1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 1/350
City of Jacksboro
Code of Ordinances
Including Supplement No. 5
This Code of Ordinances contains all ordinances deemed appropriate to be included as enacted through Ordinance O-08-2021 adopted 4/26/21.
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
*
1
Sec. 10.01. Title of Code.
This codification of ordinances by and for the City of Jacksboro, Texas, shall be designated as the Jacksboro City Code andmay be so cited. (‘84 Code, § 12-1)
State Law reference–
Authority of municipality to codify ordinances, Tex. Local Gov't Code
§§
53.001 et seq.
Sec. 10.02. Interpretation.
Unless otherwise provided herein or required by law or implication, the same rules of construction, definition, andapplication shall govern the interpretation of this Code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
Sec. 10.03. Application to future ordinances.
All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending orsupplementing this Code unless otherwise specifically provided.
Sec. 10.04. Captions.
Headings and captions used in this Code other than the title, chapter, and section numbers are employed for referencepurposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
(‘84 Code, § 12-2)
Sec. 10.05. Definitions.
(A)
General rule
. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain or ordinary and usual sense. However, technical wordsand phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their technical import.
(B)
Definitions
. For the purpose of this Code, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates orrequires a different meaning.
City, municipal corporation, or municipality
. The City of Jacksboro, Texas.
City Council or Council
. The City Council for the City of Jacksboro, Texas.
Code, this Code or this Code of Ordinances
. This Municipal Code as modified by amendment, revision, and adoption ofnew titles, chapters, or sections.
County
. Jack County, Texas.
Easement
. A right of use over the property of another, such as (but not limited to) passing over it, or discharging water on it.
Highway
. Includes any street, alley, avenue, or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass, orcauseway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use.
May
. The act referred to is permissive.
Month
. A calendar month.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 2/350
Oath
. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases thewords “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the words “affirm” and “affirmed.”
Officer, office, employee, commission, or department
. An officer, office, employee, commission, or department of thismunicipality unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
Owner
. Applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership,joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land.
Person
. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Wheneverused in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms person or whoever as applied to any unincorporatedentity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
Preceding or following
. Next before or next after, respectively.
Right-of-way
. When applied to property, that strip of land which the owner of the right-of-way may use for passage andupon which the owner of the right-of-way may place, for example, a road bed or other construction consistent with theusage of the right-of-way.
Roadway
. That portion of a street improved, designed for or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic.
Shall
. The act referred to is mandatory.
Sidewalk
. Any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line,intended for the use of pedestrians.
Signature or subscription
. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
State
. The State of Texas.
Street
. Includes any highway, alley, street, avenue, or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, underpass, overpass, tunnelor causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use.
Subchapter
. A division of a chapter, designated in this Code by a heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized headingin the body of the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading. Not all chaptershave subchapters.
Written or in writing
. Includes any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
Year
. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
(‘84 Code, § 12-3)
Sec. 10.06. Rules of interpretation.
The construction of all ordinances of this municipality shall be by the following rules, unless such construction is plainlyrepugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance:
(A)
And or or
. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written “and/or,” if the sense requires it.
(B)
Acts by assistants
. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent ordeputy as well may do as the principal, such requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act by anauthorized agent or deputy.
(C)
Gender; singular and plural; tenses
. Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include thefeminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall includethe singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if applicable.
(D)
General term
. A general term following specific enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the classenumerated unless expressly so limited.
Sec. 10.07. Severability.
If any provision of this Code as now or later amended or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, theinvalidity does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application. (‘84 Code, §12-6)
Sec. 10.08. Reference to other sections.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 3/350
Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, such reference shall extend and apply to the sectionreferred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed or materiallyaltered by the amendment or revision.
Sec. 10.09. Reference to offices.
Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer, or employee of this municipalityexercising the powers, duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of functions or changein the official title of the functionary.
Sec. 10.10. Errors and omissions.
If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any words; the omission of any word or words necessary toexpress the intention of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be attached; or theuse of a word or words when another word or words was clearly intended to express such intent, such spelling shall becorrected and such word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and theprovisions shall have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally published. Noalteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of such error.
Sec. 10.11. Official time.
The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws, shall be the official time within this municipality for thetransaction of all municipal business.
Sec. 10.12. Reasonable time.
(A) In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to begiven, reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt performance of suchact or the giving of such notice.
(B) The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day andincluding the last. If the last day be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
Sec. 10.13. Ordinances repealed.
This Code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjectsherein enumerated and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this Code shall be deemedrepealed from and after the effective date of this Code.
Sec. 10.14. Ordinances unaffected.
(A) All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in thisCode shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication, including but notlimited to the following types of ordinances:
(1) Any ordinance guaranteeing or promising the payment of money for the municipality or authorizing theissuance of any bonds of the municipality or any evidence of the municipality's indebtedness;
(2) Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for an annual budget or prescribing salaries formunicipal officers and employees;
(3) Any ordinance annexing territory to the municipality or discontinuing territory as a part of the municipality;
(4) Any ordinance designating or otherwise relating to municipal depositories;
(5) Any ordinance granting any franchise, permit, or other right;
(6) Any ordinance approving, prescribing, or otherwise relating to rates to be charged by private utilitycompanies;
(7) Any ordinance approving, authorizing, or otherwise relating to any contract or agreement;
(8) Any ordinance accepting, dedicating, vacating, or otherwise relating to any easement;
(9) Any ordinance establishing, amending, or varying the zoning designation of land.
(B) All such ordinances mentioned in division (A) of this section are hereby recognized as continuing in full force andeffect to the same extent as if set out at length herein.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 4/350
Sec. 10.15. Effective date of ordinances.
All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall take effect from and after the due publicationthereof, unless otherwise expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from their passage,unless otherwise expressly provided.
Sec. 10.16. Repeal or modification of ordinance.
(A) Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, theordinance or part of an ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the publication of the ordinancerepealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
(B) No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted, created, given, secured, or accrued under anyordinance previous to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted, enjoyed, andrecovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
(C) When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall notbe construed to revive the former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
Sec. 10.17. Ordinances which amend or supplement Code.
(A) If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or section contained in this Code, the chapter orsection shall be specifically repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, shall be substitutedin its place.
(B) Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference tothe arrangement of this Code, the proper number of such chapter or section. In addition to such indication thereof as mayappear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
(‘84 Code, § 12-4)
Sec. 10.18. Section histories; statutory references.
(A) As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage date of the original ordinance, and the mostrecent three amending ordinances, if any, are listed following the text of the code section.
Example
: (Ord. 1-1-60, passed 1-1-60; Am. Ord. 1-1-70, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 1-1-80, passed 1-1-80; Am. Ord. 1-1-85,passed 1-1-85)
(B) If a section of this Code is derived from the previous city code of ordinances published in 1984, as amended, the1984 code section number shall be indicated in the history.
Example
: (‘84 Code, § 9-1)
(C) (1) If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates that the text of the section readssubstantially the same as the statute.
Example
: (Tex. Local Gov't Code § 54.001) (Ord. 1-1-60, passed 1-1-60; Am. Ord. 1-1-85, passed 1-1-85)
(2) If a statutory cite is set forth as a “state law reference” following the text of the section, this indicates thatthe reader should refer to that statute for further information.
Example
:
Sec. 41.01 Public records available.
This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or copying all public records, unless otherwise exemptedby state law.
State Law reference–
Provisions regarding inspection of public records, Tex. Gov't Code
§
552.001 et seq.
Sec. 10.19. Altering or tampering with Code.
It shall be an offense for any unauthorized person to alter, change or amend, by addition or deletion, any part or portion ofthis Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or to tamper with this Code in any manner whatsoeverwhich will cause a law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. (Ord. 12-1-84, passed 12-1-84)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§
10.99.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 5/350
IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM
Sec. 10.30. Program adoption.
The City of Jacksboro developed this Identity Theft Prevention Program pursuant to the Federal Trade Commission's RedFlags Rule, which implements § 114 of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003, 16 C.F.R. § 681.2. Thisprogram was developed for the Utility Department of the city with oversight and approval of the City Council. Afterconsideration of the size and complexity of the utility's operations and account systems, and the nature and scope of theutility's activities, the City Council determined that this program was appropriate for the city's utility, and therefore approvedthis program to be effective on November 1, 2008, by and through ordinance no. O-31-08. (Ord. O-31-08, passed 10-27-08)
Sec. 10.31. Purpose and definitions.
(A)
Establish an identity theft prevention program
. To establish an identity theft prevention program designed to detect,prevent and mitigate identity theft in connection with the opening of a covered account or an existing covered account andto provide for continued administration of the program in compliance with 16 C.F.R. Part 681 implementing §§ 114 and 315of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act (FACTA) of 2003.
(B)
Establishing and fulfilling requirements of the Red Flags Rule
.
(1) The Red Flags Rule (“Rule”) defines “identity theft” as “fraud committed using the identifying information ofanother person” and a “red flag” (“red flag”) as a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possibleexistence of Identity Theft.
(2) Under the Rule, every financial institution and creditor is required to establish an “identity theft preventionprogram” tailored to its size, complexity and the nature of its operation. The program must contain reasonablepolicies and procedures to:
(a) Identify relevant red flags for new and existing covered accounts and incorporate those red flags intothe program;
(b) Detect red flags that have been incorporated into the program;
(c) Respond appropriately to any red flags that are detected to prevent and mitigate identity theft; and
(d) Ensure the program is updated periodically, to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safetyand soundness of the creditor from identity theft.
(C)
Red Flags Rule definitions used in this program
. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shallapply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
City
. The City of Jacksboro, Texas.
Covered Account
.
(a) Any account the utility offers or maintains primarily for personal, family or household purposes, thatinvolves multiple payments or transactions; and
(b) Any other account the utility offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk tocustomers or to the safety and soundness of the utility from identity theft.
Creditors
. The Rule defines creditors “to include finance companies, automobile dealers, mortgage brokers, utilitycompanies, and telecommunications companies. Where non-profit and government entities defer payment for goods orservices, they, too, are to be considered creditors.”
Identifying information
. Any name or number that may be used, alone or in conjunction with any other information, toidentify a specific person,” including: name, address, telephone number, social security number, date of birth, governmentissued driver's license or identification number, alien registration number, government passport number, employer ortaxpayer identification number, unique electronic identification number, computer's internet protocol address, or routingcode.
Program
. The identity theft prevention program for the city.
Program administrator
. The Finance Director is the program administrator for the program.
Utility
. The Utility Department for the city.
(Ord. O-31-08, passed 10-27-08)
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 6/350
Sec. 10.32. Identification of red flags.
In order to identify relevant red flags, the utility considers the types of accounts that it offers and maintains, the methods itprovides to open its accounts, the methods it provides to access its accounts, and its previous experiences with identitytheft. The utility identifies the following red flags, in each of the listed categories:
(A)
Notifications and warnings from consumer credit reporting agencies
. Red flags:
(1) Report of fraud accompanying a consumer credit report;
(2) Notice or report from a consumer credit agency of a credit freeze on a customer or applicant;
(3) Notice or report from a consumer credit agency of an active duty alert for an applicant; and
(4) Indication from a consumer credit report of activity that is inconsistent with a customer's usual patternor activity, including but not limited to:
(a) Recent and significant increase in volume of inquiries.
(b) Unusual number of recent credit applications.
(c) A material change in use of credit.
(d) Accounts closed for cause or abuse.
(B)
Suspicious documents
. Red flags:
(1) Identification document or card that appears to be forged, altered or inauthentic;
(2) Identification document or card on which a person's photograph or physical description is notconsistent with the person presenting the document;
(3) Other document with information that is not consistent with existing customer information (such as ifa person's signature on a check appears forged); and
(4) Application for service that appears to have been altered or forged.
(C)
Suspicious personal identifying information
. Red flags:
(1) Identifying information presented that is inconsistent with other information the customer provides(example: inconsistent birth dates, lack of correlation between social security number range and date ofbirth);
(2) Identifying information presented that is inconsistent with other sources of information (for instance,social security number or an address not matching an address on a credit report);
(3) Identifying information presented that is the same as information shown on other applications thatwere found to be fraudulent;
(4) Identifying information presented that is consistent with fraudulent activity (such as an invalid phonenumber or fictitious billing address);
(5) Social security number presented that is the same as one given by another customer;
(6) An address or phone number presented that is the same as that of another person;
(7) A person fails to provide complete personal identifying information on an application when remindedto do so (however, by law social security numbers must not be required) or an applicant cannot provideinformation requested beyond what could commonly be found in a purse or wallet; and
(8) A person's identifying information is not consistent with the information that is on file for the customer.
(D)
Suspicious account activity or unusual use of account
. Red flags:
(1) Change of address for an account followed by a request to change the account holder's name;
(2) Payments stop on an otherwise consistently up-to-date account;
(3) Account used in a way that is not consistent with prior use (example; very high activity);
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 7/350
(4) Mail sent to the account holder is repeatedly returned as undeliverable;
(5) Notice to the utility that a customer is not receiving mail sent by the utility;
(6) Notice to the utility that an account has unauthorized activity;
(7) Breach in the utility's computer system security; and
(8) Unauthorized access to or use of customer account information.
(E)
Alerts from others
. Red flag: Notice to the utility from a customer, identity theft victim, fraud detectionservice, law enforcement or other person that it has opened or is maintaining a fraudulent account for a personengaged in identity theft.
(Ord. O-31-08, passed 10-27-08)
Sec. 10.33. Detecting red flags.
(A)
New accounts
. In order to detect any of the red flags identified above associated with the opening of a new account,utility personnel will take the following steps to obtain and verify the identity of the person opening the account. Detect:
(1) Require certain identifying information such as name, date of birth, residential or business address,principal place of business for an entity, driver's license or other identification;
(2) Verify the customer's identity (for instance, review a driver's license or other identification card);
(3) Review documentation showing the existence of a business entity;
(4) Request additional documentation to establish identity; and
(5) Independently contact the customer or business.
(B)
Existing accounts
. In order to detect any of the red flags identified above for an existing account, utility personnel willtake the following steps to monitor transactions with an account. Detect:
(1) Verify the identification of customers if they request information (in person, via telephone, via facsimile, viaemail);
(2) Verify the validity of requests to close accounts or change billing addresses; and
(3) Verify changes in banking information given for billing and payment purposes.
(Ord. O-31-08, passed 10-27-08)
Sec. 10.34. Preventing and mitigating identity theft.
In the event utility personnel detect any identified red flags, such personnel shall take one or more of the following steps,depending on the degree of risk posed by the red flag.
(A)
Prevent and mitigate
.
(1) Continue to monitor an account for evidence of identity theft;
(2) Contact the customer, sometimes through multiple methods;
(3) Change any passwords or other security devices that permit access to accounts;
(4) Not open a new account;
(5) Close an existing account;
(6) Do not close the account, but monitor or contact authorities;
(7) Reopen an account with a new number;
(8) Notify the Program Administrator for determination of the appropriate step's) to take;
(9) Notify law enforcement; or
(10) Determine that no response is warranted under the particular circumstances.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 8/350
(B)
Protect customer identifying information
. In order to further prevent the likelihood of identity theft occurringwith respect to utility accounts, the utility will take the following steps with respect to its internal operatingprocedures to protect customer identifying information:
(1) Ensure that its website is secure or provide clear notice that the website is not secure;
(2) Where and when allowed, ensure complete and secure destruction of paper documents andcomputer files containing customer information;
(3) Ensure that office computers are password protected and that computer screens lock after a setperiod of time;
(4) Change passwords on office computers on a regular basis;
(5) Ensure all computers are backed up properly and any backup information is secured;
(6) Keep offices clear of papers containing customer information;
(7) Request only the last four digits of social security numbers (if any);
(8) Ensure computer virus protection is up to date; and
(9) Require and keep only the kinds of customer information that are necessary for utility purposes.
(Ord. O-31-08, passed 10-27-08)
Sec. 10.35. Program updates.
This program will be periodically reviewed and updated to reflect changes in risks to customers and the soundness of theutility from identity theft. At least annually, the Program Administrator will consider the utility's experiences with identity theftsituation, changes in identity theft methods, changes in identity theft detection and prevention methods, changes in types ofaccounts the utility maintains and changes in the utility's business arrangements with other entities, consult with lawenforcement authorities, and consult with other city personnel. After considering these factors, the Program Administratorwill determine whether changes to the program, including the listing of red flags, are warranted. If warranted, the ProgramAdministrator will update the program or present the City Council with his or her recommended changes and the CityCouncil will make a determination of whether to accept, modify or reject those changes to the program. (Ord. O-31-08,passed 10-27-08)
Sec. 10.36. Program administration.
(A)
Oversight
. Responsibility for developing, implementing and updating this program lies with an Identity TheftCommittee for the utility. The Committee is headed by a Program Administrator who may be the head of the utility or his orher appointee. Two or more other individuals appointed by the head of the utility or the Program Administrator comprise theremainder of the committee membership. The Program Administrator will be responsible for the program administration, forensuring appropriate training of utility staff on the program, for reviewing any staff reports regarding the detection of redflags and the steps for preventing and mitigating identity theft, determining which steps of prevention and mitigation shouldbe taken in particular circumstances and considering periodic changes to the program.
(B)
Staff training and reports
.
(1) Initially, all utility staff shall be trained either by or under the direction of the Program Administrator in thedetection of red flags, and the responsive steps to be taken when a red flag is detected. Thereafter, all utilitystaff shall undergo update training not less than annually. Additionally, all new utility employees shall undergotraining.
(2) All utility staff shall submit reports monthly concerning the utility's compliance with the program, thetraining that has been given and the effectiveness of the policies and procedures in addressing the risk ofidentity theft, including recommendations for changes to the program. While incidents of identity theft are to bereported immediately to the Program Administrator, the monthly reports shall contain a recap of the incident andinclude the steps taken to assist with resolution of the incident.
(C)
Service provider arrangements
. In the event the utility engages a service provider to perform an activity in connectionwith one or more accounts, including but not limited to franchise utility providers, the utility will take the following steps toensure the service provider performs its activity in accordance with reasonable policies and procedures designed to detect,prevent, and mitigate the risk of identity theft.
(1) Require, by contract or contract amendment, that service providers have such policies and procedures inplace; and
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 9/350
(2) Require, by contract or contract amendment, that service providers review the utility's program and reportany red flags to the Program Administrator.
(D)
Specific program elements and confidentiality
. For the effectiveness of identity theft prevention programs, the RedFlag Rule envisions a degree of confidentiality regarding the utility's specific practices relating to identity theft detection,prevention and mitigation. Therefore, under this program, knowledge of such specific practices are to be limited to theIdentity Theft Committee and those employees who need to know them for purposes of preventing identity theft. Becausethis program is to be adopted by a public body and thus publicly available, it would be counterproductive to list thesespecific practices here. Therefore, only the program's general red flag detection, implementation, and prevention practicesare listed in this document.
(Ord. O-31-08, passed 10-27-08)
Sec. 10.99. General penalty.
(A) Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the municipality an act is prohibited or is made or declared to beunlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or thefailure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any suchprovision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished as follows, provided that no penalty shall be greater or lessthan the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the laws of the state:
(1) A fine not to exceed $2,000.00 in all cases arising under municipal ordinances that govern fire safety,zoning, building codes and public health and sanitation;
(2) A fine not to exceed $2,000.00 if a motor vehicle is used in illegal dumping or an offense under the law orcity ordinance violated by the illegal dumping;
(3) A fine not to exceed $500.00 in all other cases.
(B) Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(‘84 Code, § 12-5)
Cross reference–
Municipal Court fines,
§
32.09.
State Law reference–
Enforcement authority and municipal penalties, Tex. Local Gov't Code
§
54.001.
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 30: CITY COUNCIL
Sec. 30.01. Election of City Council Members by Place System.
Any candidate for the office of City Council Member shall file an application for Place Number 1 through Place Number 5 forthe city officials election. (Ord. 6-6-96, passed 6-11-96)
State Law reference–
Election by place system, Tex. Local Gov't Code § 21.001.
Sec. 30.02. Salaries of Council Members.
The salaries of the City Council Members may be set from time to time by the City Council. (‘84 Code, § 1-1) (Ord. 11,passed 3-31-02)
State Law reference–
Compensation of elected officials, Tex. Local Gov't Code § 141.001.
CHAPTER 31: CITY OFFICIALS
*
1
MAYOR
Sec. 31.01. Salary of Mayor.
The salary of the Mayor may be set from time to time by the City Council. (‘84 Code, § 1-1) (Ord. 11, passed 3-31-02)
Sec. 31.02. Power of Mayor to declare an emergency.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 10/350
The Mayor may declare an emergency for a period of seven days, but in no event shall it extend beyond that period unlessthe City Council concurs. This emergency declaration may occur under any condition authorized by state law and the citymay exercise any and all powers provided for therein. (‘84 Code, § 1-2)
Cross reference–
Emergency Management Program,
Ch. 39
.
State Law reference–
Declaration of local emergency, Tex. Gov't Code § 418.108.
CITY MANAGER
Sec. 31.15. Office created.
The office of City Manager is hereby established. (‘84 Code, § 1-4) (Ord. 350, passed 7-26-83; Am. Ord. O-15-09, passed5-12-09)
State Law reference–
City Managers in General-Law Municipalities, Tex. Local Gov't Code §§ 25.001 et seq.
Sec. 31.16. Appointment and tenure; bond.
(A) The City Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite period and shall be subject to discharge at the will of the CityCouncil. Both appointment and removal shall require a majority vote of the City Council. (‘84 Code, § 1-5) (Ord. 350,passed 7-26-83)
(B) The City Manager shall execute a bond or the appropriate errors and omissions coverage shall be provided. Thebond and/or coverage shall be conditioned that the City Manager will faithfully perform the duties of City Manager and shallbe in an amount prescribed by the City Council by ordinance or city policy. (Am. Ord. O-15-09, passed 5-12-09)
Sec. 31.17. Compensation.
The annual salary of the City Manager shall be set from time to time by the City Council. (‘84 Code, § 1-6) (Ord. 350,passed 7-26-83; Am. Ord. O-15-09, passed 5-12-09)
Sec. 31.18. Temporary absence or disability.
During the absence or disability of the City Manager, the City Manager shall appoint an Acting City Manager by filing a letterwith the City Secretary. Should the City Manager fail to make such an appointment, the City Council may designate someproperly qualified person to perform the duties of such office or the Mayor, as Chief Executive Officer, may perform suchadministrative duties consistent with statutory authority. (‘84 Code, § 1-7) (Ord. 350, passed 7-26-83; Am. Ord. O-15-09,passed 5-12-09)
Sec. 31.19. Powers and duties.
The powers and duties of the City Manager shall be as follows:
(A) To devote all his or her working time and attention to the affairs of the city and to be responsible to the CityCouncil for the efficient administration of the city's affairs.
(B) To see that all provisions of federal, state, and local laws, ordinances, and resolutions are enforced.
(C) To appoint and remove, with the advice of the City Council, all heads of departments and to have thepower to appoint and remove all subordinate employees.
(D) To exercise supervision and control over all departments created by the City Council.
(E) To attend all meetings of the City Council with a right to take part in the discussion, but having no vote,and to be notified of all special meetings of the City Council.
(F) To see that all contracts with the city, including public utility franchises, are faithfully kept and performedand, upon knowledge of any violation thereof, to call the same to the attention of the City Council.
(G) To assist the Mayor with the preparation of the budget and submission to the City Council, prior to thebeginning of each fiscal year, a budget of proposed income and expenditures for the ensuing year.
(H) To file the budget as required by state law after the budget has been approved by the City Council.
(I) To keep the City Council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city and to make suchrecommendations as may seem to him or her desirable.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 11/350
(J) To report on finances and on administrative activities for the preceding year and to publish such reports asrequired by law.
(K) (1) To act as purchasing agent for the city, responsible for all purchases made in the name of thecity, and shall receive prior approval by the City Council for all non-budgeted expenditures that exceed$3,000.00 or for purchases not included in the budget for the applicable fiscal year; to further ensure thatall purchases are made, and contracts awarded, consistent with applicable statutory authority andlimitations.
(2) The City Manager shall be authorized and directed to make certain nondiscretionary paymentsoccurring on a monthly and quarterly basis and specific expenditures previously approved by the CityCouncil in the budget, such as utility bills, insurance payments, payments due to the state and federalgovernments by law, payment required by order of a court, refunds of money held in escrow which are nota part of the city funds, debt service payments, without limitation as to the amount. Payments set forth inthis subsection shall be deemed to have been approved by the City Council upon approval of such specificsums in the budget, entry of the order of the court or approval of the annual audit permitting suchpayments as good accounting practices.
(3) The City Council shall receive and approve all expenditures made by the City Manager, or requestedto be made, in a monthly report, or as Council may direct to be submitted for this purpose.
(L) To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance, resolution, or as directed by the CityCouncil, not inconsistent with the Mayor's statutory authority. Neither the City Council nor any of its membersshall direct or request the appointment of any person to, or his or her removal from, office by the City Manageror by any of his or her subordinates. However, the City Council may consult and advise the City Manager, makeinquiries regarding appointment or removal, and may express their opinion in regard to the administrative andexecutive duties under the jurisdiction of the City Manager. The City Council and its members shall deal solelythrough the City Manager, and neither the City Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to anysubordinate of the City Manager, either privately or publicly. Any willful violation of the foregoing provision by anymember of the City Council shall constitute official misconduct.
(‘84 Code, § 1-9) (Ord. 350, passed 7-26-83; Am. Ord. O-20-07, passed 10-16-07; Am. Ord. O-15-09, passed 5-12-09)
State Law reference–
Duties of City Manager, Tex. Local Gov't Code §§ 22.029.
HEALTH OFFICER
Sec. 31.60. City Health Office created; term.
The Health Officer shall be certified by the state Department of Health pursuant to the Tex. Health and Safety Code. He orshe shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council and shall receive his or her appointment to office therefrom. (‘84 Code, §13-30)
State Law reference–
Local health authorities, Tex. Health and Safety Code §§ 121.021 et seq.
Sec. 31.61. Duties; compensation.
(A) The City Health Officer shall see that all laws imposed by state statutes and ordinances of the city deemed necessaryfor the health of citizens are enforced.
(B) He or she shall be paid compensation or salary as determined by the City Council for services rendered.
(‘84 Code, § 13-31)
CHAPTER 32: MUNICIPAL COURT
*
2
Sec. 32.01. Municipal Court created.
The Municipal Court as authorized by state law is hereby organized. (‘84 Code, § 1-31) (Ord. 8-A, passed 8-10-1899; Am.Ord. 338, passed 4-9-81)
Sec. 32.02. Municipal Judge created; appointment; powers; alternate judge.
The position of Municipal Judge is hereby created and this individual shall exercise all powers granted to all other MunicipalJudges under state law. Further, the City Council shall have the power to appoint an individual to serve as the AlternateMunicipal Judge in the absence, inability, or refusal of the Municipal Judge to act, and such individual shall have all powerswhich are granted to other persons of similar station by state law. (‘84 Code, § 1-32) (Ord. 338, passed 4-9-81)
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 12/350
Sec. 32.03. Manner of appointment.
It shall be the responsibility and power of the City Council to appoint the Municipal Judge and the Alternate Municipal Judgeby majority vote. (‘84 Code, § 1-33) (Ord. 338, passed 4-9-81)
Sec. 32.04. Court Clerk.
The City Clerk shall serve as Clerk of the Municipal Court until such time as the City Council shall appoint another person toserve in that capacity. The Court Clerk may appoint a deputy to assist him or her, who shall have the same powers as theCourt Clerk. (‘84 Code, § 1-34) (Ord. 338, passed 4-9-81)
Sec. 32.05. Terms of appointment.
The term of the appointment of the Municipal Judges and the Court Clerk shall be for a period of two years. In the event ofvacancy in the judge's positions, the City Council shall appoint another person to fill the unexpired term of that judge. (‘84Code, § 1-35) (Ord. 338, passed 4-9-81)
Sec. 32.06. Time of appointment.
The Municipal Judge and Court Clerk shall be appointed in odd numbered years and their terms shall run concurrent withthe terms of the Mayor. The appointment of these individuals shall take place at the first meeting of the City Council afterthe mayoral election or as soon thereafter as is practical. (‘84 Code, § 1-36) (Ord. 338, passed 4-9-81)
Sec. 32.07. Restrictions on service.
There shall be no restrictions on the number of years served by the Municipal Judge or Court Clerk in their positions or theirqualifications except those imposed by state law and their residency in the City. (‘84 Code, § 1-37) (Ord. 338, passed 4-9-81)
Sec. 32.08. Salary.
The salary of the Municipal Judge, Alternate Municipal Judge, Court Clerk, and Deputy Court Clerk, if any, shall beestablished by the City Council as needed. (‘84 Code, § 1-38) (Ord. 338, passed 4-9-81)
Sec. 32.09. Municipal Court fines.
(A) Municipal Court fines shall be established as set forth in the
Fee Appendix
to this Code.
(B) The Municipal Court Judge may from time to time establish rates for other offenses not specifically identified by thissection in accordance with any local, state or federal laws which may provide for and establish such charges.
(C)
Payment by credit card, processing fee and service charge
.
(1) The Finance Director, Municipal Court Clerk or his or her designee, is authorized to accept payment bycredit card for a fee, fine, court cost or other charge imposed by the City Municipal Court.
(2) The Finance Director, Municipal Court Clerk, or his or her designee, shall collect a processing fee forpayments made by credit card. The processing fee shall equal 5% of the amount of the fee, fine, court cost orother charges being paid as authorized by Tex. Local Gov't Code § 132.003(b), as it exists and as it may beamended.
(3) If a payment by credit card of a fee, fine, court cost or other charge authorized herein is not honored bythe credit card company on which the funds are drawn the Finance Director, Municipal Court Clerk, or his or herdesignee shall collect a service charge from the person who owes the fee, fine, court cost or other charge and isfor the collection of the original amount. The amount of the service charge shall equal the fee charged for thecollection of the check drawn on an account with insufficient funds, as authorized by Tex. Local Gov't Code §132.004 as it exists and as it may be amended.
(4) The Finance Director, Municipal Court Clerk, or his or her designee, shall deposit all processing fees andservice charges in the General Fund of the city, as authorized by Tex. Local Gov't Code § 132.006 as it existsand as it may be amended.
(5) The Mayor shall be authorized on behalf of the city to contract with a company that issues credit cards tocollect and seize credit cards issued by the company that are outdated or otherwise unauthorized. Such contractmay provide that the city will charge the company a fee for the return of such credit cards, as authorized by Tex.Local Gov't Code § 132.005.
(Ord. 9-13-96, passed 9-24-96; Am. Ord. O-01-07, passed 2-27-07)
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 13/350
Cross reference–
General penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 32.10. Municipal Court Technology Fund.
(A) There is hereby created and established a Municipal Court Technology Fund, here-in-now known as the Fund,pursuant to Article 102.0172 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
(B) The Fund may be maintained in an interest bearing account and may be maintained in the general revenue account.
(C)
Establishment of amount of the fee; assessment and collection
.
(1) The fee shall be in the amount of $4.00.
(2) The fee shall be assessed and collected from the defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor offense inthe Municipal Court as a cost of court. A defendant is considered convicted if:
(a) A sentence is imposed on the person;
(b) The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication communitysupervision; or
(c) The court defers final disposition of the person's case.
(3) The fee shall be collected on conviction for an offense committed after adoption of this section.
(4) The Clerk of the Court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the Municipal Treasurer of the city, who shalldeposit the fee into the Municipal Court Technology Fund.
(D)
Designated use of the Fund and administration
.
(1) The Fund shall be used only to finance the purchase of technological enhancements for the MunicipalCourt of the city, including:
(a) Computer systems;
(b) Computer networks;
(c) Computer hardware;
(d) Computer software;
(e) Imaging systems;
(f) Electronic kiosks;
(g) Electronic ticket writers; or
(h) Docket management systems.
(2) The Fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the City Council.
(Ord. 9-10-99, passed 9-14-99; Am. Ord. O-10-07, passed 7-24-07)
Sec. 32.11. Municipal Court Building Security Fund.
(A) There is hereby created and established a Municipal Court Building Security Fund, here-in-now known as the Fund,pursuant to Article 102.017 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
(B) The Fund may be maintained in an interest-bearing account and may be maintained in the general revenue account.
(C) The Fund may be used only to finance security personnel or to finance items when used for the purpose of providingsecurity services for housing Municipal Court including:
(1) The purchase or repair of X-ray machines and conveying systems;
(2) The purchase of handheld metal detectors;
(3) Walk-through metal detectors;
(4) Identification cards and systems;
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 14/350
(5) Electronic locking and surveillance equipment;
(6) Bailiffs, deputy sheriffs, deputy constables or contract security personnel during times when they areproviding appropriate security services;
(7) Signage;
(8) Confiscated-weapon inventory and tracking systems;
(9) Locks, chains, alarms or similar security devices;
(10) The purchase or repair of bullet-proof glass; and
(11) Continuing education on security issues for court personnel and security personnel.
(D)
Establishment of amount of the fee; assessment and collection
.
(1) The fee shall be in the amount of $3.00.
(2) The fee shall be assessed and collected from the defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor offense inthe Municipal Court as a cost of court. A defendant is considered convicted if:
(a) A sentence is imposed on the person;
(b) The person receives community supervision, including deferred adjudication; or
(c) The court defers final disposition of the person's case.
(3) The fee shall be collected on conviction for an offense committed after adoption of this section.
(4) The Clerk of the Court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the Municipal Treasurer of the city, who shalldeposit the fee into the Municipal Court Building Security Fund.
(Ord. O-11-07, passed 7-24-07)
CHAPTER 33: DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
*
3
BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENT
Sec. 33.01. Board of Zoning Adjustment created; composition; term.
(A) The Board of Zoning Adjustment is hereby created with all the powers, duties and responsibilities authorized by Tex.Local Gov't Code §§ 211.008 through 211.013.
(B) The Board of Zoning Adjustment shall consist of five members and two alternates serving two year staggered terms.
(Ord. 5-4-96, passed 5-14-96)
Sec. 33.02. Violation of orders of the Board of Zoning Adjustment.
Any person who violates an order of the Board of Zoning Adjustment shall commit an offense. An offense under this sectionis a Class B misdemeanor, punishable by fine, imprisonment, or both. (Ord. 5-4-96, passed 5-14-96)
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
Sec. 33.15. Planning and Zoning Commission created; composition; appointment; removal.
(A) There is hereby created and established for the city a Planning and Zoning Commission, which shall be composed ofseven members. All members of the City Council and the Mayor shall be ex-officio members.
(B) The seven members shall be qualified voters and residents of the city. They shall be appointed by the Mayor, subjectto the confirmation of the City Council, for a term of two years. All vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term in thesame manner as provided for the original appointments. All expired terms shall be filled for terms as provided for theoriginal appointments and in the same manner prescribed.
(C) Members of the Commission may be removed by the Mayor, with the consent of the City Council, after public hearingand for cause assigned in writing. The members of this Commission shall serve without compensation.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 15/350
(‘84 Code, § 1-71) (Ord. 145-A, passed 5- -47; Am. Ord. 296, passed 10-25-77)
State Law reference–
Planning and Zoning Commissions, Tex. Local Gov't Code § 211.007.
Sec. 33.16. Organization; rules.
(A) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall elect a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson from its membership. It shallhave the power to make rules, regulations, and bylaws for its own government, which shall conform as nearly as possiblewith those governing the City Council, and the same shall be subject to the approval of the City Council.
(B) Such bylaws shall include, among other items, provisions for:
(1) Records of its proceedings, which shall be open to the public for inspection;
(2) Reporting to the City Council and the public from time to time and annually on the matters handled by theCommission;
(3) Regular and special meetings shall be open and in compliance with the open meetings laws for the state;and
(4) The holding of public meetings on its recommendations to the City Council.
(‘84 Code, § 1-72) (Ord. 145-A, passed 5- -47; Am. Ord. 296, passed 10-25-77)
Sec. 33.17. Powers.
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the power and it shall be its duty to make and recommend for adoption amaster plan, as a whole, or in parts, for the future development and redevelopment of this municipality and those areaswithin its extraterritorial jurisdiction, and shall have power and it shall be its duty to prepare a comprehensive plan andordinance for planning and zoning of the city in accordance with Tex. Local Gov't Code §§ 211.001 et seq., as amended.The Commission shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by state law or ordinances passed by the CityCouncil.
(‘84 Code, § 1-73) (Ord. 145-A, passed 5- -47; Am. Ord. 296, passed 10-25-77)
PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD
Sec. 33.30. Parks and Recreation Board created; composition; term.
(A) A Parks and Recreation Board is hereby created with only the powers, duties and responsibilities authorized to it bythe City Council, as may be amended from time to time.
(B) The Parks and Recreation Board shall consist of five members.
(C) The Board shall, at their first meeting, elect by nomination and majority vote a Chairperson and Vice-Chairpersonwho shall serve in that capacity until the City Council considers appointments or reappointments to the Board eachOctober.
(Ord. 5-3-96, passed 5-14-96; Am. Ord. O-19-04, passed 12-14-04)
Sec. 33.31. Duties and functions.
(A) The Board will meet once a month in open session, post official agendas consistent with the Open Meetings Act, andkeep official record of the minutes of the meeting.
(B) The Board is an advisory board and shall make recommendations for policies, programs, procedures, goals andobjectives to the City Council relative to park and recreational needs of the city.
(C) The Board is established for the purpose of identifying the park and recreational needs of the city and assist in theplanning process for parks, recreation facilities and programs.
(D) The Board will assist in the promotion of park use and recreational program participation and the recruitment ofvolunteers and solicitation of voluntary contributions.
(Ord. 5-3-96, passed 5-14-96; Am. Ord. O-19-04, passed 12-14-04)
KEEP JACKSBORO BEAUTIFUL BOARD
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 16/350
Sec. 33.45. Keep Jacksboro Beautiful Board created; appointments.
There is hereby created the Keep Jacksboro Beautiful Board which shall be composed of five members who shall beresident citizens, taxpayers, and qualified voters of the city and who shall abide by guidelines as established by the CityCouncil for all board members. Members of the Board shall be appointed by a majority vote of the City Council. (Ord. O-01-03, passed 1-14-03)
Sec. 33.46. Duties and functions.
(A) The Board will meet once a month in open session, officially post agendas, items to be considered and keep officialrecord of the minutes of the meeting.
(B) The Board will be an advisory board and make recommendations for policies, programs or procedures to the CityCouncil for consideration and/or adoption or approval.
(C) The Board is established for the purpose of enhancing the appearance, environment and the entranceways of thecity.
(D) The Board shall be appointed or reappointed to terms of one year.
(E) The Board members shall following adoption of this subchapter at their first meeting elect by nomination and majorityvote a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson who shall serve in that capacity until the City Council considers appointments orreappointments to the Board each October.
(Ord. O-01-03, passed 1-14-03)
CHAPTER 34: FIRE PROTECTION SERVICES
*
4
VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT
Sec. 34.01. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires adifferent meaning.
Board of Appeals
. The City Council.
Code official
. The Fire Marshal.
Code
. The International Fire Code, 2000 Edition, as supplemented and amended, and/or the most current version.
Fire department
. The Jacksboro Volunteer Fire Department.
Jurisdiction
. The City of Jacksboro.
Municipal officer
. Includes yet is not limited to those persons elected to serve on the City Council or appointed by the CityCouncil to serve on a Board, Commission or other recommending or advisory body, the Mayor, City Manager and CitySecretary. “Municipal officers” do not include city employees.
(Ord. O-15-03, passed 8-26-03)
Sec. 34.02. Designation of volunteer fire department; agreement for emergency services; duties.
(A) The Jacksboro Volunteer Fire Department shall be recognized as the official fire department of the city.
(B) An agreement shall be executed which memorializes the Volunteer Fire Department's agreement to provideemergency services to the city. Such agreement shall be reviewed annually and, if acceptable, renewed annually, subject tomodification. A proposed copy of the agreement is attached to Ord. O-15-03 (passed 8-26-03) as “Exhibit A”, for illustrativepurposes.
(C) The City Council may adopt any ordinances that it considers necessary for the general health, safety and welfare ofthe citizens of the city. The Jacksboro Volunteer Fire Department shall adhere to and enforce all such city ordinancesrelative to fire prevention and safety, including the code, to the extent provided for in an “Agreement For EmergencyServices”, as it may be amended.
(D) The Jacksboro Volunteer Fire Department, as an independent contractor, shall fulfill the following obligations to thecity:
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 17/350
(1) Provide personnel to respond to any emergency that may arise within the city limits including, yet notlimited to, fire, tornado, severe storms, building collapse, vehicle accidents, emergency medical services (whenrequested), floods, emergency management, and other natural or human-made emergency situations that mayarise and shall required the response of the Department as requested by the city.
(2) Assure that all members of the Department are well trained and will operate under the Incident CommandSystem to ensure an orderly response to these incidents.
(3) Assist in the maintenance and repair of equipment (including personal protective equipment, trucks,hoses, ladders, nozzles and the like) provided by the city and operate the equipment in a manner that assuresthe safety of operations as well as the citizens of the community.
(4) Hold regular training meetings, as well as attending area and state schools, to receive training and makereports to the proper agencies.
(5) Abide by the constitution and bylaws of the Department and manage and conduct all emergency situationsin a professional manner.
(6) Control the work and the manner in which it is performed, consistent with and subject to state statutes andapplicable ordinances.
(Ord. O-15-03, passed 8-26-03)
Sec. 34.03. City to provide equipment, training and benefits.
(A) The City Council may obtain fire engines and other fire protection apparatus and shall have control over the use anddisposition of the apparatus and provide a fire station to preserve the apparatus. The Fire Department shall maintain thefire engines and fire protection apparatus including ensuring that all routine maintenance is performed in accordance withmanufacturers recommended warranties.
(B) The city shall provide certain equipment, training and benefits to the Volunteer Fire Department. Such equipment,training and benefits includes yet is not limited to the following:
(1) Provide, repair and maintain such equipment as may be necessary for the safe operation andmanagement of all emergency situations that may arise. This shall include yet is not limited to pump trucks,hoses, ladders, nozzles and other water handling appliances, smoke ejectors, self-contained breathingapparatus, personal protective equipment (helmet, boots, gloves, coats, pants, suspenders and the like), andother equipment that may be necessary to manage emergency situations (command posts, van, rescue unit).
(2) Provide insurance to protect the Department against injury, liability and the like.
(3) Provide and manage the Firefighter's Relief and Retirement Fund and compensate persons alreadyeligible, as well as members becoming eligible in the future.
(Ord. O-15-03, passed 8-26-03)
Sec. 34.04. Consideration system.
The following consideration system is hereby established for those who serve on the Jacksboro Volunteer Fire Department.
(A) Persons who serve as members of the Jacksboro Volunteer Fire Department may elect to receiveconsideration for service as a volunteer firefighter as follows:
(1) Firefighters who reside in the corporate limits of the city may receive a $10.00 credit per month onthe city utility (water) bill provided that the bill is current or paid when due less the $10.00 credit. The citywill credit the firefighters account in the amount of $10.00 at that point. Failure to pay the water bill on timewill result in no credit being given. For the purposes of this consideration, payment on time is deemed tobe at 5:00 p.m. on the date payment is due.
(2) Municipal Officers who serve as volunteer firefighters may not participate in the preparation ofbudgets or ordinances relative to the Jacksboro Volunteer Fire Department. To avoid the appearance ofimpropriety, the Municipal Officer should, yet is not required to, abstain from voting on issues relating solelyto the Jacksboro Volunteer Fire Department unless abstention is otherwise required by law.
(Ord. O-15-03, passed 8-26-03)
Sec. 34.05. Fire Chief; position created.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 18/350
(A) The Fire Chief shall be a member of the Volunteer Fire Department and shall be selected by the members of theDepartment and shall be confirmed by the City Council.
(B) The Fire Chief shall report to the City Manager and perform all lawful duties directed to him or her by the CityManager.
(C) The Fire Chief shall assist the Fire Marshal in his or her duties and responsibilities.
(D) The salary of the Fire Chief, if any, shall be recommended by the City Manager and approved by the City Council.
(E) The Fire Chief shall submit an annual budget to the City Manager for review and consideration by the City Council.
(Ord. O-15-03, passed 8-26-03)
Sec. 34.06. Fire Marshal; position created; appeals.
(A) The Fire Marshal, in charge of fire prevention, shall be appointed by the members of the Department on the basis ofcompetitive examination or based on qualifications. The appointment of the Fire Marshal shall be confirmed by the CityCouncil prior to the person assuming office or performing any duties.
(B) The Fire Marshal may, with the concurrence of the Chief of Police or his designee, designate that the members of thePolice Department have authority to enforce the provisions of the code for which the normal training of a peace officerwould provide the level of technical skills and knowledge required. Such designation of enforcement authority shall bemade in writing with specific reference to the code part or parts for which enforcement authority is given, and the Chief ofPolice shall agree in writing to accept such enforcement authority prior to any enforcement action being taken pursuant tosuch designation.
(C) Any appeal from a decision of the Fire Marshal relative to the following may be appealed to the Board of Appealswithin 30 days from the date of the decision:
(1) Disapproval of an application.
(2) Refusal to grant a permit.
(3) Decision relative to the interpretation or applicability of the code.
(D) Such request for an appeal must be made in writing and submitted to the City Secretary and the Fire Chief. TheBoard of Appeals shall hear the appeal at the first available and practical regular meeting date. The Board of Appeals mayrequire additional evidence and expert testimony in order to render its decision. The decision of the Board of Appeals shallbe final and binding.
(Ord. O-15-03, passed 8-26-03)
Sec. 34.07. Fire Marshal and Fire Chief.
No Municipal Officer may serve in the capacity as Fire Marshal or Fire Chief while serving in public office. (Ord. O-15-03,passed 8-26-03)
Sec. 34.08. Permits.
Permits and associated fees shall be issued and enforced in accordance with the code. (Ord. O-15-03, passed 8-26-03)
Sec. 34.09. Adoption of International Fire Code.
(A) The City Council hereby adopts the follow 2015 edition of the International Codes, including all amendments andannual supplements published thereto, including appendix chapters, inclusive, are on file in the office of the Fire MarshallOfficer for permanent record and inspection:
(1)
International Fire Code, 2015 edition
.
a.
Adopted
. The city council adopts International Fire Code, 2015 edition, as published by theInternational Code Council and its appendices.
b.
Amendments
. The city council adopts Option B of the NCTCOG regional amendments to theInternational Fire Code.
(2)
International Wildland-Urban Interface Code, 2015 edition
.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 19/350
a.
Adopted
. The city council adopts International Wildland-Urban Interface Code, 2015 edition, aspublished by the international Code Council and its appendices.
b.
Amendments
. The city council adopts Option B of the NCTCOG regional amendments to theInternational Wildland-Urban Interface Code.
(3)
National Fire Protection Association 101 Life Safety Code, 2015 edition
.
a.
Adopted
. The city council adopts National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 101 Life Safety Code,2015 edition, as published by the NFPA and its appendices.
(B) Said codes are hereby adopted as the fire codes of the city for regulating conditions hazardous to life and propertyfrom fire or explosion in the city, providing for issuance of permits; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,conditions and terms of such International Fire Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc., andthe secondary publications referenced above. The city may replace the 2015 editions with a more current updated version,provided however, such versions are kept as provided herein.
(Ord. O-15-03, passed 8-26-03; Ord. O-10-17, passed 9-25-17)
Sec. 34.10. Mitigation rates for the deployment of emergency and nonemergency services.
(A) The city shall initiate mitigation rates for the delivery of emergency and nonemergency services by the firedepartment for personnel, supplies and equipment to the scene of emergency and nonemergency incidents as listed inexhibit A to Ordinance O-17-18. The mitigation rates shall be based on actual costs of the services and that which is usual,customary and reasonable (UCR) as shown in exhibit A to Ordinance O-17-18, which may include any services, personnel,supplies, and equipment and with baselines established by addendum to this document.
(B) A claim shall be filed to the responsible party(s) through their insurance carrier. In some circumstances, theresponsible party(s) will be billed directly.
(C) The city council may make rules or regulations and from time to time may amend, revoke, or add rules andregulations, not consistent with this section, as they may deem necessary or expedient in respect to billing for thesemitigation rates or the collection thereof.
(D) The mitigation rates lists in exhibit A to Ordinance O-17-18 will increase by 1.5% annually or based on the annualpercentage increase in the consumer price index (CPI), as developed by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the U.S.Department of Labor, whichever is more. Rate adjustments will occur on the anniversary date of this ordinance/resolution tokeep the fire department's cost recovery program in conformity with increasing operating expenses.
(Ord. O-17-18, passed 11-19-18)
CHAPTER 35: POLICE DEPARTMENT
*
5
Sec. 35.01. Duties of Chief of Police.
(A) The Police Chief shall report to the City Manager and perform all lawful duties directed to him or her by the CityManager.
(B) The Police Chief shall be responsible for the day-to-day management and operations of the Police Department.
Sec. 35.02. Police Reserve force created.
(A) The city is desirous of adding a sufficient number of auxiliary and reserve police personnel to the Police Departmentto assist in such times as may be necessary to complement the present force and to provide additional personnel in thecases of sickness, death, or incapacity of any officer which would create an impairment of the department in theperformance of its duties.
(B) There is hereby established a Police Reserve force to be composed of a maximum of 20 members. Such force is tobe in compliance and operated under the provisions of Tex. Local Gov't Code §§ 141.007, 142.003 and 341.012, asamended.
(C) The creation of this reserve force is not intended in any way, form, or fashion to alter the authority of the Chief ofPolice as outlined under Tex. Local Gov't Code § 342.012.
(‘84 Code, §§ 1-21, 1-22, 1-23) (Ord. 325, passed 4-22-80)
State Law reference–
Compensation of Police Reserve Force, Tex. Local Gov't Code § 141.007; Generally, Tex. Local Gov't Code §342.012; Reserve Force hospital and medical assistance, Tex. Local Gov't Code § 142.003.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 20/350
Sec. 35.03. Adoption of Standard Operating Procedures.
The Standard Operating Procedures for the Jacksboro Police Department of the city, dated November 15, 2005, are herebyestablished and incorporated herein by reference to this section for all purposes. (Ord. O-18-05, passed 11-15-05; Am. Ord.O-07-08, passed 3-11-08)
Sec. 35.04. Taser policy.
The taser policy is to be included within the Standard Operating Procedures for the City of Jacksboro, Texas, PoliceDepartment, which is attached to Ord. No. O-18-10, as Exhibit A, and incorporated herein by reference to this section for allpurposes. (Ord. No. O-18-10, § 2, 12-14-10)
CHAPTER 36: PERSONNEL REGULATIONS
Sec. 36.01. Personnel rules and regulations adopted by reference.
The city personnel rules and regulations, copies of which are maintained by the City Manager or his or her designee, arehereby adopted by reference and shall be treated as if set forth in full herein. Where there exists a conflict between any ofthe ordinances contained in this Code of Ordinances and any of the city personnel rules and regulations, this Code ofOrdinances shall govern and prevail. (Am. Ord. 5-6-98, passed 5-26-98; Am. Ord. O-6-02, passed 8-27-02; Am. Ord. O-17-05, passed 11-15-05; Am. Ord. O-21-08, passed 7-8-08; Am. Ord. O-22-08, passed 7-22-08; Am. Ord. O-01-16, passed 1-25-16; Am. Ord. O-06-16, passed 7-25-16; Ord. O-18-18, passed 11-19-18)
Sec. 36.02. Texas Municipal Retirement System (TMRS); election to participate; adoption by reference.
(A)
Election to participate in the TMRS
. On behalf of the city, the City Council hereby exercises its option and elects tohave the city and all of the employees of all departments, except the fire department, participate in the Texas MunicipalRetirement System (hereafter “TMRS”) as provided in Tex. Gov't Code §§ 851.001 et seq., as amended; and all of thebenefits and obligations of such system are hereby accepted.
(B)
Election to participate in the TMRS Supplemental Benefits Fund
. The City Council elects to have the employees of allparticipating departments of the city participate in and be covered by the Supplemental Benefits Fund of the TexasMunicipal Retirement System, as provided by Tex. Gov't Code §§ 851.001 et seq.; and all the benefits and obligations ofparticipation in such fund are hereby accepted by the city as to such employees.
(C)
Adoption by reference
. Ordinances effecting the plan for participation in the TMRS, employee contributions, updatedservice credits, increases in benefits and retirement annuities and any other applicable legislation of the city and state areadopted by reference into this Code of Ordinances as if fully set forth herein and shall be kept on file in the office of the CityClerk.
(‘84 Code, §§ 1-61 § 1-68) (Am. Ord. 9-8-01, passed 9-11-01; Am. Ord. O-9-02, passed 9-17-02; Am. Ord. O-16-06,passed 10-10-06; Am. Ord. O-24-08, passed 8-26-08; Am. Ord. O-05-16, passed - - 16)
CHAPTER 37: RECORDS MANAGEMENT
*
6
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 37.01. Definition of city records.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a differentmeaning.
City records
. Any document, paper, letter, book, map, photograph, sound or video recording, microfilm, magnetic tape,electronic medium, or other information recording medium, regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless ofwhether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by the city or any of itsofficers or employees pursuant to law, including an ordinance, or in the transaction of public business. The term does notinclude:
(1) Extra identical copies of documents created only for convenience of reference or research by officers oremployees of the city;
(2) Notes, journals, diaries, and similar documents created by an officer or employee of the city for theofficer's or employee's personal convenience;
(3) Blank forms;
(4) Stocks of publications;
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 21/350
(5) Library and museum materials acquired solely for the purposes of reference or display; or
(6) Copies of documents in any media furnished to members of the public to which they are entitled underTex. Gov't Code, Ch. 552, or other state law.
(Tex. Loc. Gov't Code § 201.003)
Sec. 37.02. City records declared public property.
All city records, as defined in
§ 37.01
, are declared to be the property of the city. No city official or employee has, by virtueof his or her position, any personal or property right to such records even though he or she may have developed orcompiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or unauthorized use of such records is prohibited. (Ord. 1-1-91, passed 1-22-91)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 37.03. Policy.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over the creation,distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all city records through a comprehensive system ofintegrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their ultimate disposition. (Ord. 1-1-91, passed1-22-91)
RECORDS CONTROL
Sec. 37.15. Use of records schedules.
All city offices and departments shall adopt records retention and disposition schedules and destroy, transfer, or otherwisedispose of records only according to such schedules. (Ord. 1-1-91, passed 1-22-91)
Sec. 37.16. Development of records retention and disposition schedules.
(A) Retention periods to be included in records schedules shall be submitted by the Records Management Office to theCity Attorney, who shall notify the Records Management Office within ten working days of his or her approval or of anyobjection to a retention period. At the expiration of the ten-day period, if no objection has been submitted, the recordsschedule shall be adopted and shall have full force as sufficient authorization for records destruction or other action. Ifobjection is made, the Records Management Office shall determine a retention period satisfactory to the office ofdepartment concerned, to the City Attorney.
(B) When a records retention and disposition schedule is adopted, it shall constitute full authority to destroy, transfer,microphotograph, or take other action, and the City Council hereby directs that such action be taken by the RecordManagement Office or under his or her supervision. The Records Management Office shall notify the State Librarian ofintended destruction, as required by law, but no further notice to the City Council or other city office shall be required.
(C) Revision of retention periods shall be submitted for review to the City Attorney in the same manner as the originalretention periods.
(Ord. 1-1-91, passed 1-22-91)
Sec. 37.17. One-time destruction of obsolete records.
Prior to adoption of records schedules for an office, one-time destruction of accumulated obsolete records of that office maybe made by or under the supervision of the Records Management Office. Prior to such destruction, the RecordsManagement Office shall submit lists of records to be destroyed to the City Attorney, who shall give notice within tenworking days of any records that he or she believes should not be destroyed, and such records shall be retained for aperiod suggested by either. The Records Management Office shall also submit notice as required by law to the StateLibrarian. Obsolete records shall include those no longer created by the office or department and no longer needed foradministrative, legal, fiscal or other research purposes. (Ord. 1-1-91, passed 1-22-91)
Sec. 37.18. Records center.
A records center operation shall utilize one or more buildings to store inactive records; to insure the security of suchrecords; to promote fast, efficient retrieval of information from stored records; and to provide facilities for a centralizedmicrographics program. (Ord. 1-1-91, passed 1-22-91)
Sec. 37.19. Preservation of permanent records.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 22/350
The Records Management Office shall develop procedures to insure the permanent preservation of historically valuablerecords of the city. The Records Management Office shall provide housing under archival conditions for such records in theRecords Center or in another municipal facility and in such manner that the records, unless their use is restricted by law orregulation, are open to the public for research purposes. If city-owned facilities are not available, the Records ManagementOffice shall arrange for the transfer of the records to the Texas State Library for perpetual care and preservation in one ofits nearby Regional Historical Resource Depositories, or shall make other arrangements for their permanent preservationnot contrary to law or regulation. In no circumstances shall the permanent records of the city be transferred to privateindividuals, to private historical societies or museums, or to private collages or universities. (Ord. 1-1-91, passed 1-22-91)
Sec. 37.20. Non-current records not to be maintained in office files.
Records no longer required in the conduct of current business by an office of the city shall be promptly transferred to theRecords Center or archives or the State Library, or be destroyed, at the time such action is designated on an approvedrecords schedule. Such records shall not be maintained in current office files or equipment. (Ord. 1-1-91, passed 1-22-91)
ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 37.35. Designation of Records Manager.
The City Clerk and his or her successors in office shall be designated as Records Manager and shall administer theRecords Management Program and shall be responsible for city-wide files management and the direction and control of thecity's record disposition program. The Records Manager shall report to and be responsible to the City Manager. (Ord. 1-1-91, passed 1-22-91)
Sec. 37.36. Duties of Records Manager.
The Records Manager shall have the following duties, and others as assigned by the City Manager:
(A) Plan, formulate, and prescribe basic file management and records disposition policies, systems,standards, and procedures.
(B) Prepare records retention and disposition schedules in cooperation with department heads for all cityoffices and departments, define and identify vital and permanent records, and establish retention periods for allrecords. Retention periods shall be no shorter than desired by the originating office, but shall be as long asdeemed necessary by either the Records Manager, the City Attorney, or the City Finance Officer.
(C) Review schedules annually and update or amend as needed.
(D) Coordinate the city-wide files management and records disposition programs and report annually to theCity Manager on program effectiveness in each city department.
(E) Provide records management advice as assistance to all city offices and departments by preparation ofmanuals of procedures and policies and by on-site consultation.
(F) Develop, disseminate, and coordinate files maintenance and records disposition procedures, including butnot limited to those prescribed by this chapter, to meet the current and long-term information needs of the city.
(G) Train departmental records officers and other personnel in the fundamentals of record management andtheir duties in the records management program.
(H) Carry out at the proper time actions such as microphotography, destruction, and transfers that arerequired by records schedules.
(I) Design and manage the operations of a records center for the low-cost storage of inactive records and as afacility for a centralized micrographics program.
(J) Establish and monitor compliance with standards for filing and storage equipment and supplies in all cityoffices and departments, and report to the City Manager failure of any officer or department to comply with suchstandards. Keep careful records of savings in equipment, supplies, and staff costs realized by each departmentof the city through implementation of the records management program. Report annually such cost savings tothe City Manager; the report shall include the amount of storage space and equipment released for other uses.
(K) Develop a city-wide forms design and control system.
(L) Establish in cooperation with other responsible city officials a disaster plan for each city office anddepartment to insure maximum availability of records for reestablishing operations quickly and with minimumdisruption and expense.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 23/350
(M) Develop procedures to insure that permanent preservation of historically valuable records of the city.
(N) Protect privacy and assure availability of public information from records stored in the records center;bring to the attention of the City Manager any office not in compliance with laws or ordinances regarding publicaccess to information or protection of privacy.
(O) Prepare and submit annually to the City Manager the budget requirements of the Records ManagementProgram to enable it to fulfill the records management goals of the city.
(Ord. 1-1-91, passed 1-22-91)
State Law reference–
Duties of Records Management officer, Tex. Local Gov't Code § 203.023.
Sec. 37.37. Responsibilities of City Department Heads.
All city officers and department heads are responsible for the implementation and operation of effective files operations,records transfers and dispositions, and other activities in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within their areas ofresponsibility. They shall designate records officers within their offices and provide the Records Management Office thenames of such designees and of all file stations and file custodians under their supervision. Persons designated as recordsofficers shall report directly to the head of their department on matters relating to the records management program andshould have full access to all files in their department. (Ord. 1-1-91, passed 1-22-91)
Sec. 37.38. Responsibilities of Records Officers.
The Records Officer in each office and department is responsible for providing coordination between the Records Managerand personnel in his or her office to ensure that provisions of this chapter are complied with. This responsibility shall includeoverseeing the application of records schedules within the office or department. (Ord. 1-1-91, passed 1-22-91)
CHAPTER 38: TAXATION AND FINANCE
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 38.01. Tax Assessor/Collector's duties.
The City Tax Assessor/Collector shall begin the collection of taxes annually October 1, or as soon thereafter as he or shemay be able to obtain the proper assessment rolls, books or data upon which to proceed with such collection, and he orshe shall publish a notice in the official paper of the city, stating in such notice the time and place where such taxes arerequired to be paid; and it shall be the duty of every person to pay his or her taxes before February 1 in each and everyyear after assessment is made. (‘84 Code, § 7-41) (Ord. 15A, passed 4-20-09)
Sec. 38.02. Reserved.
(‘84 Code, § 7-42) (Ord. 15A, passed 4-20-09)
Sec. 38.03. Tax Collector authorized to seize, sell delinquents' property.
If any person shall fail or refuse to pay the taxes imposed upon him or her or his or her property by law and by anyordinance of this city, within the time prescribed in this chapter, the Tax Collector shall by virtue of his or her tax rolls, seizeand levy upon so much personal or real property belonging to such person as may be sufficient to pay his or her taxes,together with all costs accruing thereon, unless the Tax Collector shall be ordered by the City Council to bring suit directlyagainst the persons refusing to pay the taxes as directed in this chapter, and the same shall be sold in accordance with thelaws of the state in such cases made and provided. (‘84 Code, § 7-43) (Ord. 15A, passed 4-20-09)
State Law reference–
Appraisal records review, Tex. Tax Code §§ 41.01 et seq.; Appraisal Review Board, Tex. Tex. Code §§ 6.41 and6.42; Local Appraisal, Tex. Tax Code Ch. 25; Tax Collection Powers for Type A Municipality, Tex. Tax Code § 302.102(a).
Sec. 38.04. Fees for past due accounts.
In accordance with Art. 103.0031 of the Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure, there shall be imposed an additional fee of 30%on all debts and accounts receivable, i.e. fines, fees, restitution, other debts and costs that are more than 60 days past dueand have been referred to an attorney for collection. (Ord. O-09-08, passed 4-8-08)
HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION FOR ELDERLY
Sec. 38.15. Exemption; rate.
Upon compliance with all requirements of this subchapter and all other applicable laws and ordinances, $6,000.00 of theassessed value of residence homesteads of persons 65 years of age or older shall be exempt from ad valorem taxes levied
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 24/350
by the city. (‘84 Code, § 7-11) (Ord. 271, passed 3-13-73)
State Law reference–
Residence homestead exemption, Tex. Const. Art. VIII, § 1-b.
Sec. 38.16. Effective date.
Such exemption shall be effective as to such residence homesteads as may qualify hereunder from and after January 1,1973. Eligibility for such exemption shall be determined each year as of January 1 of such year. (‘84 Code, § 7-12) (Ord.271, passed 3-13-73)
Sec. 38.17. Application for exemption.
The exemption provided for by this subchapter shall not be allowed unless the person claiming such exemption shall filewith the Chief Appraiser or other proper authority, between January 1 and April 1 of the year for which such exemption isclaimed, a sworn statement of age satisfactory to the Chief Appraiser and a sworn claim for such exemption, describing theproperty for which exemption is sought, on prescribed forms, giving complete information as provided for by such forms. Inthe event of good cause shown to the satisfaction of the Chief Appraiser, late applications may be accepted but no later, inany event, than ten days prior to time for submission of assessment rolls to the Board of Equalization. After the filing ofsuch statement of age and claim for exemption, the Chief Appraiser may, if he or she deems it necessary, request furtherinformation in order to determine eligibility for such exemptions. Such information shall be provided by the applicant as aprerequisite to obtaining such exemption. Such application for exemption shall be made annually for each year that suchexemption is sought. (‘84 Code, § 7-13) (Ord. 271, passed 3-13-73)
Sec. 38.18. Determination of Chief Appraiser.
After the application and all necessary statements and any other necessary information has been filed, the Chief Appraisershall determine eligibility for such exemption. The determination of the Chief Appraiser shall be final and the property inquestion shall be placed on the tax rolls of the city in accordance with such determination. However, in the event the ChiefAppraiser should deny such application for exemption, notice shall be given to the applicant within ten days of suchdetermination and in any event no later than the submission of all assessment lists to the Board of Equalization. However,there shall be no appeal of the Chief Appraiser's determination. (‘84 Code, § 7-14) (Ord. 271, passed 3-13-73)
Sec. 38.19. Limitations of exemption.
The exemption authorized hereby shall extend only to a residential homestead as same may be defined by the laws of thestate. Such exemptions shall be allowed only if the property in question is in fact the residential homestead of the applicantand such person has attained the age of 65 years on January 1 of the taxable year in question. The exemption shall begranted if one spouse has attained the age of 65 years on such application date even though the other has not attainedsuch age. (‘84 Code, § 7-15) (Ord. 271, passed 3-13-73)
Sec. 38.20. Determinative date for exemption.
January 1 of each tax year shall be the determinative date for eligibility for such exemption and qualification therefor shallbe determined each year as of that date. Determination of eligibility for such exemption shall be for only the year inquestion with each subsequent year requiring application and determination of eligibility as provided herein. There shall beno proration of the exemption provided for in this subchapter for any taxable year either in the event of qualification ordisqualification of either any applicable person or property for such exemption after January 1 of the applicable year. (‘84Code, § 7-16) (Ord. 271, passed 3-13-73)
GAS AND ELECTRIC SALES TAX
Sec. 38.35. Gas and electric sales tax continued.
The tax heretofore imposed by the city pursuant to the provisions of the Local Sales and Use Tax Act, being Tex. Tax Code§§ 321.001 et seq., is hereby continued on the sale, production, distribution, lease or rental of and the use, storage or otherconsumption of gas and electricity for residential use. (‘84 Code, § 7-1) (Ord. 306, passed 8-22-78)
State Law reference–
Authority to reimpose sales tax on gas and electricity, Tex. Tax Code § 321.105(c).
Sec. 38.36. Gas and electricity sale, production, and the like not exempt from tax.
The sale, production, distribution, lease or rental of and the use, storage or other consumption of gas and electricity forresidential use shall not be exempt from the tax imposed by the city under the Local Sales and Use Tax Act, being Tex. TaxCode §§ 321.001 et seq. (‘84 Code, § 7-2) (Ord. 306, passed 8-22-78)
HOTEL-MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 25/350
Sec. 38.50. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires adifferent meaning.
Consideration
. The cost of the room, sleeping space, or bed space, but shall not include the cost of any food served orpersonal services rendered to the occupant not related to cleaning and readying such room or space for occupancy, andshall not include any tax assessed for the occupancy thereof by any other governmental agency.
Hotel
. A building in which members of the public obtain sleeping accommodations for consideration. The term includeshotel, motel, tourist home, tourist house, tourist court, lodging house, inn, rooming house, or bed and breakfast. The termdoes not include a hospital, sanitarium or nursing home, nor does the term include a dormitory or other housing facilityowned or leased and operated by an institution of higher education or a private or independent institution of highereducation as those terms are defined by Tex. Educ. Code § 61.003, used by the institution for the purpose of providingsleeping accommodations for persons engaged in an educational program or activity at the institution.
Occupancy
. The use or possession or the right to the use or possession of any room, space or sleeping facility in a hotel forany purpose.
Occupant
. Anyone who for a consideration uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any room or rooms, orsleeping space or facility in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or agreement.
Permanent resident
. Any occupant who has or shall have the right of occupancy of any room or rooms or sleeping space orfacility in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days during the current calendar year or preceding year, so long as there is nointerruption of payment for the period.
Person
. Any individual, company, corporation or association owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel.
Quarterly period
. The regular calendar quarters of the year: the first quarter being composed of the months of January,February and March; the second quarter being the months of April, May and June; the third quarter being the months ofJuly, August and September; and the fourth quarter being the months of October, November and December.
Tax collector
. The Finance Officer of the city.
(‘84 Code, § 7-21) (Ord. 292, passed 10-11-77)
Sec. 38.51. Hotel occupancy tax rate.
There is hereby levied a tax upon the cost of occupancy of any room or space furnished by any hotel where such cost ofoccupancy is at the rate of $2.00 or more per day, such tax to be equal to 7% of the consideration paid by the occupant ofsuch room to such hotel, exclusive of other occupancy taxes imposed by other governmental agencies. (‘84 Code, § 7-22)(Ord. 292, passed 10-11-77; Am. Ord. 297, passed 12-27-77; Am. Ord. 353, passed 10-11-83)
State Law reference–
Hotel and Motel Tax generally, Tex. Tax Code §§ 351.001 et seq.
Sec. 38.52. Permanent residents exempt.
No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a permanent resident. (‘84 Code, § 7-23) (Ord. 292, passed 10-11-77)
Sec. 38.53. Exemptions.
(A) No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a corporation or association organized and operated exclusively forreligious, charitable or educational purposes, no part of the net earnings of which enures to the benefit of any privateshareholder or individual. (‘84 Code, § 7-24) (Ord. 292, passed 10-11-77)
(B) No tax shall be imposed on:
(1) The United States, this state, or an agency, institution, board or commission of this state other than aninstitution of higher education;
(2) An officer or employee of a state governmental entity described in division (B)(4)(a)1. when traveling on orotherwise engaged in the course of official duties for the governmental entity; or
(3) An officer or employee of a governmental entity of the United States when traveling on or otherwiseengaged in the course of official duties for the governmental entity if the governmental entity directly pays to thehotel the price of the room.
(C) A governmental entity otherwise excepted under this division (B) who shall pay the tax imposed by this section isentitled to a refund of the amount of tax paid in accordance with Tex. Tax Code § 156.154.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 26/350
(D) A state officer or employee described by division (B) who is entitled to reimbursement for the cost of lodging and forwhom a special provision or exception to the general rate of reimbursement under the General Appropriations Act is notapplicable shall pay the tax under this chapter as if it were imposed by this chapter. The state governmental entity withwhom the person is associated is entitled under Tex. Tax Code § 156.154 to a refund of the tax paid.
(E) A state officer or employee described by division (B) for whom a special exception to the general rate ofreimbursement under the General Appropriations Act applies and who is provided with photo identification verifying theidentity and exempt status of the person is not required to pay the tax and is not entitled to a refund. The photoidentification of a state officer or employee described by this section may be modified for the purposes of this section.
(F) As used in this section, “institution of higher education” has the meaning assigned by Tex. Educ. Code § 61.003.
(Tex. Tax Code §§ 156.103 and 351.006)
Sec. 38.54. Tax collection by owner and the like.
Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax imposed by § 38.51 for the city. (‘84Code, § 7-25) (Ord. 292, passed 10-11-77)
Sec. 38.55. Quarterly reports, payments.
On the last day of the month following each quarterly period, every person required in
§ 38.54
to collect the tax imposedherein shall file a report with the Finance Officer showing the consideration paid for all room occupancies in the precedingquarter, the amount of tax collected on such occupancies, and any other information the Finance Officer may reasonablyrequire. Such person shall pay the tax due on such occupancies at the time of filing such report. There shall also befurnished to the Finance Officer of the city at the time of payment of such tax a copy of the quarterly report filed with theState Comptroller in connection with the state hotel occupancy tax. (‘84 Code, § 7-26) (Ord. 292, passed 10-11-77)
Sec. 38.56. Finance Officer to make rules.
The Finance Officer shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are reasonable and necessary toeffectively collect the tax levied hereby and shall, upon reasonable notice, have access to books and records necessary toenable him or her to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this subchapter and the amount of taxesdue under the provisions of this subchapter. (‘84 Code, § 7-27) (Ord. 292, passed 10-11-77)
Sec. 38.57. Penalty for noncompliance.
If any person required by the provisions of this subchapter to collect the tax imposed herein, or make reports as requiredherein, and pay to the Finance Officer the tax imposed herein, shall fail to collect such tax, file such report or pay such tax,or if any person shall file a false report, such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction bepunished as provided in
§ 10.99
, and shall pay to the Finance Officer the tax due, together with a penalty of 10% of the taxdue for each 30 days that the same is not timely filed. (‘84 Code, § 7-28) (Ord. 292, passed 10-11-77)
LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX
Sec. 38.70. Tax imposed.
(A) In accordance with the election held February 18, 1969, a local sales and use tax in the amount of 1% is herebyimposed.
(B) In accordance with the election held May 7, 1994, an additional sales and use tax at a rate of one-half of one percentto be used to reduce the property tax rate.
AD VALOREM TAX
Sec. 38.80. Tax imposed.
(A) The City Council of the City of Jacksboro, Texas, does hereby levy and adopt the tax rate on $100.00 assessedvaluation for the tax year 2016 as follows:
$0.74363 for the purpose of maintenance and operations;
$0.519875 for the purpose of principal and interest of debt of the city;
$1.263505 total tax rate.
(B) The tax assessor/collector is hereby authorized to assess and collect the taxes of the City of Jacksboro, Texas.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 27/350
(Ord. 9-7-01, passed 9-11-01; Am. Ord. O-8-02, passed 9-17-02; Am. Ord. O-13-03, passed 8-26-03; Am. Ord. O-15-04,passed 9-14-04; Am. Ord. O-11-05, passed 9-13-05; Am. Ord. O-13-06, passed 8-29-06; Am. Ord. O-16-07, passed 9-11-07; Am. Ord. O-28-08, passed 9-23-08; Am. Ord. O-22-09, passed 9-8-09; Am. Ord. O-14-10, passed 9-14-10; Am. Ord. O-15-11, passed 9-27-11; Am. Ord. O-12-12, passed 9-6-12; Am. Ord. O-13-13, passed 9-10-13; Am. Ord. O-11-14, passed9-9-14; Am. Ord. O-16-15, passed 9-8-15; Am. Ord. O-09-16, passed 9-6-16)
CHAPTER 39: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
Sec. 39.01. Organization.
The fire chief is hereby appointed as the emergency management coordinator and the police chief is hereby appointed asthe assistant emergency management coordinator to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and otherappropriate sections pertaining to emergency management and will serve at pleasure of the director. (Ord. O-05-03, passed3-25-03; Ord. O-01-18, passed 1-8-18)
Sec. 39.02. Emergency Management Director.
The duties and responsibilities of the Emergency Management Director shall include the following:
(A) Surveying actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property within the city and identifying andrequiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence orreduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur.
(B) Supervision of the development and approval of an Emergency Management Plan for the city, and shallrecommend for adoption by the City Council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for theimplementation of such a plan.
(C) Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed for a periodin excess of seven days except by or with the consent of the City Council. Any order or proclamation declaring,continuing or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filedpromptly with the City Secretary.
(D) Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations or directives which are necessary for carrying out thepurposes of this chapter. Such proclamations, regulations or directives shall be disseminated promptly by meanscalculated to bring its contents to the attention of the general public and, unless circumstances attendant on thedisaster prevents or impede, promptly filed with the City Secretary.
(E) Direction and control of the operations of the Jacksboro Emergency Management Organization as well asthe training of emergency management personnel.
(F) Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise with the EmergencyManagement Organization of the city.
(G) Maintenance of liaison with all other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal emergencymanagement organizations.
(H) Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city to aid in thecarrying out of the provisions of the Emergency Management Plan.
(I) Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representativesof the state and other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemeddesirable, of an agreement with the county in which said city is located and with other municipalities within thecounty, for the county-wide coordination of emergency management efforts.
(J) Supervision of and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment,including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergencymanagement within the city.
(K) Authorizing the agreements, after approval by the City Attorney, for use of private property for publicshelter and other purposes.
(L) Surveying the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could be usedduring a disaster, as provided for herein.
(M) Other requirements as specified in the Texas Disaster Act (Tex. Local Gov't Code Ch. 418).
(Ord. O-05-03, passed 3-25-03)
Sec. 39.03. Emergency Management Plan.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 28/350
A Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The Plan shall setforth the form of the organization; establish and designate divisions and functions; assign responsibilities, tasks, duties andpowers; and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this chapter. As provided by state law, the Planshall follow the standards and criteria established by the State Division of Emergency Management. Insofar as possible, theform of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the State Division of EmergencyManagement. When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by thePlan and to maintain their portion of the Plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The Emergency Management Planshall be considered supplementary to this chapter and have the effect of law during the time of disaster. (Ord. O-05-03,passed 3-25-03)
Sec. 39.04. Interjurisdictional Program.
The Mayor is hereby authorized to join with the County Judge and the Mayors of other cities in the county, if he so chooses,in the formation of an Interjurisdictional Emergency Management Program for the county, and shall have the authority tocooperate in the preparation of an Interjurisdictional Emergency Management Plan and in the appointment of a jointEmergency Management Coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a county-wide program ofemergency management insofar as said program may affect the city. (Ord. O-05-03, passed 3-25-03)
Sec. 39.05. Override.
At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, theyshall supercede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules or regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistenttherewith. (Ord. O-05-03, passed 3-25-03)
Sec. 39.06. Liability.
This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health and safety.Neither the city, the agents and representatives of the city, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation,association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to complywith, any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for any damagesustained to persons as the result of said activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises whovoluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license or privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect,designate and use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering personsduring an actual, impending or practice enemy attack or natural or man-made disaster shall, together with his successors ininterest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises undersuch license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. (Ord. O-05-03, passed3-25-03)
Sec. 39.07. Commitment of funds.
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activityauthorized by this chapter without the prior approval by the City Council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the cityby contract, agreement, or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the City Council unless during a declareddisaster. During a declared disaster, the Mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the city when deemed prudentand necessary for the protection of health, life or property. (Ord. O-05-03, passed 3-25-03)
Sec. 39.08. Penalty clause.
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the Emergency ManagementOrganization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter. Further, it shall be unlawful forany person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a member of theEmergency Management Organization of the city, unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the properofficials. Convictions for violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by fine not to exceed $1,000.00and/or up to 180 days in jail. (Ord. O-05-03, passed 3-25-03)
Sec. 39.09. Limitations.
This chapter shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or naval order, ruleor regulation. (Ord. O-05-03, passed 3-25-03)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
CHAPTER 50: GARBAGE AND REFUSE
*
1
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 29/350
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 50.01. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires adifferent meaning.
Brush
. Large tree or shrub limbs, branches or trimmings which can be handled in standard garbage trucks.
City
. The City of Jacksboro, Texas, or its agents.
Construction debris
. All lumber, bricks, stone, sheetrock, roofing, sand, gravel, tile, and all other building material wastefrom construction, alteration or remodeling of any building.
Containers
. The receptacles placed throughout the city by the city or its agents in which garbage is deposited formechanical collection.
Dispose
. Means to discharge, deposit, inject, jump, spill, leak, or place junk, garbage, rubbish, refuse or other solid wasteon or into land or water, or into another person's residential or commercial container or polycart.
Garbage
. Kitchen refuse, ordinarily including only foodstuffs or related materials. “Garbage” also includes all decayablewastes, except sewage.
Junk
. All worn-out, worthless and discarded material, including odds and ends, old iron or other metal, glass and cordage.
Large appliances and trees
. All refrigerators, freezers, stoves, water heaters, washers, dryers, ironers, trees, tree limbs,and the like that are too large, heavy or bulky to be collected with normal collection equipment (standard garbage trucks).
Refuse
. All wastes resulting from domestic, commercial or industrial operations incident to urban life, except sewage, butincluding garbage and trash.
Rubbish
. All nondecayable wastes, except ashes.
Sanitation service
. A city-wide service for collection of garbage, yard trash and brush provided by the city or its agents.
Single-family residence
. Any residential unit which is served by a separate water meter.
Trash
. All refuse other than garbage, brush, and large appliances and trees, including household trash (discarded clothing,toys, papers, and the like) and yard trash (grass clippings, small shrub and tree trimmings, leaves, and the like).
(‘84 Code, § 11-1)
Sec. 50.02. Enforcement of Solid Waste Disposal Act authorized.
(A) Pursuant to Tex. Health and Safety Code §§ 361.001 et seq., commonly known as the Solid Waste Disposal Act (theAct), the City Council assumes, pursuant to Tex. Health and Safety Code §§ 361.165 through 361.167, exclusive authorityto exercise within the area subject to the city's jurisdiction the powers, enforcement and other authority granted by the Act.
(B) Such exercise of power shall be in conformance with state law and subject to the same duties, limitations, andrestrictions applicable to counties under the Act.
(C) Departments of the city and specifically the City Attorney, Code Enforcement Officer, or the City Prosecutor's officeshall be authorized to seek enforcement of the Act within the city's jurisdiction both by civil injunction and civil penalty asallowed in the Act and all other lawful remedies, civil or criminal.
(D) The city acknowledges that pursuant to Tex. Health and Safety Code § 361.223, all civil penalties ever imposedpursuant to the Act shall be equally divided by the state on the one hand and the local government or governments on theother hand, with 50% of recovery going to the General Fund of the state and 50% of recovery going to the local governmentinstituting the suit.
(E) Pursuant to Tex. Health and Safety Code § 361.2215, all such criminal fines or penalties imposed pursuant to the Actshall be equally divided with 50% of recovery going to the state and 50% of recovery going to the local governmentinstituting the suit, except that if the court determines that the state or the local government bore significantly more of theburden of prosecuting the case, it may apportion up to 75% of the fine to the government that predominantly prosecuted thecase.
(F) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to diminish, negate or alter the penalties or legal requirements set forth in thischapter or any other health, safety or refuse ordinances of the city.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 30/350
(Ord. passed 2-16-86)
Sec. 50.03. Authority of Code Enforcement Officer.
(A)
Generally
. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to make inspection of publicly or privately ownedpremises to determine whether or not refuse is being properly collected, removed and disposed of, as required by theprovisions of this chapter, or any other applicable health ordinances. In the event it is found that this chapter or any otherapplicable health ordinance is being violated, appropriate and timely action shall be taken to insure full compliance withsame. (‘84 Code, § 11-11)
(B)
Authority to make inspections and issue notices
. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to makeinspections of refuse containers from which garbage and trash are to be collected by city forces and to issue notices tocomply with provisions of this chapter to owners, occupants, tenants or lessees occupying any building, house or structurewithin the corporate limits, or the premises from which such collections are to be made, when such owners, occupants,tenants or lessees have failed to maintain refuse containers in the manner prescribed by this chapter. If compliance withthis chapter is not obtained by issuance of such notice, the matter shall be referred to the City Council for further correctiveaction, as provided by this chapter. (‘84 Code, § 11-7) (Ord. 246, passed 9-12-67)
CONTAINER REGULATIONS
Sec. 50.15. Duty of owner or occupant to provide refuse containers.
(a) It is unlawful for any person to intentionally, knowingly or recklessly handle, scavenge from, disturb, or remove anycontents of any bin, bag, or other container that has been placed for collection of garbage, trash or recyclable materials atthe designated location for pickup by the department, or for pickup by any other public or private collection service.
(b) Refuse shall be collected from every building, house, structure and trailer house within the corporate boundaries,used for residential, church, school, college, lodge, commercial, business or any other purpose, and the owner, occupant,tenant or lessee using or occupying such premises shall provide and maintain standard refuse containers of sufficient sizeand number, as hereinafter specified, to hold such garbage or trash as will normally accumulate on such premises.
(‘84 Code, § 11-2; Am. Ord. O-05-14, passed 5-27-14)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 50.16. Refuse container requirements.
Each owner, occupant, tenant or lessee receiving refuse collection service shall be provided suitable leakproof refusecontainers for garbage and trash, constructed of substantial material and maintained in good condition, with a tight-fitting lidor cover, with handles so that same can be conveniently emptied, and tapered from top to bottom; provided, that the CodeEnforcement Officer may approve appropriate containers for commercial establishments. When containers deteriorate soas to become hazardous or non-leakproof, they shall be replaced. (‘84 Code, § 11-3)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 50.17. Refuse containers to be kept secure and fastened.
All refuse containers shall be kept secure and fastened with lids in place at all times so that insects, rodents or otheranimals cannot have access to the contents thereof, to minimize fire hazard, and to prevent accumulation of water therein.(‘84 Code, § 11-4)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 50.18. Placing refuse containers for collection.
Containers shall be placed by the curb or the front or side of the building, house or structure for which refuse service isprovided; provided, however, that in no event shall such containers be placed inside any building, fence or other enclosure.Such placement shall not occur sooner than 24 hours prior to collection. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have theauthority to designate the location of such containers, taking into consideration, among other things, convenience tocollection crews, convenience to the customer, hazardous conditions such as electrical wiring, danger of collectors beingbitten by household pets, and the like. (‘84 Code, § 11-5)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 50.19. Certain types of wastes placed in containers; regulations.
The following regulations shall apply to containers:
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 31/350
(A) No heavy materials such as rock, sheetrock, tile, stone, automobile frames, tree trunks or heavy metalobjects shall be placed in containers.
(B) No brush exceeding four feet in length shall be placed in containers.
(C) Garbage that is mixed with water shall be drained before placing in containers.
(D) Animal matter that is subject to decomposition shall be wrapped in paper or plastic material before beingplaced in containers.
(E) No dead dogs, cats or other animals shall be placed in containers.
(F) No manure shall be placed in containers.
(G) Empty boxes or packing cases shall be flattened before being placed in containers.
(‘84 Code, § 11-17)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 50.20. Use of polycarts.
Customers are responsible for using polycarts in the manner designed. Damages caused by overloading or misuse shallresult in repair costs being charged directly to the customer. (Ord. 5-2-92, passed 5-26-92; Am. Ord. 9-11-94, passed 9-27-94; Am. Ord. 9-5-95, passed 9-26-95; Am. Ord. 9-14-96, passed 9-24-96)
DISPOSITION OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE
Sec. 50.30. Illegal disposal of garbage, junk, refuse and rubbish.
(A) A person commits an offense if the person disposes of junk, garbage, rubbish, refuse, or other solid waste on a publichighway, street, right-of-way, public park, or into another person's residential or commercial container or polycart, or onother public or private property within the boundary limits of the city.
(B) A person commits an offense if the person allows or permits another person to dispose of junk, garbage, rubbish,refuse, or other solid waste on a public highway, street, right-of-way, public park, or into another person's residential orcommercial container or polycart, or on other public or private property within the boundary limits of the city.
(C) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the disposal occurred at a permitted or licensed solid waste siteprovided for public use, or a designated collection area provided for public use for ultimate disposal at a permitted orlicensed solid waste site.
(D) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the disposal into another person's residential or commercialcontainer or polycart was done in a manner such that the amount disposed was no more than a handful, was aninsignificant amount and was done to prevent littering or to dispose of another person's litter.
(Ord. 4-2-91, passed 4-9-91)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
State Law reference
–
Texas Litter Abatement Act, Tex. Health and Safety Code §§ 365.001 et seq.
Sec. 50.31. Requirements and prohibitions concerning collection of various types of refuse.
The following special requirements and prohibitions shall govern the collection of the types of refuse indicated:
(A)
Garbage and household trash
. Such refuse shall be placed in regulation containers as specified in
§50.16
, and collected from the normal collection point as specified by the Code Enforcement Officer.
(B)
Tree limbs, shrubs, hedge cuttings, grass and leaves
. Such refuse shall be collected on normal collectiondays if such material is tied and bundled in four foot lengths, or bagged and not exceeding 40 pounds. Suchmaterial shall be placed at the curb on regularly scheduled collection days.
(C)
Brush, trees, bulky items and household appliances
. Such refuse shall be reduced to shapes and sizesnot over four feet in length and tied in bundles that can be readily handled by collectors, and placed at the pointspecified by the Code Enforcement Officer. Bulky items and household appliances shall be collected on the firstWednesday of each month. All household appliances must be free of freon and properly tagged by licensed
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 32/350
freon recovery personnel. The customer must contact the solid waste contractor at least 48 hours prior tocollection.
(D)
Ashes
. All ashes must be allowed to stand until cold before being placed in containers for collection.Ashes which have been allowed to cool completely shall be placed in suitable containers and will be collectedfrom the point specified by the Code Enforcement Officer.
(E)
Earth and construction materials
. Earth, rocks, concrete and similar materials will not be collected duringnormal collections. Waste materials resulting from construction or remodeling and materials from an unimprovedlot will not be normally collected. Appropriate containers must be provided for the collection and disposal of suchmaterials.
(F)
Wet refuse
. All refuse that is mixed with water or other liquids shall be drained before being deposited inthe garbage container.
(G)
Animal excrement
. All animal excrement shall be wrapped in paper or other combustible material beforebeing deposited in the garbage container.
(H)
Papers
. Where large accumulations of paper, such as newspapers, are put out for collection, such papersshall be securely bound or placed in containers, to prevent scattering of paper on privately and publicly ownedpremises.
(I)
Weight
. The combined weight of the garbage and the container shall not exceed 75 pounds regardless ofthe contents thereof.
(‘84 Code, § 11-8) (Ord. 246, passed 9-12-67; Am. Ord. 5-2-92, passed 5-26-92; Am. Ord. 9-11-94, passed 9-27-94; Am.Ord. 9-5-95, passed 9-26-95; Am. Ord. 9-14-96, passed 9-24-96)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 50.32. Private dumping of refuse.
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to dispose of refuse from their own premises at a city operated disposal site maydo so; provided, such refuse is dumped at the place designated by the person in charge of the disposal site. (‘84 Code, §11-12) (Ord. 246, passed 9-12-67)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 50.33. Trash transported to landfill; cover required.
All individuals or organizations shall use covered containers in the transportation of items of refuse to the city sanitarylandfill. These items shall be covered or secured in such manner as to prevent the scattering of any debris. (‘84 Code, § 11-13) (Ord. 302, passed 5-24-78)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 50.34. Burning trash, garbage, and the like unlawful; exception permit.
The disposal or burning of kitchen garbage, trash or rubbish in any place within the city limits is prohibited except bypersons or business operators dealing in papers of a personal or secret nature which requires that they be destroyed in thepresence of the persons owning or holding same, which persons or businesses shall on proper satisfactory showing to thecity obtain special permits for this purpose. (‘84 Code, § 11-14) (Ord. 89, passed 8-19-48; Am. Ord. 112, passed 11-6-50;Am. Ord. 246, passed 9-12-67)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 50.35. Ownership of waste, junk and other material.
All junk and other material placed upon the dump ground by any person, firm or corporation becomes the property of thecity and no person is allowed to separate and collect, carry off or dispose of same except under the direction of the city. (‘84Code, § 11-15) (Ord. 246, passed 9-12-67)
Sec. 50.36. Disposition of certain types of waste.
Various types of waste shall be disposed of as follows:
(A) Garbage shall be placed in containers or roll-outs.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 33/350
(B) Yard trash shall be placed in containers if containers are available. Where roll-outs are used, yard trashshall be bagged and placed by the curb for collection with brush.
(C) Brush shall be placed in the alley in such a way as not to obstruct traffic or interfere with the emptying ofcontainers where alleys exist. Where alleys do not exist, brush shall be placed at the street behind the curb.
(D) Construction debris will not be removed by the city or its agents. Construction debris shall be removed bythe owner or occupant of the premises or his or her agent.
(E) Bulk waste will not be removed by the city or its agents. Bulk waste shall be removed by the owner oroccupant of the premises or his or her agent.
(‘84 Code, § 11-16)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 50.37. Disposal of dead animals.
Small dead animals may, at the expense of the owner, be disposed of by the Animal Control Officer. Heavy dead animalssuch as horses and cattle must be disposed of by the owner or person having charge of any such animal, at his or her ownexpense, in the manner and by the method specified by the Health Officer of the city. (‘84 Code, § 11-18)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 50.38. Convenience station regulations.
(A) The convenience station shall not accept tires, batteries, dead animals, brush which cannot be chipped, shingles,rock, soil, concrete, metal, barrels, hazardous waste of any kind and hot ashes or burning material.
(B) Metal items and household appliances shall be separated and placed in designated areas. Items containing freon willnot be accepted without proper tagging indicating freon has been removed by licensed freon recovery personnel.
(Ord. 5-2-92, passed 5-26-92; Am. Ord. 9-11-94, passed 9-27-94; Am. Ord. 9-5-95, passed 9-26-95; Am. Ord. 9-14-96,passed 9-24-96)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
RATES AND CHARGES
Sec. 50.50. Garbage removal; charges.
(A)
Regular service
. Garbage and trash removal service from houses, buildings, and premises used for residential orcommercial, business, or other non-residential purposes shall be provided, and the monthly charges shall be as set forth inthe
Fee Appendix
to this Code.
(B)
Convenience center use
. The sanitation rates to be charged to all customers for use of the convenience center shallbe as set forth in the
Fee Appendix
to this Code.
(C)
Special service; unscheduled services
. Upon special request, the city or its authorized agent shall make such specialunscheduled collection of refuse as is requested, and a charge will be levied for such service, as may be determined by thecity or its agent.
(D)
Unclassified services
. In the event the trash or garbage to be collected from any house, building or premises exceedsthat which can be placed in refuse containers, as defined in
§ 50.16
, the owner, occupant, tenant or lessee thereof shall becharged proportionately for the collection, removal and hauling of such excess at a rate to be determined by the city or itsagent, with regard for the frequency of such service, and the amount of time required for loading and hauling to the refusedisposal site.
(‘84 Code, §§ 11-9, 17-61) (Ord. 246, passed 9-12-67; Am. Ord. 1-1-89, passed 1-24-89; Am. Ord. 5-2-92, passed 5-26-92;Am. Ord. 9-11-94, passed 9-27-94; Am. Ord. 9-5-95, passed 9-26-95; Am. Ord. 9-14-96, passed 9-24-96)
Sec. 50.51. Collection of charges; payment for services rendered.
To avoid duplication in billing and as a convenience to the public, the fees for the services herein regulated shall beincluded on all monthly water bills, and any person who shall fail or refuse to pay the charge for such services rendered bythe due date shall be subject to having all city services suspended in accordance with
§§ 51.26
and
52.69
. It is expresslythe duty of the owner, occupant, tenant or lessee using or occupying any building, house or structure receiving suchservices to make payment therefor. When refuse collection services are suspended for non-payment of charges, the Code
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 34/350
Enforcement Officer shall be notified immediately for appropriate action in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.(‘84 Code, § 11-10) (Ord. 246, passed 9-12-67)
Sec. 50.52. Late payment penalty.
A penalty of 10% shall be added to any payment for sanitation service made after the tenth day of the month for service forthe preceding calendar month. (‘84 Code, § 17-62) (Ord. 355, passed 10-11-83)
CHAPTER 51: SEWER REGULATIONS
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 51.01. Purpose and policy.
(A) This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works for the city and enablesthe city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 USC § 1251 et seq.) and thegeneral pretreatment regulations (40 CFR Part 403). The objectives of this chapter are:
(1) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will interfere with itsoperation;
(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will pass through thepublicly owned treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible withthe publicly owned treatment works;
(3) To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludgein the course of their employment and the general public;
(4) To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the publicly owned treatmentworks;
(5) To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement ofthe publicly owned treatment works; and
(6) To enable the control authority to comply with its national pollutant discharge elimination system permitconditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the publiclyowned treatment works is subject.
(B) This chapter shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment works. This chapter authorizes the issuance ofwastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrativereview procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costsresulting from the program established herein.
(Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Sec. 51.02. Administration.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the Director of Public Works (DPW) shall administer, implement, and enforce theprovisions of this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the DPW may be delegated by the DPW to othercity personnel. (Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
SEWER USE
Sec. 51.10. Definitions.
For purposes of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires adifferent meaning. NOTE: Terms used in this subchapter which are not defined within this section are defined in
§ 51.40
.
Building (house) drain
. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge fromsoil, wastes, and other drainage pipes within the walls of the building, and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning twofeet outside the inner face of the building wall or foundation.
Domestic sewage
. Water borne wastes normally discharging from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings (includingapartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories and institutions, free from storm surface water and industrialwastes.
House lateral
. The extension from the public sewer main to the nearest property or easement line.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 35/350
Properly shredded garbage
. The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that has been shredded tosuch degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers.
Sewage
. A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrialestablishments.
Sewage treatment plant
. Any city owned facility, devices and structures used for receiving and treating sewage from the citysanitary sewer system.
Sewage works
. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.
Sewer
. A pipe or conduit for carrying sanitary sewage.
(Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Sec. 51.11. Mandatory sewer connections.
(A) Every building intended for human habitation or occupancy, where a public sewer capable of receiving gravity flowfrom such buildings exists within 150 feet of the lot, tract, or acreage upon which the building is situated, shall have thesame connected to the sewer by the owner or agent of the premises in accordance with the adopted city plumbing codeand with a separate connection for each house or building.
(B) The owner or occupant shall maintain his or her private service line and its connection in such a way to:
(1) Be impermeable to storm water or rain infiltration and inflow; and
(2) Prevent sewage discharge into the surrounding terrain.
(C) The owner shall be notified in writing by the city when his or her line is broken or damaged and shall be given 30days to repair it himself or herself. Failure of the owner or his or her agent to repair or replace his or her private service lineas required shall result in the following at the city's option:
(1) The city may repair or replace the line and place a lien against the property for the cost; or
(2) The property may be disconnected from city sanitary sewer systems.
(Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 51.99
.
Sec. 51.12. Septic tank required in absence of sewer connection.
(A) If any owner of a building is not required to connect with the sewer system, a septic tack must be constructed on thepremises. Septic tanks installed under this provision will be constructed and maintained in accordance with the provisionsof 30 TAC 285.Sec.
(B) When a sewer line is extended to within 150 feet of the lot, tract, or acreage upon which the building is situated theowner shall be notified in writing by the city and shall be given 180 days to connect to the sewer line in accordance with theprovisions of this section and cease use of the septic tank.
(Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 51.99
.
Sec. 51.13. Connection of gutters, cisterns, privies, etc.
It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other private facility intended or usedfor the disposal of sewage or industrial wastes within the city limits except allowed by this subchapter. (Ord. O-01-08,passed 1-22-08)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 51.99
.
Sec. 51.14. Rates and charges.
Sanitary sewer service
.
(A) Charges for sanitary sewer service for customers who are water customers of the city shall be based uponbuilding use and water consumption, in accordance with the schedule of rates as provided for in the
FeeAppendix
to this Code.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 36/350
(B) Charges for sewer services for customers who are not water customers of the city shall be determinedbased upon a flat fee as provided in the
Fee Appendix
to this Code.
(Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Sec. 51.15. Management of sanitary sewers and sewage treatment; records.
The city sanitary sewers and sewage treatment shall be under the control and management of the City Council and thePublic Works Department, and the Public Works Department shall make and keep a complete transcript of the records ofthe sanitary sewers and sewage treatment. (Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Sec. 51.16. Permits.
(A)
Plumbing permit prerequisite to connection permit
.
(1) It shall be the duty of the Public Works Department to issue all permits for sewer connections.
(2) Before making connection with any sewer, the builder or plumber shall take out a plumbing permit with theoffice of the Public Works Department. The application for a plumbing permit shall give the exact location of theproperty, the name of the owner and the name of the person employed to do the plumbing work.
(B)
Plumbing permit prerequisite to maintenance and replacement of the building sewer
. No person shall break orremove any portion of any building sewer without taking out a plumbing permit with the Public Works Department. Suchbuilding sewer will be subject to inspection by the Plumbing Inspector to assure that a tight and well-constructed buildingsewer has been constructed to prevent surface water from entering the city sewer system.
(C)
Authority to revoke prior to completion of work
. All permits to connect with sewers shall be given upon the expresscondition that the Public Works Department may, at any time before the work is completed or the sewer is connected to thecity's sanitary sewer system, revoke and annul the same, and no party interested shall have the right to claim damage inconsequence of such permits being revoked or annulled.
(Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Sec. 51.17. Injuries to sewer system generally; notice before laying pipe in streets.
No person shall injure, break or remove any portion of any manhole or any part of the city's sanitary sewer system, andwhen any person shall desire to lay or drive any pipe in any of the streets upon which sewers are laid, they shall give atleast 24 hours notice to the Public Works Department. (Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Sec. 51.18. Rules applicable within the city.
All of the rules and regulations contained in this subchapter applicable to patrons within the city shall likewise be applicableto patrons now being served outside of the city limits. (Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Sec. 51.19. Manner of connecting cost.
(A) It shall be the policy of the city to supply sewer service to the city's patrons through mains and lines owned andcontrolled by the city and which shall be located behind curbs in a dedicated street, alley or approved easement adjacent toproperty being served.
(B) All connections within the city limits shall be made in the following manner:
(1) When sewer main is available. If the property to be served is adjacent to a dedicated street, alley oreasement, where there exists a city sewer main or line, the city, upon payment by applicant of the regular sewertap charge, will construct such lines that shall be necessary to serve such patron.
(2) When sewer extension is necessary.
(a) If the property to be served is adjacent to a dedicated street, alley, or easement, and an extension ofthe city sewer main line is necessary, the city, upon payment of the sewer tap charge and the payment asprovided for in the
Fee Appendix
to this Code. No sewer extension shall be made without a written contractsetting forth the provisions of this and other pertinent chapters and ordinances between the city and theperson desiring such extension.
(b) All lines constructed under the provisions of this section shall be the property of the city and the cityshall have full control and jurisdiction over such lines.
(Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 37/350
Sec. 51.20. Additions and subdivisions inside and outside the city.
The construction of sewer mains and lines within an addition or subdivision, inside or outside the city, shall conform to theplatting requirements of the city subdivision chapter and shall be approved by the city Planning Commission. (Ord. O-01-08,passed 1-22-08)
Sec. 51.21. Sewer taps.
(A)
Abandoned sewer tap
. “Abandoned sewer tap” shall mean a sewer tap that has been disconnected from the buildingsewer line. All such taps must be plugged in such a manner that will prevent ground or subsurface drainage from enteringthe sewer main. All such abandoned taps must be plugged at a depth, below the ground surface, of not less than one footto prevent damage to house lateral and sewer main. In the event service is restored at the same location, a service chargeas provided for in the
Fee Appendix
to this Code shall be made. In all such cases where the abandoned sewer tap is notused to restore service at the same location, a sewer tap charge shall be made.
(B)
Sewer service to vacant lots
. In no event shall sewer service be furnished to any vacant lot, either by a sewer tap orby an extension of the sewer main, unless or until sufficient proof is given to the city that a building will begin constructionwithin 180 days on such vacant lot.
(C)
Separate for each residence in new service
. For any service hereafter installed at each individual residence, buildingor trailer house located on one lot or plot of ground, each shall have a separate sewer tap. The provision of this sectionshall not apply to garages, wash houses or utility buildings that serve an individual residence, building or trailer house.
(D)
Multiple use of sewer tap in existing buildings or houses
. In existing cases where more than one building or house isserved by a single sewer tap, the entire amount of the monthly sewer charge shall be billed to the building or house nearestthe sewer tap and shall include regular monthly Base charge for each building or house being served by such tap. Suchprocedure shall continue until such buildings are served by separate sewer taps.
(E)
One sewer tap to apartment unit
. Any number of apartments on one plot of ground and constructed in one buildingshall constitute a bona fide apartment unit and shall be entitled to service through one sewer tap.
(F)
One sewer tap for apartment units or apartment houses
. Where apartment units or apartment houses are served withone sewer tap and such apartment units or apartment houses are served with separate water meters for each suchapartments or houses, the monthly sewer charge shall be billed to the person such water service is registered, the same asto single-family dwellings.
(G)
Persons authorized to make taps
. No plumber or other person, except the Public Works Department, shall beallowed to tap any city sewer main or line without the signed, written approval of the Director of Public Works.
(Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Sec. 51.22. Refunding contracts remain in effect.
The provisions of this subchapter shall not abridge any existing refunding contract between the city and any person, butsuch contract shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Sec. 51.23. Connections to comply with sewer and plumbing regulations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make or cause to be made or to remove or cause to be removed any sewerconnection, except as provided in this subchapter and the city plumbing code. (Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 51.99
.
Sec. 51.24. Installation of building sewer generally; inspection of same.
The building sewer two feet outside the building shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of this subchapterand the city plumbing code, covering methods and materials for building sewer construction. Such building sewers will besubject to inspection and approval by the city's Plumbing Inspector as required by this subchapter and the city plumbingcode. The Public Works Department shall refuse to connect to the sanitary sewer system any building sewer not meetingrequirements of such regulations as to workmanship and materials. To assure such quality of workmanship, the PlumbingInspector shall have performed such water or infiltration tests as necessary to assure a tight and well-constructed buildingsewer. (Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Sec. 51.25. Certain acts declared unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any reason to do any of the acts designated in this subchapter except as provided by this chapter, orto uncover any city sewer for any purpose, or to make connection therewith, unless by consent and under the supervisionof the Public Works Department or its authorized representative, whose duty it shall be to insure full compliance with theprovisions of this subchapter and the city plumbing code pertaining to connections. (Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 38/350
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 51.99
.
Sec. 51.26. Notice; compliance with notice.
It shall be the duty of the Public Works Department to notify the owner or occupant of every building situated where therehas been laid a sanitary sewer, and where there is sufficient water service from the city's water system, to make closetconnections with the city's sanitary sewer and any such owner or occupant of any building so situated, who shall fail tomake at least one water closet connection with the city's sanitary sewer within 30 days after receipt of such water closetsuitably arranged for the use of a urinal, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Sec. 51.27. Certain wastes prohibited in sanitary sewers
(A) No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any storm water, groundwater, roof run-off, subsurfacedrainage down spouts, yard drains, yard fountains, and ponds, or lawn sprays into any sanitary sewer. Water fromswimming pools, unpolluted industrial water, such as boiler drains, blow-off pipes or cooling water from various equipment,shall not be discharged into sanitary sewers if a closed storm sewer is available. If a closed storm sewer is not available, itmay be discharged into the sanitary sewer by an indirect connection whereby such discharge is cooled if required and flowsinto the sanitary sewer at a rate not in excess of three gallons per minute; provided that the waste does not containmaterials or substances in suspension or solution in violation of the limits prescribed by this subchapter or other sections ofthis chapter.
(B) No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, into any public sewer any of the substances, materials, watersor wastes specifically prohibited in
§§ 51.40
through
51.76
.
(Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 51.99
.
Sec. 51.28. Connection of wash or slop stands; unlawful disposition of slops.
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to connect all wash stands in his house or yard with the city's sewer, or toallow any slops, wash or wastewater of any kind to flow over the pavement, or under the pavement, or into any open gutteror into the street. (Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 51.99
.
Sec. 51.29. Indemnity agreement required under certain circumstances.
Where, in the opinion of the City Council and the City Engineer or an engineer acting for the city, the property is subject toflooding or the sanitary sewer is subject to being surcharged due to infiltration or storm waters, or the premises is subject tobeing flooded by an overcharged sewer due to its elevation in relation to the main sewer line, then the owner or user of thepremises shall be denied a connection to the sanitary sewer unless the owner agrees to install a check or back flow valve inhis house sewer and agrees to indemnify fully the city and save it whole and harmless from and against any and alldamages, costs, or expense of every kind, character and nature, where real or asserted, accruing upon or about thebuilding due to surcharge of the sanitary sewer. Such agreement shall be executed by the owner of the property and filed inthe deed records of the county, and shall be a covenant running with the land and shall be binding on the owner, hissuccessors or assigns. (Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Sec. 51.30. Disconnection for failure to pay bills or violation of regulations.
Failure to pay monthly bills when due or failure to pay the established pro rata fee or charge for sanitary sewer installations,as provided in this chapter, when due, or repeated discharge of prohibited wastes into the sanitary sewer, shall be sufficientcause to disconnect any and all services from the city water mains, and the same penalties and charges provided for withinthis Code of Ordinances shall apply. (Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Sec. 51.31. Right of entry of city employees.
The city officials and authorized employees of the city acting as its duly authorized agent and bearing proper credentialsand identification, shall be permitted to gain access to such properties as may be necessary for the purpose of inspection,observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter or other regulationsof the city. (Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
INDUSTRIAL WASTE
Sec. 51.40. Definitions.
(A) For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires adifferent meaning.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 39/350
Approving authority
. The Mayor or his duly authorized representative).
B.O.D. (Biochemical oxygen demand)
. The quantity of oxygen by weight, expressed in mg/l, utilized in the biochemicaloxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five days at a temperature of 20° Centigrade.
Building sewer
. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal (also called houselateral and house connection).
City
. The City of Jacksboro, Texas, or any authorized person acting in its behalf.
C.O.D. (Chemical oxygen demand)
. Measure of the oxygen consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present inthe water or wastewater expressed in mg/l as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test,but not differentiating between stable and unstable organic matter and thus not necessarily correlating with biochemicaloxygen demand.
Control manhole
. A manhole giving access to a building sewer at some point before the building sewer discharge mixeswith other discharges in the public sewer.
Control point
. A point of access to a course of discharge before the discharge mixes with other discharges in the publicsewer.
Garbage
. Animal and vegetable wastes and residue from preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food; and from thehandling, processing, storage, and sale of food products and produce.
Industrial waste
. Waste resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade, or business from the development ofany natural resource, or any mixture of the waste with water or normal wastewater, or distinct from normal wastewater.
Industrial waste charge
. The charge made on those persons who discharge industrial wastes into the city's seweragesystem.
Milligrams per liter (mg/l)
. The same as parts per million and is a weight-to-volume ratio; the milligram-per-liter valuemultiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water.
Natural outlet
. Any outlet into a watercourse ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater.
Normal domestic wastewater
. Wastewater excluding industrial wastewater discharged by a person into sanitary sewers andin which the average concentration of total suspended solids is not more than 200 mg/l and BOD is not more than 200 mg/l.
Overload
. The imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment facility in excess of its engineered design capacity.
Person
. Includes corporation, organization, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate,trust, partnership, association, and any other legal entity.
pH
. The reciprocal of the logarithm (base 10) of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed in grams per liter.
Public sewer
. Pipe or conduit carrying wastewater or unpolluted drainage in which owners of abutting properties shall havethe use, subject to control by the city.
Sanitary sewers
. A public sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and intowhich storm water, surface water, groundwater, and other unpolluted wastes are not intentionally passed.
Slug
. Any discharge of water, wastewater, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantityof flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentrationof flows during normal operation.
Standard methods
. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, ofStandard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater as prepared, approved, and published jointly by theAmerican Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
Storm sewer
. A public sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage and into which domestic wastewater orindustrial wastes are not intentionally passed.
Storm water
. Rainfall or any other forms of precipitation.
Superintendent
. The water and wastewater superintendent of the city or his duly authorized deputy, agent, orrepresentative.
Suspended solids
. Solids measured in mg/l that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, wastewater, orother liquids, and which are largely removable by a, laboratory filtration device.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 40/350
To discharge
. Includes to deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep, or otherwise release or dispose of, or toallow, permit, or suffer any of these acts or omissions.
Trap
. A device designed to skim, settle, or otherwise remove grease, oil, sand, flammable wastes or other harmfulsubstances.
Unpolluted wastewater
. Water containing no free or emulsified grease or oil; no acids or alkalis; no phenols or othersubstances producing taste or odor in receiving water; no toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state orsolution; no noxious or otherwise obnoxious or odorous gases; not more than ten mg/l each of suspended solids and BOD;and color not exceeding 50 units as measured by the Platinum-Cobalt method of determination as specified in standardmethods.
Waste
. Rejected, unutilized or superfluous substances in liquid, gaseous, or solid form resulting from domestic agriculturalor industrial activities.
Wastewater
. A combination of the water carried waste from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrialestablishments, together with any ground, surface, and storm water that may be present.
Wastewater facilities
. Includes all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of wastewater and industrialwastes.
Wastewater service charge
. The charge on all users of the public sewer system whose wastes do not exceed in strengththe concentration values established as representative of normal wastewater.
Wastewater treatment plant
. Any city owned facilities, devices, and structures used for receiving, processing and treatingwastewater, industrial waste, and sludges from the sanitary sewers.
Watercourse
. A natural or man-made channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
(B)
Abbreviations
. The following abbreviations, when used in this subchapter, shall have the designated meanings.
BOD
Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR
Code of Federal Regulations
COD
Chemical oxygen demand
DPW
Director of Public Works
EPA
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
gpd
gallons per day
mg/l
milligrams per liter
NPDES
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
POTW
Publicly owned treatment works
RCRA
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 41/350
SIC
Standard industrial classification
SIU
Significant industrial user
TCEQ
Texas Commission on Environmental Quality
TPDES
Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
TSS
Total suspended solids
TTO
Total toxic organics
USC
United States Code
(Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Sec. 51.41. Prohibited discharges.
(A) No person may discharge into public sewers any waste which by itself or by interaction with other wastes may:
(1) Injure or interfere with wastewater treatment processes or facilities.
(2) Constitute a hazard to humans or animals or water treatment plant effluent.
(B) All discharges shall conform to requirements of this subchapter.
(Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 51.99
.
Sec. 51.42. Chemical discharges.
(A)
Public sewer
. No discharge into public sewers may contain the following:
(1) Cyanide greater than 1.0 mg/l.
(2) Fluoride other than that contained in the public water supply.
(3) Chlorides in concentrations greater than 250 mg/l.
(4) Gasoline, benzene, naptha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.
(5) Substances causing an excessive chemical oxygen demand (COD).
(B)
Waste or wastewater discharges
. No waste or wastewater discharged into public waters may contain the following:
(1) Strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.
(2) Fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances whichmay solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32° and 150° Fahrenheit (0° and 65° Centigrade).
(3) Objectionable or toxic substances, exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that anysuch material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds the limitsestablished by the Public Works Superintendent for such materials.
(4) Obnoxious, toxic, or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in quantities sufficient to violate the provisions ofdivision (A) above.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 42/350
(C)
pH limits
. No waste, wastewater, or other substance may be discharged into public sewers which has a pH lowerthan 5.5 or higher than 10.0, or any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,equipment, and personnel at the wastewater facilities.
(D)
Other substances
. All waste, wastewater, or other substance containing phenols, hydrogen sulfide, or other taste andodor producing substances, shall conform to concentration limits established by the approving authority. After treatment ofthe composite wastewater, concentration limits may not exceed the requirements established by state, federal, or otheragencies with jurisdiction over discharges to receiving waters.
(Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 51.99
.
Sec. 51.43. Heavy metals and toxic materials.
No discharges may contain concentrations of heavy metals greater than amounts specified in this subchapter.
(A)
Maximum concentrations
.
(1) The maximum allowable concentrations of heavy metals stated in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l),determined on the basis of individual sampling in accordance with standard methods are:
Arsenic
0.05 mg/l
Barium
5.0 mg/l
Boron
1.0 mg/l
BOD
200 mg/l
Cadmium
0.02 mg/l
Chromium
5.0 mg/l (total)
Copper
1.0 mg/l
Lead
0.1 mg/l
Manganese
1.0 mg/l
Mercury
0.005 mg/l
Nickel
1.0 mg/l
Selenium
0.02 mg/l
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 43/350
Silver
0.1 mg/l
TSS
200 mg/l
Zinc
5.0 mg/l
(2) NOTE: In determining the concentration parameters to be included in the ordinances, current state,federal, and other appropriate agency rules, regulations, and orders should be consulted, including TexasWater Quality Board Order 70-0828-5 regulating the discharge of hazardous metals into or adjacent tostate waters.
(B)
Permit required
. No other heavy metals or toxic materials may be discharged into public sewers without a permit fromthe approving authority specifying conditions of pretreatment, concentrations, volumes, and other applicable provisions.
(C)
Prohibited heavy metals
. Prohibited heavy metals and toxic materials include but are not limited to the following:
Antimony
Beryllium
Bismuth
Cobalt
Molybdenum
Tin
Uranylion
Rhenium
Strontium
Tellurium
Herbicides
Fungicides
Pesticides
(Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 51.99
.
Sec. 51.44. Garbage.
No person may discharge garbage into public sewers unless it is shredded to a degree that all particles can be carriedfreely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers. Particles greater than one-half inch in any dimensionare prohibited. (Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 51.99
.
Sec. 51.45. Storm water and other unpolluted drainage.
(A) No person may discharge into public sanitary sewers any of the following:
(1) Unpolluted storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, or subsurface drainage.
(2) Unpolluted cooling water.
(3) Unpolluted industrial process waters.
(4) Other unpolluted drainage.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 44/350
(B) In compliance with the Texas Quality Act and other standards, the approving authority may designate storm sewersand other watercourses into which unpolluted drainage described in this subchapter may be discharged.
(Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 51.99
.
Sec. 51.46. Temperature.
No person may discharge liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° Fahrenheit (65° Centigrade), or anysubstance which causes the temperature of the total wastewater treatment plant influent to increase at a rate of 10°Fahrenheit or more per hour, or a combined total increase of plant influent temperature to 110° Fahrenheit. (Ord. O-01-08,passed 1-22-08)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 51.99
.
Sec. 51.47. Radioactive wastes.
No person may discharge radioactive wastes or isotopes into public sewers without the permission of the approvingauthority. The approving authority may establish regulations for discharge of radioactive wastes into public sewers. (Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 51.99
.
Sec. 51.48. Impairment of facilities.
No person may discharge into the public sewers any substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers,interference with the operation of treatment processes of facilities, or excessive loading of treatment facilities.
(A)
Prohibited discharges
. Discharges prohibited herein include, but are not limited to materials which exert orcause concentrations of:
(1) Inert suspended solids greater than 250 mg/l, including but not limited to Fuller's earth, lime slurries,and lime residues.
(2) Dissolved solids greater than 500 mg/l, including but not limited to sodium chloride and sodiumsulfate.
(3) Excessive discoloration, including but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.
(4) BOD, COD, or chlorine demand in excess of normal plant capacity.
(B)
Prohibited substances
. No person may discharge into public sewers any substance that may:
(1) Deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a manner as to clog the sewers.
(2) Overload skimming and grease handling equipment.
(3) Pass to the receiving waters without being effectively treated by normal wastewater treatmentprocesses due to the non-amenability of the substance to bacterial action.
(4) Deleteriously affect the treatment process due to excessive quantities.
(C)
Other discharges
. No person may discharge any substance into public sewers which:
(1) Is not amenable to treatment or reduction by the process and facilities employed.
(2) Is amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the treatment plant effluent cannot meet therequirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
(D)
Flow and concentration of slugs
. The approving authority shall regulate the flow and concentration ofslugs when they may:
(1) Impair the treatment process.
(2) Cause damage to collection facilities.
(3) Incur treatment costs exceeding those for normal wastewater.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 45/350
(4) Render the waste unfit for stream disposal or industrial use.
(E)
Solid or viscous substances prohibited
. No person may discharge into public sewers solid or viscoussubstances which may violate this section if present in sufficient quantity or size including but not limited toashes; cinders; sand; mud; straw; shavings; metal; glass; rags; feathers; tar; plastics; wood; un-ground garbage;whole blood; paunch manure; hair and fleshings; entrails; paper products, either whole or ground by garbagegrinders; slops; chemical residues; paint residues; or bulk solids.
(Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 51.99
.
Sec. 51.49. Compliance with existing authority.
(A)
Uses of public sewer
. Unless exception is granted by the approving authority, the public sewer system shall be usedby all persons discharging any of the following:
(1) Wastewater.
(2) Industrial waste.
(3) Polluted liquids.
(4) Unpolluted waters or liquids.
(B)
Public property wastes prohibited
. Unless authorized by the Texas Water Quality Board, no person may deposit ordischarge any waste included in this subchapter on public property in or adjacent to any:
(1) Natural outlet.
(2) Watercourse.
(3) Storm sewer.
(4) Other area within the jurisdiction of the city.
(C)
Verification of discharges
. The approving authority shall verify prior to discharge that wastes authorized to bedischarged will receive suitable treatment within the provisions of laws, regulations, ordinances, rules and orders of federal,state, and local governments.
(Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 51.99
.
Sec. 51.50. Approving authority requirements.
(A) If discharges or proposed discharges to public sewers may deleteriously affect wastewater facilities, processes,equipment, or receiving waters; create a hazard to life or health; or create a public nuisance, the approving authority shallrequire pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; control over the quantities and rates ofdischarge; and payment to cover the cost of handling and treating the wastes.
(B) The approving authority is entitled to determine whether a discharge or proposed discharge is included under thissubchapter.
(C) The approving authority shall reject wastes when:
(1) It determines that a discharge or proposed discharge is included under this section.
(2) The discharger does not meet the requirements of this subchapter.
(Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Sec. 51.51. Approving authority review and approval of pretreatment.
(A) If pretreatment or control is required, the approving authority shall review and approve design and installation ofequipment and processes.
(B) The design and installation of equipment and processes must conform to all applicable statutes, codes, ordinances,and other laws.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 46/350
(C) Any person responsible for discharges requiring pretreatment, flow-equalizing, or other facilities shall provide andmaintain the facilities in effective operating condition at his own expense.
(Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Sec. 51.52. Requirements for traps.
(A) Discharges requiring a trap include:
(1) Grease or waste containing grease in excessive amounts.
(2) Oil.
(3) Sand.
(4) Flammable wastes.
(5) Other harmful ingredients.
(B) Any person responsible for discharges requiring a trap shall at his own expense and as required by the approvingauthority, provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity approved by the approving authority; locate the trap in amanner that provides ready and easy accessibility for cleaning and inspection and maintain the trap in effective operatingcondition.
(Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 51.99
.
Sec. 51.53. Requirements for building sewers.
Any person responsible for discharges through a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall, at his own expense and asrequired by the approving authority:
(A) Install an accessible and safely located control manhole.
(B) Install meters and other appurtenances to facilitate observation sampling and measurement of the waste.
(C) Maintain the equipment and facilities.
(Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 51.99
.
Sec. 51.54. Sampling and testing.
(A) (1) Sampling shall be conducted according to customarily accepted methods, reflecting the effect ofconstituents upon the sewage works and determining the existence of hazards to health, life, limb, and property.
(2) NOTE: The particular analysis involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite sample from alloutfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but notalways, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls. Whereapplicable, 16-hour, 8-hour or some other period may be required. Periodic grab samples are used to determinepH.
(B) Examination and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes required by this subchapter shall be conductedin accordance with the latest edition of standard methods and determined from suitable samples taken at the controlmanhole provided or other control point authorized by the approving authority.
(C) BOD and suspended solids shall be determined from composite sampling. The city may select an independent firmor laboratory to determine flow, BOD, and suspended solids. Also, the city is entitled to select the time of sampling at itssole discretion so long as at least annual samples are taken. Industrial waste shall be sampled for BOD and totalsuspended solids and reports submitted to the city each month.
(D) All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the Director of Public Works but in no case lessthan once every six months, submit a report to the Director of Public Works indicating the nature and concentration ofpollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average andmaximum daily flows for the reporting period. At the city's discretion, sampling and analysis may be performed by the city inlieu of industrial monitoring.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 47/350
(E)
Records retention
. All users subject to this division shall retain, preserve and make available for inspection andcopying, for no less than three years, any records, books, documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence and any andall summaries thereof, relating to monitoring, sampling and chemical analysis made by or in behalf of a user in connectionwith its discharge. All records which pertain to matters which are the subject of administrative adjustment or any otherenforcement or litigation activities brought by the control authority pursuant hereto shall be retained and preserved by theuser until all enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals haveexpired. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person taking thesample; the date the analyses were performed and who performed them; analytical techniques or methods used; andresults.
(Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 51.99
.
Sec. 51.55. Payment and agreement required.
(A) Persons making discharges of industrial waste shall pay a charge to cover the cost of collection and treatment asfollows.
(B) When discharges of industrial waste are approved by the approving authority, city, or its authorized representativeperson shall enter into an agreement or arrangement providing terms of acceptance by the city and payment by the personmaking the discharge.
(Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Sec. 51.56. Industrial waste charge and added costs.
(A)
When waste does not cause overloading
. If the volume or character of the waste to be treated by the city does notcause overloading of the sewage collection, treatment, or disposal facilities of the city, then prior to approval, the city andthe person making the discharge shall enter into an agreement which provides that the discharger pay an industrial wastecharge to be determined from the formula in
§ 51.58
.
(B)
When waste will cause overloading
. If the volume or character of the waste to be treated by the city requires thatwastewater collection, treatment, or other disposal facilities of the city be improved, expanded, or enlarged in order to treatthe waste, then prior to approval, the city and the person making the discharge shall enter into an agreement whichprovides that the discharger pay in full all added costs the city may incur due to acceptance of the waste.
(C)
Agreement
. The agreement entered into pursuant to division (A) above shall include but not be limited to amortizationof all capital outlay for collecting and treating the waste, including new capital outlay and the proportionate part of the valueof the existing system used in handling and treating the waste.
(D)
Amortization
. Amortization shall be completed in a 20-year period and payment shall include all debt service costs.
(Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Sec. 51.57. Schedule of charges.
Industrial waste charges shall be determined by resolution duly adopted by the City Council. The following formula shall beused, subject to change by resolution:
(A) Ci = Q/1000 x CW x (BOD/200) x (TSS/200).
(B) Ci = Charge to industrial customer.
(C) Q = Total monthly flow in gallons.
(D) CW = Maximum commercial wastewater unit charge in $1,000.00 gal.
(E) BOD = Actual total amount of BOD (mg/l) in industrial influent.
(F) TSS = Actual total amount of TSS (mg/l) in industrial influent.
(Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Sec. 51.58. Adjustment of charges.
(A)
Annual adjustment
. The city shall adjust charges at least annually to reflect changes in the characteristics ofwastewater based on the results of sampling and testing.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 48/350
(B)
Increases retroactive
. Increases in charges shall be retroactive for two billing periods and shall continue for six billingperiods unless subsequent tests determine that the charge should be further increased.
(C)
City to review basis for charges
. The city shall review at least semi-annually the basis for determining charges andshall adjust the unit treatment cost in the formula to reflect increases or decreases in wastewater treatment costs based onthe previous year's experience.
(D)
Monthly billing
. The city shall bill the discharger by the month and shall show industrial waste charges as a separateitem on the regular bill for water and sewer charges. The discharger shall pay monthly in accordance with practices existingfor payment of sewer charges.
(Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Sec. 51.59. Savings clause.
A person discharging industrial wastes into public sewers prior to the effective date of this subchapter may continue withoutpenalty as long as he:
(A) Does not increase the quantity, BOD or TSS of the discharge, without permission of the approvingauthority.
(B) Has discharged the industrial waste at least six months prior to the effective date of this subchapter.
(C) Applies for and is granted a permit no later than 150 days after the effective date of this subchapter.
(Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Sec. 51.60. Failure to pay.
In addition to sanctions provided for by this subchapter, the city is entitled to exercise sanctions provided for by the otherprovisions of this chapter for failure to pay the bill for water and sanitary sewer service when due. (Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Sec. 51.61. Conditions of permit.
(A) The city may grant a permit to discharge to persons meeting all requirements of the savings clause provided that theperson:
(1) Submit an application within 120 days after the effective date of this subchapter on forms supplied by theapproving authority.
(2) Secure approval by the approving authority of plans and specifications for pretreatment facilities whenrequired.
(3) Has complied with all requirements for agreements or arrangements including, but not limited to,provisions for payment of charges; installation and operation of pretreatment facilities; sampling and analysis todetermine quantity and strength.
(4) Provides a sampling point subject to the provisions of this chapter and approval of the approving authority.
(B) A person applying for a new discharge shall meet all conditions of this subchapter and secure a permit prior todischarging any waste.
(Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Sec. 51.62. Power to enter property.
The approving authority and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification areentitled to enter any public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this subchapter.
(A)
Safety rules to be observed
. Anyone acting under this authority shall observe the establishment's rulesand regulations concerning safety, internal security, and fire protection.
(B)
Liability of city
. Except when caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions,the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and againstliability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growingout of the sampling operation.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 49/350
(C)
When city may enter private properties
. The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of thecity bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter all private properties through which the cityholds a negotiated easement for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling or repair;maintenance of any portion of the sewerage system supplying within the easements; and conducting any otherauthorized activity. All activities shall be conducted in full accordance with the terms of the negotiated easementpertaining to the private property involved.
(D)
Inquiries
. No person acting under authority of this provision may inquire into any processes. includingmetallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearingon the kind and source of discharge to the public sewers.
(Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Sec. 51.63. Termination of service.
(A)
When city may terminate service
. The city may terminate water and wastewater disposal service and disconnect anindustrial customer from the system when:
(1) Acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment process are released to the sewer causing rapiddeterioration of these structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater.
(2) A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longerof a quality permitted for discharge to a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is delivering wastewaterto the city's system that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by the city asnormal domestic treatment.
(3) The industrial customer discharges industrial waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issuedby the approving authority; discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to causean imbalance in the wastewater treatment system; fails to pay monthly bills for water and sanitary sewerservices when due; or repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes to public sewers.
(4) The customer will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity toshow cause under this section why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the DPWshall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(B)
When service is terminated
. If service is terminated pursuant to division (A)(3), the city shall disconnect the customer,supply the customer with the governmental agency's report and provide the customer with all pertinent information; andcontinue termination until such time as the industrial customer provides additional pretreatment or other facilities designedto remove the objectionable characteristics from his industrial wastes.
(Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Sec. 51.64. Continuing prohibited discharges.
No person may continue discharging in violation of this subchapter beyond the time limit provided in the notice. (Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 51.99
.
Sec. 51.65. Notification of violation.
When the DPW finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this subchapter, a wastewaterdischarge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the DPW may serve uponthat user a written notice of violation stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactorycompliance as determined by the Director of Public Works. The time limit will be based on the seriousness of the violationbut will not exceed 180 days. Within ten days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for thesatisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to theDPW. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of thenotice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the DPW to take any action, including emergencyactions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. (Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Sec. 51.66. Show cause hearing.
The DPW may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this subchapter, a wastewaterdischarge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the DPWand show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifyingthe time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that, theuser show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 50/350
personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days prior to the hearing. Such notice maybe served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisitefor, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Sec. 51.67. Compliance orders.
When the DPW finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this subchapter, a wastewaterdischarge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the DPW may issue anorder to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If theuser does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequatetreatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders alsomay contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and managementpractices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend thedeadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve theuser of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a baragainst, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Sec. 51.68. Cease and desist orders.
When the DPW finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this subchapter, a wastewaterdischarge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's pastviolations are likely to recur, the DPW may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations anddirecting the user to:
(A) Immediately comply with all requirements; and
(B) Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuingor threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against theuser.
(Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Sec. 51.69. Emergency suspensions.
The DPW may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension isnecessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent orsubstantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The DPW may also immediately suspend a user's discharge,after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, ormay present, an endangerment to the environment.
(A) Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. Inthe event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the DPW may takesuch steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent orminimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The DPW may allowthe user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the DPW that theperiod of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in
§ 51.63
are initiated against theuser.
(B) A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shallsubmit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken toprevent any future occurrence, to the DPW prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under
§§51.63
or
51.66
. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergencysuspension under this section.
(Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Sec. 51.70. Injunctive relief.
When the DPW finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this subchapter, a wastewaterdischarge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the DPW may petition themunicipal court through the City Attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, whichrestrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed bythis article on activities of the user. The DPW may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitablerelief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not bea bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. (Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 51/350
Sec. 51.71. Civil penalties.
(A) A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this subchapter, a wastewater discharge permit, ororder issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for a maximum civilpenalty of $1,000.00 per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penaltiesshall accrue for each day during the period of the violation.
(B) The DPW may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcementactivities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city.
(C) In determining the amount-of-civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, butnot limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefitgained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factoras justice requires.
(D) Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
(Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Sec. 51.72. Criminal prosecution.
(A) A user who violates any provision of this subchapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, orany other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine ofnot more than $2,000.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment as decided by an appropriate court, or both.
(B) A user who introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, uponconviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to the same penalties described in division (A) above. This penaltyshall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law.
(C) A user who makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, orother documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this subchapter, wastewater discharge permit, or orderissued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method requiredunder this subchapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to the same penalties described in division (A) above.
(D) Criminal responsibility. A culpable mental state is not required to prove an offense under this subchapter. A person iscriminally responsible for a violation of this subchapter if:
(1) The person commits or assists in the commission of a violation, or causes or permits another person tocommit a violation; or
(2) The person owns or manages the property or facilities determined to be the cause of the illegal dischargeunder this chapter.
(Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Sec. 51.73. Remedies nonexclusive.
The remedies provided for in this subchapter are not exclusive. The DPW may take any, all, or any combination of theseactions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city'senforcement response plan. However, the DPW may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant.Further, the DPW is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. (Ord. O-01-08,passed 1-22-08)
Sec. 51.74. Applicability of more stringent regulations.
(A) If national pretreatment standards, categorical or otherwise, more stringent than the discharge limits prescribed in thissubchapter are promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency for certain industries, the morestringent national pretreatment standards will apply to the affected industrial user. A violation of the more stringent nationalpretreatment standards will also be considered a violation of this subchapter.
(B)
Applicability of more stringent discharge limits
. An industrial user within the city who discharges industrial wasteultimately received and treated by another governmental entity pursuant to a wholesale wastewater contract or a reciprocalagreement with the city is subject to the following additional rules:
(1) If the governmental entity has more stringent discharge limits than those prescribed by this subchapter, orby a discharge permit issued hereunder, because the United States Environmental Protection Agency requiresthe more stringent discharge limits as part of the governmental entity's wastewater pretreatment program, themore stringent discharge limits shall prevail.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 52/350
(2) The DPW is authorized to issue a discharge permit to an industrial user affected by division (B)(1) above,to insure notice of and compliance with the more stringent discharge limits. If the industrial user already has adischarge permit, the DPW may amend the permit to apply and enforce the more stringent discharge limits. Anindustrial user shall submit to the. DPW an expected compliance date and an installation schedule if the morestringent discharge limits necessitate technological or mechanical adjustments to discharge facilities or plantprocesses.
(3) If the DPW chooses not to issue or amend a permit under division (B)(2) above, the DPW shall notify theaffected industrial user in writing of the more stringent discharge limits and their effective date. Regardless ofwhether or not a permit is issued or amended, an industrial user shall be given a reasonable opportunity tocomply with the more stringent discharge limits.
(4) The more stringent discharge limits cease to apply upon termination of the city's wholesale wastewatercontract or reciprocal agreement with the governmental entity, or upon modification or elimination of the limits bythe government entity or the United States Environmental Protection Agency. The DPW shall take theappropriate action to notify the affected industrial user of an occurrence under this division.
(C)
Variances in compliance dates
. The DPW may grant a variance in compliance dates to an industry when, in theDPW's opinion, such action is necessary to achieve pretreatment or corrective measures. In no case shall the DPW grant avariance in compliance dates to an industry affected by national categorical pretreatment standards beyond the compliancedates established by the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
(D)
Authority to regulate
. The DPW may establish regulations, not in conflict with this subchapter or other laws, to controlthe disposal and discharge of industrial waste into the wastewater system and to insure compliance with the city'spretreatment enforcement program with all applicable pretreatment regulations promulgated by the United StatesEnvironmental Protection Agency. The regulations established shall, where applicable, be made part of any dischargepermit issued to an industrial user by the DPW.
(Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Sec. 51.75. Affirmative defenses to discharge violations.
(A)
Upset provision
. In an action brought in federal court only.
(1) For the purposes of this section, “Upset” means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional andtemporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonablecontrol of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error,improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, orcareless or improper operation.
(2) An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categoricalpretreatment standards if the requirements of division (A)(3) below, are met.
(3) A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properlysigned, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that:
(a) An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset;
(b) The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliancewith applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and
(c) The user has submitted the following information to the DPW within 24 hours of becoming aware ofthe upset, if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days:
1. A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance;
2. The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, theanticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and
3. Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of thenoncompliance.
(4) In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have theburden of proof.
(5) Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcementaction brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 53/350
(6) Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance withcategorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility isrestored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where,among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.
(B)
Act of God provision
. In an action brought in municipal or state court only.
(1) An event that would otherwise be a violation that is caused solely by an act of God, war, strike, riot, orother catastrophe is not a violation.
(2) In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an act of God, war, strike,riot, or other catastrophe shall have the burden of proof.
(3) In the event that divisions (B)(1) and (2) above has been demonstrated the user shall control production ofall discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss,or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided.
(Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Sec. 51.76. Bypass.
(A) For the purposes of this section:
(1) Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility.
(2) Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatmentfacilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resourceswhich can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. “Severe property damage” does notmean economic loss caused by delays in production.
(B) A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated,but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provisionsof division (C) below.
(1) If a user knows in advance of the need for bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the DPW, at least ten daysbefore the date of the bypass, if possible.
(2) A user shall submit oral notice to the DPW of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicablepretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submissionshall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The writtensubmission shall contain a, description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exactdates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; andsteps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The DPW may waive thewritten report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours.
(C) (1) Bypass is prohibited, and the DPW may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass,unless:
(a) Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage;
(b) There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities,retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. Thiscondition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise ofreasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipmentdowntime or preventive maintenance; and
(c) The user submitted notices as required under division (B) above.
(2) The DPW may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the DPWdetermines that it will meet the three conditions listed in division (C)(1) above.
(Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
Sec. 51.99. Penalty.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereofshall be fined in a sum not to exceed $2,000.00 and each day any violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.(Ord. O-01-08, passed 1-22-08)
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 54/350
CHAPTER 52: WATER REGULATIONS
*
2
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 52.01. City supply of water limited.
In the sale of water by the city to any person, firm or corporation, within and without the city limits, and in the supply ofwater for municipal use for the protection of property against fires, the city does not agree, nor is the city bound to furnishwater of any special or specific analysis, or in any special or specified amount, but only undertakes to furnish such waterand the amount of water that may be supplied from the city lake, or such other sources as the city may select, and in anamount within the capacity of the city's pumping plants. (‘84 Code, § 17-3) (Ord. 357, passed 2-14-84)
Sec. 52.02. Patrons established; rules and regulations.
(A) All patrons of the city water system before being furnished water by the city must agree and comply with the rules andregulations of the city, as well as all of the provisions of this chapter. All residences within the city limits are encouraged totie into city water service if such service is available. A separate tap is required for each service address. All residencesrequesting to drill a water well for residential use must obtain a permit from the city prior to drilling a water well. All waterwells drilled after July 1, 2013, must have and pass a Customer Service Inspection and a Backflow Prevention AssemblyTest if applicable, before the residence is permitted to utilize the well for residential or irrigation purposes. Failure to complywith this requirement may result in a fine, not to exceed $100.00 per day, and/or a requirement to discontinue use of thewell until a satisfactory Customer Service Inspection and a Backflow Prevention Assembly Test if applicable, is performedand satisfactorily completed.
(B) All businesses within the city limits are required to tie into the city water service if such service is available within 150feet of the property. A separate tap is required for each service address. Effective July 1, 2013, businesses are prohibitedfrom drilling water wells for commercial use. Any existing wells prior to July 1, 2013, utilized for commercial use must havea Customer Service Inspection and/or an annual Backflow Prevention Assembly Test as appropriate, with a copy submittedto the city no later than October 1st of each year. Failure to comply with this requirement may result in a fine not to exceed$100.00 per day, and/or a requirement to discontinue use of the well until a satisfactory Customer Service Inspection and/orBackflow Prevention Assembly Test is performed and satisfactorily completed.
(C) A Customer Service Inspection is required for the following:
a. All new water wells.
b. Existing water wells where the city has reason to believe that cross-connections or other potentialcontamination hazards exist.
c. Existing residential or commercial water wells where a material improvement, correction, or addition hasbeen made to the private water distribution facilities.
(‘84 Code, § 17-4; Am. Ord. 357, passed 2-14-84; Ord. 9-15-96, passed 9-24-96; Am. Ord. 9-15-96 (rev.), passed 11-12-96;Am. Ord. O-09-12, passed 8-14-12; Am. Ord. O-05-13, passed 6-25-13)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 52.03. Limitation on city liability.
(A) Accidental failures in water supply. In the event of accident by reason of which the city may become unable to supplywater to the patrons of the city, within or without the city, or to the municipality for the prevention or suppression of fire, thecity will in no manner be liable for damages by reason of any such failure to any patron of the water system, or to anyperson or persons whose property may have been destroyed by fire or otherwise damaged.
(B)
Turn-on service
.
(1) After a request has been made for water service to the city, the required deposit received, and a properlyprocessed work order made for the service at a particular address, residence, business, shop or installation, thecity shall not be held liable for any damages arising out of or as the result of turning on of the water servicebecause of broken pipes, leaks as a result of frozen pipes, open or broken faucets, or for any other reason.
(2) Customers and property owners will be solely responsible that the privately owned plumbing system is ingood repair, that there are no breaks or leaks and that faucets are turned off prior to requesting water service.
(3) The city absolves itself free from all claims for damages arising out of loose uncontrolled water on privateproperties.
(‘84 Code, §§ 17-5, 17-31; Ord. 357, passed 2-14-84)
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 55/350
Sec. 52.04. Water supplied through city-owned mains and lines; location.
It shall be the policy of the city to supply water to its patrons through mains and lines owned and controlled by the city andwhich shall be located in the streets between the curb and sidewalk lines, or in alleys, adjacent to property being served.(‘84 Code, § 17-6; Ord. 357, passed 2-14-84)
Sec. 52.05. Regulations applicable to patrons outside city.
All of the rules and regulations in this chapter applicable to patrons within the city limits shall likewise be applicable topatrons outside the city limits. (‘84 Code, § 17-29; Ord. 357, passed 2-14-84)
Sec. 52.06. Property owner to acquire easements and the like.
The property owner, developer or person desiring service shall procure and provide at his or her own expense all rights-of-way or easements as needed for construction of water lines, mains or appurtenances. (‘84 Code, § 17-35; Ord. 357,passed 2-14-84)
Sec. 52.07. Contract required.
No water extension shall be made without a written contract setting forth the provisions of this and other pertinent chaptersand ordinances between the city and person desiring such extension. (‘84 Code, § 17-36; Ord. 357, passed 2-14-84)
Sec. 52.08. Water conservation and drought contingency plan.
The City of Jacksboro, Texas Water Conservation and Drought Contingency Plan, adopted as the official policy of the cityand attached to Ordinance O-16-08 as Exhibit A is adopted by reference as if set out in full herein. (Ord. O-16-08, passed6-10-08)
WATER REGULATIONS
Sec. 52.20. Unlawful activities.
(A) It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person or persons to do, commit or assist in committing any of the followingthings or acts in the city:
(1) To open or close any fire hydrant or stopcock connected with the waterworks system, or lift or remove thecovers of any gate valves or shut-offs thereof, without the permission of the Water Superintendent, except incase of fire, and then under the direction of officers of the Fire Department.
(2) To interfere with, destroy, deface, impair, injure, or wantonly force open any gate or door, or in any waywhatsoever destroy, injure, or deface any part of any engine house, reservoir, standpipe, elevated tank, buildingor buildings, or appurtenances, fences, trees, shrubs, or fixtures or property appertaining to the waterworkssystem.
(3) To go upon or ascend the stairway or steps on any elevated water storage tank or standpipe of thewaterworks system, except by permission of the Supervisor of Public Works.
(4) To place any telegraph, telephone, electric light pole, or any obstruction whatsoever within three feet ofany fire hydrant.
(5) To resort to any fraudulent device or arrangement for the purpose of procuring water for himself, herself orothers from private connections on premises contrary to the city regulations or ordinances.
(6) To interfere with or injure any reservoir, tank, fountain, hydrant, pipe, cock, valve, or other apparatuspertaining to the waterworks system, or to turn on or off without authority the water in any street hydrant or otherwater fixture, or to tie any animal thereto.
(7) To make or permit to be made any connections with the main or service pipes of the waterworks system,or to turn on or use the water of the system without first obtaining a permit therefor.
(8) To cover over or conceal from view any water valve box, service or meter box.
(9) To remove any water meter that has been placed by the city, or to in any manner change, interfere with ortamper with any water meter.
(10) To turn on the water supply to any building or to any supply pipe where the supply has been turned off forthe nonpayment of the monthly water charge or for the violation of any rule or ordinance governing thewaterworks system.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 56/350
(11) To conduct recreational activities or trespass in a restricted zone of 200 feet radius from the raw waterintake works, or to interfere with, destroy, deface, impair, injure or obscure in any manner, the visibility of anysign depicting regulations for raw water intake works restricted areas. Such restricted zone is currentlydesignated at Lost Creek Reservoir and is 200 feet radius in any direction from the raw water intake works.
(B) The provisions of this section shall not apply to the employees of the city when acting in their official capacity.
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 52.21. Service to new additions; regulations.
Service for water patrons in new additions or subdivisions inside, outside and adjacent to the city limits shall be provided inthe following manner:
(A) The property owner, or the owner of an addition or development, shall enter into a contract, the terms ofwhich shall include the following:
(1) All necessary mains, lines, fire hydrants, gate valves and all other necessary fittings shall befurnished and installed under the directions of the City Engineer, at the cost of the property owner.
(2) Such mains, lines, fire hydrants and gate valves are to become the property of the city upon theexecution of the contract, and the city to have full control, management and jurisdiction of such lines,mains, fire hydrants and gate valves.
(3) The city is to receive all rents and revenues for water service provided through such mains or lines.
(4) When the property served is made a part of, or brought within the city limits, there shall be norefunds or reimbursements, whatsoever, by the city for the cost of such water or sewer mains orappurtenances.
(B) After installation of such mains and lines and their acceptance by the city, those persons desiring waterservice may secure the same by following the procedure set forth in this chapter for applicants within the citylimits.
(‘84 Code, § 17-7) (Ord. 357, passed 2-14-84)
Sec. 52.22. Patrons prohibited from allowing taps leading into premises.
No patron of the waterworks system shall permit any person to tap any water pipe leading into his or her premises withoutthe consent of the Water Superintendent. (‘84 Code, § 17-11) (Ord. 357, passed 2-14-84)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 52.23. Cross connections forbidden; storage tanks.
(A) Cross connections between piping receiving water from city water mains and piping receiving water from any othersource or storage is positively forbidden and the city reserves the right when it discovers the existence of any such crossconnection to immediately and without further notice disconnect the service connecting such piping with the city mains.
(B) Anyone desiring to use water from some other source in addition to the city connection may do so by using a storagetank and delivering the city water supply into the tank four inches above the overflow line and through a pipe having at leasta four inch air space between its discharge end and the surface of the water in the tank. The water from the other sourcemay then be piped into the tank and the service lines taken from the tank in any manner desired.
(C) If inflow from a city water main to a swimming pool or other storage of water is below overflow levels, a crossconnection exists.
(‘84 Code, § 17-12) (Ord. 357, passed 2-14-84)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 52.24. Minimum diameter for water mains extended outside city limits.
All extensions of water mains hereafter outside the city limits shall not be smaller than six inch diameter. (‘84 Code, § 17-32) (Ord. 357, passed 2-14-84)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 52.25. Extension of services at cost of property owner; city becomes owner of appurtenances.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 57/350
The entire cost of the complete extension ready for use shall be paid by the property owner or developer or person desiringservice. Such mains, lines, fire hydrants, gate valves, manholes, cleanouts, and other appurtenances to such extensionshall become the property of the city upon installation and the city shall have full management and jurisdiction over suchlines, fire hydrants, gate valves, manholes, cleanouts and other appurtenances. (‘84 Code, § 17-33) (Ord. 357, passed 2-28-74)
Sec. 52.26. Landscape irrigators or yard sprinklers.
Any person involved in the business of landscape irrigation or yard sprinkler construction desiring to do such workconnecting into or onto a supply line where an opening is provided in the existing potable water supply line shall be issuedpermits for such work upon presentation of credentials issued by the Texas Board of Irrigators and upon payment of permitfees adopted by the City Council and on file with the City Clerk. Such work shall be inspected by the administrativeauthority when the connection to the potable water supply line is completed. (‘84 Code, § 17-37) (Ord. 357, passed 2-14-84)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 52.27. Water Conservation and Drought Contingency Plan.
(A)
Approval of Water Conservation and Drought Contingency Plan
. The City Council hereby approves and adopts as thecity's water conservation plan the Water Conservation and Drought Contingency Plan as set forth in this section. The citycommits to implement the program according to the procedures set forth herein.
(B)
Annual reporting
. The city shall report to the Texas Water Development Board annually on the implementation andeffectiveness of the plan in accordance with the outline set forth in the plan.
(C)
Implementation and enforcement
. In regards to the implementation and enforcement of the Water Conservation andDrought Contingency Plan, the City Manager is designated as the official responsible for implementation and enforcement,and the guidelines set forth in this section are hereby adopted.
(D)
Water Conservation and Drought Contingency Plan guidelines
. The plan adopted by the city will be keyed to potentialwater supply problems resulting from treatment and distribution limits, failure of a major component of the treatment anddistribution system, severity of the drought conditions (mild, moderate, and severe), and appropriate measures to beimplemented. Measures will include voluntary and mandatory reductions, with fines assessed for non-compliance.
(E)
Trigger conditions
.
(1)
Mild conditions
. The following conditions will trigger implementation of the mild conditions of the DroughtContingency Plan:
(a) Treatment plant production exceeds 0.9 mgd per day for three consecutive days.
(b) A major component of the treatment or distribution system fails, limiting the capacity of the facilitiesto 0.8 mgd per day.
(c) The lake level in Lake Jacksboro reaches an elevation of 1,006 msl (before Lost Creek Reservoir isbuilt).
(d) The combined storage in Lake Jacksboro and Lost Creek Reservoir reaches 1,400 acre-feet (afterfirst fill of Lost Creek Reservoir).
(2)
Moderate conditions
. The following conditions will trigger implementation of the moderate conditions of theDrought Contingency Plan:
(a) Treatment plant production exceeds 1.0 mgd per day for three consecutive days.
(b) A major component of the treatment or distribution system fails, limiting the capacity of the facilitiesto 0.6 mgd per day during October through May, or 0.8 mgd per day during June through September.
(c) The lake level in Lake Jacksboro reaches an elevation of 1,005 msl (before Lost Creek Reservoir isbuilt).
(d) The combined storage in Lake Jacksboro and Lost Creek Reservoir reaches 1,200 acre-feet (afterfirst fill of Lost Creek Reservoir).
(3)
Severe conditions
. The following conditions will trigger implementation of the severe conditions of theDrought Contingency Plan:
(a) Treatment plant production exceeds 1.1 mgd per day for three consecutive days.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 58/350
(b) A major component of the treatment or distribution system fails, limiting the capacity of the facilitiesto 0.4 mgd per day during October through May, or 0.6 mgd per day during June through September.
(c) The lake level in Lake Jacksboro reaches an elevation of 1,004 msl (before Lost Creek Reservoir isbuilt).
(d) The combined storage in Lake Jacksboro and Lost Creek Reservoir reaches 1,000 acre-feet (afterfirst fill of Lost Creek Reservoir).
(F)
Drought contingency measures
.
(1)
Mild conditions
. Measure implemented for the mild condition will be strictly voluntary. These measures willinclude:
(a) Informing the public through the news media that a mild drought condition has been triggered.
(b) Indicate the appropriate measures required under the mild condition through the news media.
(c) Request voluntary reduction in water usage by limiting lawn watering to once every five days.
(d) Request limiting car washing to once a week.
(e) Request reducing indoor usage by 10%.
(2)
Moderate conditions
. Measure implemented for the moderate condition will be voluntary and mandatory.These measures will include:
(a) Informing the public through the news media and individual mailings that a moderate droughtcondition has been triggered.
(b) Indicate the appropriate measures required under the moderate condition through the news mediaand mailings.
(c) Request a voluntary reduction in total water usage by 20%.
(d) Limit lawn watering to every five days by the last number of the address; for example, houses withnumbers ending in 0 or 1 may water the first day, 2 or 3 the second day, and the like.
(e) Prohibit all other non-essential outdoor water uses, including car washing.
(f) Impose a fine of $2,000.00 for violating health, safety, or welfare regulations, or $500.00 for violatingother required measures.
(g) Impose a surcharge of $3.50 per 1,000 gallons for all water used over 8,000 gallons per month.
(3)
Severe conditions
. Measure implemented for the severe drought condition will be mandatory. Thesemeasures will include:
(a) Informing the public through the news media and individual mailings that a severe drought conditionhas been triggered.
(b) Indicate the suggested and required measures required under the severe condition through the newsmedia and mailings.
(c) Require a reduction in total water usage of 20% by all customers for the past years usage during thatmonth.
(d) Prohibit all outdoor water uses.
(e) Impose a fine of $500.00 for violating required measures or wasting water.
(f) Impose a surcharge of $3.50 per 1,000 gallons for all water used over 7,000 gallons per month.
(G)
Information and education
.
(1) When it becomes apparent one of the trigger conditions will be approached, the city will notify each watercustomer through inserts in its water bills of the impending conditions. Cable TV Channel 10 and newspaperannouncements will be made one week before the trigger condition is anticipated to occur, except in the event of
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 59/350
a major component failure which will immediately trigger the appropriate condition. A complete description of themeasures required and fines for noncompliance will be published.
(2) Lake levels will be published in the newspaper each week any time the level in Lake Jacksboro dropsbelow an elevation of 1,008 feet with a warning that drought conservation measures will be imposed when thewater level reaches 1,006 feet elevation.
(H)
Initiation procedures
. Initiation of the drought contingency measures will take effect immediately upon reaching theappropriate trigger condition. For moderate and severe measures, fines will be imposed three working days afternotification mailings have been sent. In the case of the trigger condition being caused by treatment plant capacity or lowreservoir content, every attempt will be made to provide notice of an “impending” trigger condition at least one week beforethe trigger condition is anticipated to be reached. In addition, the city will inform the public daily through the news media onthe status of the drought. Lake levels and water usage will be reported to the news media.
(I)
Termination notification
. The city will notify water customers through the news media and Cable TV Channel 10 whenthe drought condition is over. The condition that will trigger termination of the drought emergency will be:
(1) Treatment or distribution capacity falls below the trigger condition for five consecutive days;
(2) The equipment or plant component that failed is repaired; or
(3) Lake levels rise above trigger conditions.
(J)
Implementation
. Revision to codes and ordinances of the city will be revised to make these Water Conservation andDrought Contingency Plans enforceable by the city.
(K)
Penalty
. Unless otherwise provided in this section, users of city water, except for the city, that do not comply with theprovisions of this section shall be subject to a penalty as provided in
§ 10.99
per day for each day of noncompliance anddisconnection or discontinuance of water services to such users by the city.
(Ord. 6-2-88, passed - -88)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 52.28. Plumbing water conservation regulations.
(A) The following plumbing requirements, standards and specifications are hereby adopted and deemed necessary toconserve fresh water resources in the city.
(B) All new construction or repairs or reconstruction involving plumbing renovation within the city limits or any authorizeduser outside the city limits will meet the following plumbing specifications.
(C) The following maximum flow rates or water usage standards shall apply for fixtures in any new building or structure orportions thereof, and additions to existing buildings that provide facilities or shelter for public assembly, educational,business, mercantile, institutional, residential occupancy, and hotels, motels, condominiums, day care centers, nursinghomes and apartments.
(1) Tank type water closets shall be required to be of a design that provides a maximum flush not to exceedthree and one-half gallons.
(2) Shower heads shall have a maximum flow not to exceed three gpm at pressure ranges from 20 to 80 psi.
(3) Laundry and kitchen faucets shall be equipped with flow controllers, aerators or spray taps which result ina maximum delivery not to exceed two and three-fourths gpm (.25 gpm).
(4) Flushometer type water closets shall adequately flush and clean fixtures, and shall discharge not morethan three gallons per flush.
(5) Tank type urinals shall have a maximum flush not to exceed three gallons per flush.
(6) Flushometer type urinals shall adequately flush and clean fixtures, and shall discharge not more than onegallon per flush.
(7) Lavatory faucets for public facilities shall be equipped with self closing valves that limit delivery of hotwater to a maximum of .25 gpm and delivery of cold water to a maximum of one and three-fourths gpm for amaximum combined delivery of two gpm.
(8) Lavatories in restrooms of public facilities shall be equipped with outlet devices which limit flow of hotwater to a maximum of 0.5 gpm, and be equipped with devices which limit the outlet temperature to a maximum
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 60/350
of 100°F.
(9) All hot water lines shall be insulated.
(10) New swimming pools must have recirculating filtration equipment.
(D) The standards and specifications set forth in this section shall not apply to hospitals, laboratories, and any otherapplication where health and safety are dependent upon particular water flow rates. The Building Official shall determinewhether application requires exception from these standards.
(E) Fixture flow performance requirements shall be rated by data furnished by the equipment supplier or certified under anationally recognized certification program or rating procedure.
(F) New service taps shall be limited to those customers in compliance with this section.
(G) Noncompliance with this section shall subject noncomplying users with a penalty as set forth in
§ 10.99
per day foreach day of noncompliance or disconnection or discontinuance of water, sewage and garbage services to such users bythe city.
(Ord. 6-1-88, passed - -88)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 52.29. Only copper allowed; other material requirements.
(A) All service lines shall be of Mueller's Copper Service Pipe, or copper pipe of similar construction and equal in quality.In no case shall any wrought iron or steel be used in a service line. Polyvinyl chloride pipe of at least one and one-fourthinches may be used in a service line.
(B) The Building Official shall cause to be placed in each service line a corporation stop and a curb stop. In cases wherethe service line is one inch or smaller, the curb stop shall be Mueller's H-14250 Plain flat Head Ground Key Angle Stop,with swivel nut, or a stop of similar construction and equal in quality.
(C) Where the service line is of a size one and one-fourth inch or larger, such stop shall be a gate valve or ball valve.
(D) All stops, as aforesaid, shall be for the exclusive use of the city and shall be under the exclusive control of the city.
(E) Where a two inch gate valve or ball valve or smaller size is used, the same shall be connected to the copper servicepipe with Mueller's H-15425 copper connection, or a copper connection of similar construction and equal in quality, or abrass or copper nipple.
(F) Hereafter, all connections to the waterworks mains shall be made on the side of the mains or on a 45 degree anglefrom top and not on top of the mains, and the service pipe shall be laid not less than 20 inches below the surface of thestreet or alley.
(G) All taps hereafter made in the water mains of the city shall be at least two feet from any joint in the water mains.
(H) In all cases where copper service pipe is used, such pipe, at the point of connection to the city water main, shall bebent in the form of a goose neck and connected to the city water main with a Mueller H-15000 Ground Joint CorporationStop, or a stop of similar construction and equal in quality.
(‘84 Code, § 4-33) (Ord. passed 2-28-84)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 52.30. Drilling permits; water wells.
(A) A city issued permit is required prior to the drilling and installation of any water wells within the corporate boundariesof the city or its extra-territorial jurisdiction.
(B) A permit fee of $25.00 is established to administer and inspect the installation of the water wells within the corporateboundaries of the city or it extra-territorial jurisdiction.
(C) Any existing water well installed to the date of passage of this ordinance is subject to inspection by the city withoutcost.
(Ord. 10-15-98, passed 10-27-97)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 61/350
WATER METERS
Sec. 52.40. Water service required.
Water wells will not eliminate required water service and associated charges.
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 52.41. Each meter a separate service.
Each meter installed at any premises shall constitute a separate service and must be paid for as such. (‘84 Code, § 17-18)(Ord. 357, passed 2-14-84)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 52.42. Separate metering required.
Each individual residence or building making connection with the City Water System shall have a separate meter and nonew connection shall be made by the city unless the individual residence or building is separately metered. (‘84 Code, § 17-19) (Ord. 357, passed 2-14-84)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 52.43. Multi-unit business meters.
Any number of houses on one plot of ground owned by one person and constituting a bona fide tourist camp shall beentitled to water service from one meter. In all cases, however, where the owner's or manager's residence, store or fillingstation is conducted in connection with such tourist camp, such residence, store or filling station shall each be equippedwith a separate meter and a separate charge made therefor, unless the residence, store or filling station is situated within asingle building, in which case a single meter shall suffice for such residence, store or filling station and one charge shall bemade therefor. (‘84 Code, § 17-20) (Ord. 357, passed 2-14-84)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 52.44. Residence and garage apartments; no separate charge.
Where a residence and garage apartment are served by a single meter, and the garage apartment is used by a member ofthe same immediate family occupying the residence, or by a servant of the family occupying the residence, no separatecharge shall be made for water service to the garage apartment. (‘84 Code, § 17-21) (Ord. 357, passed 2-14-84)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 52.45. Two or more houses served by one meter; separate charges; vacancies.
In all cases where two or more houses or buildings are now served by one meter, separate charges shall be made for eachhouse or building and no allowance shall be made for vacancy of either house or building unless the owner shall furnishsatisfactory proof to the city that water service to such house or building has been disconnected, and at the same time by awritten application agree that in the event of a reconnection, the same shall be equipped with a separate meter and aseparate charge paid therefor. (‘84 Code, § 17-22) (Ord. 357, passed 2-14-84)
Cross reference
–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 52.46. Meter failure; city estimate of charges.
If a meter fails to register the water actually consumed because the register or meter is out of order, the Water Departmentmay estimate the charge by the normal consumption, taking into consideration the season of the year. This estimation maybe based on the consumption either before or after the period that the meter fails to register the water consumed. (‘84Code, § 17-9) (Ord. 357, passed 2-14-84)
Sec. 52.47. Meter tests; adjustment of charges.
If a patron complains of the charges for water supplied to him or her and if he or she demands that the meter supplying hisor her premises be tested, the Water Department may remove the meter and send to a certified third party for testing and, ifit is found that the meter does not register in error more than 2% fast, the consumer shall pay the amount of $100.00 formaking the test and no adjustment of the charges shall be made. If, however, the meter should register more than 2% fast,the consumer shall pay no fee for such test, and the Water Department shall make appropriate adjustment in the waterservice charges. (‘84 Code, § 17-10) (Ord. 357, passed 2-14-84; Am. Ord. O-11-15, passed 6-23-15)
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 62/350
RATES AND CHARGES
Sec. 52.60. Schedule of rates and charges.
(A)
Water Rates
.
(1) The monthly water rates to be charged and collected by the city from all customers within city limits andobtaining city services for water shall be as set forth in the
Fee Appendix
to this Code.
(2) The monthly water rates to be charged and collected by the city from all customers who are outside thecity limits and obtaining city services for water shall be as set forth in the
Fee Appendix
to this Code.
(3) The raw (non-potable) water rates to be charged and collected by the city from all customers shall be asset forth in the
Fee Appendix
to this Code.
(B)
Water Service Fee and Deposits
.
(1) Each new water customer shall be charged a non-refundable water service fee as set forth in the
FeeAppendix
to this Code.
(2) Additionally, the customer may be required to make a refundable deposit with the city to guaranteepayment of water, sewer and sanitation charges. All deposits will be refunded after one year of continual servicewithout late payments or service disconnects. Deposits shall hereby be fixed as set forth in the
Fee Appendix
tothis Code unless it appears that a larger deposit is reasonably necessary to protect the city from loss by non-payment, which in such cases, the city may require such additional sum of money as may be reasonablynecessary to protect the city from such loss.
(C)
Water Taps
.
(1) All service addresses require separate water taps, except for multi-use commercial, business or multi-family establishments.
(2) Service addresses that have a single water tap but are comprised of more than one commercial unit, ormulti-family units, shall be permitted to share a common tap, if in the opinion of the city's Engineer, BuildingOfficial or their designees, such common tap with multiple meters does not adversely affect the health andsafety of the occupants of the commercial unit or multi-family residences and is consistent with applicablehealth, safety and water rules and regulations. Each separate meter shall constitute a separate water customer.
(3) Water tap fees, and meter charges for common taps, as provided herein, shall be set forth in the
FeeAppendix
attached to this Code.
(D)
Service charge
. The schedule of service charges applicable to all customers shall hereby be fixed as set forth in the
Fee Appendix
to this Code.
(Ord. 12-9-91, passed 12-10-91; Am. Ord. 9-3-92, passed 9-8-92; Am. Ord. 9-10-94, passed 9-27-94; Am. Ord. 9-15-96,passed 9-24-96; Am. Ord. 9-15-96 (rev.), passed 11-12-96; Am. Ord. O-14-09, passed 5-12-09)
Sec. 52.61. Water deposit required.
(A) Each water consumer shall put up a meter deposit at the city office in accordance with the rates or schedulesadopted by the City Council, set forth in
§ 52.60
. Such rates and schedules are also on file in the office of the City Clerk andmay be inspected by any person during ordinary and usual business hours.
(B) The above deposits may be applied to the payment of any unpaid bills and when so used the deposits shall berestored to the original amount. Any unused portion of the deposit shall be refunded at any time the account or service isdiscontinued.
(‘84 Code, § 17-23; Ord. 357, passed 2-14-84)
Sec. 52.62. Water rates.
Uniform monthly rates shall be charged all persons, firms or corporations for city water service within the corporate limits ofthe city in accordance with the rate structure adopted by the City Council, as set forth in
§ 52.60
and the
Fee Appendix
tothis Code. Such rates are also on file in the office of the City Clerk and may be inspected by any person during ordinary andusual business hours. (‘84 Code, § 17-24; Ord. 357, passed 2-14-84)
Sec. 52.63. Water tap fee.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 63/350
A water tap fee is hereby established. Such fee, as adopted by the City Council, is set forth in
§ 52.60
and is also on filewith the City Clerk. The fee shall be payable with the building permit for a new installation or with the request for services.The charge for the installation of an oversized (larger than the standard size) water service shall be as provided in
§ 52.60
and the
Fee Appendix
to this Code. (‘84 Code, § 17-25; Ord. 357, passed 2-14-84)
Sec. 52.64. Turn-on and turn-off charges.
Any person wishing to discontinue the use of water supplied from the waterworks system must give notice thereof to thewater sales office; otherwise, the charge will be entered until such notice has been given. The charge for shutting off andturning on of such service shall be as set forth in the
Fee Appendix
to this Code, and no allowance will be made in anycase for less than 30 days. (‘84 Code, § 17-26; Ord. 357, passed 2-14-84)
Sec. 52.65. Service charges.
The schedule of service charges applicable to all customers covering service calls and returned check charges, as adoptedby the City Council, are set forth in
§ 52.60
and the
Fee Appendix
to this Code. Such rates are also on file in the office ofthe City Clerk and may be inspected by any person during ordinary and usual business hours. (‘84 Code, § 17-27; Ord.357, passed 2-14-84)
Sec. 52.66. Charges; penalty for delinquency; reconnect fee.
(A) All bills for service rendered by the water system shall be paid monthly on or before each tenth day of the followingmonth. A penalty of 10% shall be added to any payment for service made after the tenth day of the month for the precedingcalendar month. After the tenth day of the following month, service shall be discontinued pursuant to
§ 52.69
if such bill isnot paid.
(B) In the event of discontinuance of service, an additional fee shall be charged for reconnection to the system as setforth in the
Fee Appendix
to this Code. In the event a second trip is made to discontinue service, the meter shall beremoved and an additional fee shall be charged for reconnection to the system as set forth in the
Fee Appendix
to thisCode.
(C) Bills for water and sewer shall be rendered under one bill, and payment for one service will not be accepted unlesspayment is made concurrently for the other service. If service has been discontinued, then payment for the total bill plusany reconnect charges must be paid in full before reconnection to the system.
(‘84 Code, § 17-28; Ord. 357, passed 2-14-84; Am. Ord. 3-2-89, passed 3-14-89; Am. Ord. 9-3-92, passed 9-8-92; Am.Ord. 9-10-94, passed 9-27-94)
Sec. 52.67. Failure to receive bill no excuse for non-payment or extension.
Failure of any patron to receive a bill for water used shall be no excuse for non-payment, and shall in no way operate toextend the payment period or penalties provided for in this chapter. (‘84 Code, § 17-8; Ord. 357, passed 2-14-84)
Sec. 52.68. City receives all rents, revenues for service.
The city shall receive all rents and revenues for water service provided through such city lines, mains and appurtenances.(‘84 Code, § 17-34; Ord. 357, passed 2-14-84)
Sec. 52.69. Reserved.
Editor
'
s note
–
Ord. No. O-09-12, § 2, adopted Aug. 14, 2012, repealed
§ 52.69
entitled
“
Disconnection for late payment
”
.
Sec. 52.70. Capital Improvement Program fee.
(A) A Capital Improvement Program fee is hereby established.
(B) The Capital Improvement Program will be budgeted annually in the Utility Fund budget and expenditures used solelyfor utility related projects.
(C) The Capital Improvement Program fee schedule is as follows:
Customer class
Average monthly waterusage
Monthly fee
Residential
All
$1.00
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 64/350
Commercial
0–20,000
1.00
Commercial
20,001–50,000
3.00
Commercial
50,001 & over
5.00
(Ord. 9-12-99, passed 9-28-99)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 52.80. Director of Public Works appointed; duties.
(A) There shall be appointed a Director of Public Works who shall be the administrative officer of the waterworks system,including all engine houses, engines, pumps, reservoirs, standpipes, elevated tanks, pipelines, hydrants, meters, wrenches,stopcocks, gate valves, fire plugs, testing equipment, and all other property and machinery used in or connected with thewaterworks system.
(B) The Director of Public Works shall have general supervision over all employees of the waterworks system and shallmake frequent trips of inspection over all pipelines and all other property used in or connected with the waterworks system,and shall make all repairs deemed necessary and consistent with his or her duties.
(C) The Director of Public Works shall also report all violations of this chapter to the City Manager and shall forthwithproceed to have prosecuted offenders as set forth in this chapter or any amendment thereof.
(D) The Director of Public Works shall also attend to and control the water supply and all times see to the sufficiencythereof, and shall notify the community, unless emergency requires otherwise, of the necessity of shutting off any pipelinefor the purpose of making repairs, extensions, connections, and the like. The Director of Public Works should knowbeforehand the necessity to so shut off the water from any line or lines of the system.
(E) In the performance of his or her duties as required by this section, the Director of Public Works shall be subject at alltimes to the city ordinances, rules, and regulations. He or she shall serve for such term and receive such compensation asmay be fixed by the City Council.
(F) All pipes or mains for the extension of the waterworks system of the city shall be laid under the management andcontrol of the Director of Public Works.
(G) The Director of Public Works shall keep in his or her office maps and plats of the city showing all mains and pipeslaid or belonging to the city, giving the size of same, and showing the locations of all valves and fire hydrants.
(H) The Director of Public Works shall see that all patrons of the waterworks system shall obey the rules and regulationsprescribed by the management of the waterworks system of the city.
(‘84 Code, § 17-1; Ord. 357, passed 2-14-84)
Cross reference
–
City Manager to appoint,
§ 31.19
(C).
Sec. 52.81. Right of entry for city employees; right to conduct water line repairs and shut-offs.
(A) Every patron of the waterworks system must agree, and does agree, that the Director of Public Works, or anyoneacting under the direction of the city, shall at reasonable times be permitted to enter any premises or building in which wateris used.
(B) It is expressly agreed and must be understood that the city reserves the right at any time to shut off the water in themains for the purpose of repairing them, making connections or extensions to them, for the purpose of cleaning same, andin so doing the city shall not be liable in any manner for damages.
(‘84 Code, § 17-13; Ord. 357, passed 2-14-84)
Sec. 52.82. Only city employees to tap city mains and lines.
No plumber or other person, except the Director of Public Works or other person acting under the direction of the city, shallbe allowed to tap any city main or any service pipe. (‘84 Code, § 17-14; Ord. 357, passed 2-14-84)
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 65/350
Sec. 52.83. City employees to report leaks and violations.
It shall be the duty of all employees of the city, including officers and members of the police force, to report to the Director ofPublic Works, upon blanks furnished for that purpose, any leaks and unnecessary waste of water that may come to theirattention, and also any violations of this chapter. (‘84 Code, § 17-15; Ord. 357, passed 2-14-84)
Sec. 52.84. Disconnection of services.
(A)
Disconnection for violation of rules and regulation
. The city shall not furnish water to any person unless such personhas complied with all of the rules and regulations of this chapter and of the waterworks system, and if any patron of thewaterworks system violates any of the rules and regulations of the waterworks system, the city shall shut off and otherwisedisconnect the water service from the premises of such violator pursuant to this section and the violator shall forfeit thedeposit, if any, for monies due and owing on the account.
(B)
Disconnection with notice
. Water service may be disconnected after proper notice for any of the following reasons:
(1) Failure to pay a delinquent account for service;
(2) Payment by check which has been rejected for insufficient funds, closed account, or for which a stoppayment order has been issued is not deemed to be payment to the city;
(i) Payment at the city billing department or payments made online is considered payment to the city.
(ii) The city is not obligated to accept payment of the bill when an employee is at the customer's locationto disconnect service.
(3) Violation of the city's rules pertaining to the use of service in a manner which interferes with the service ofothers;
(4) Operation of nonstandard equipment, if a reasonable attempt has been made to notify the customer andthe customer is provided with a reasonable opportunity to remedy the situation;
(5) Failure to comply with deposit or guarantee arrangements where required.
(C)
Disconnection without notice
. Water service may be disconnected without prior notice for the following reasons:
(1) Where a known and dangerous condition related to the type of service provided exists. Where reasonable,given the nature of the reason for disconnection, a written notice of the disconnection, explaining the reasonservice was disconnected, shall be posted at the entrance to the property, the place of common entry or uponthe front door of each affected residential unit as soon as possible after service has been disconnected;
(2) Where service is connected without authority by a person who has not made application for service.Service is connected without authority when the person who has made application and is listed as the patronvacates the property, relocates to another address and/or is deceased;
(3) Where service has been reconnected without authority following termination of service for nonpayment asset forth herein; or
(4) In instances of tampering with the city's meter or equipment, bypassing the same, or other instances ofdiversion.
(D)
Procedure for disconnection
.
(1) A patron's water utility service may be disconnected if payment was not received by the due date, providedthat:
a. A disconnection notice after the due date and at least ten days prior to the stated date ofdisconnection.
b. The disconnection notice contains the following information:
i. The words “disconnection notice” are prominently displayed;
ii The amount and date payment must be received by patron to avoid disconnection;
iii. The date service will be disconnected if payment is not received; and
iv. A local address where patron can go during normal business hours to make arrangements forpayment and reconnection.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 66/350
(2) Disconnection may not be on a day or a day immediately preceding a day, when the city is not available tocollect payments and reconnect service, such as a holiday or weekend, unless a dangerous condition exists.
(3) Notice requirements. Proper notice shall consist of a separate written statement which a city must mail orhand-deliver to a customer before service may be disconnected. The notice must be provided and must includethe following information:
(i) The words “termination notice” or similar language approved by the City Manager written in a way tostand out from other information on the notice;
(ii) The action required to avoid disconnection, such as paying past due service charges;
(iii) The date by which the required action must be completed to avoid disconnection. This date must beat least ten days from the date the notice is provided unless a shorter time is authorized by the CityManager;
(iv) The intended date of disconnection;
(v) The office hours, telephone number, and address of the city's billing office; and
(vi) The total past due charges.
(4) Disconnection prohibited. Utility service may not be disconnected for any of the following reasons:
(i) Failure to pay for utility service provided to a previous occupant of the premises;
(ii) Failure to pay for merchandise, or charges for non-utility service provided by the city;
(iii) Failure to pay for a different type or class of utility service unless the fee for such service is includedon the same bill or unless such disconnection is in accordance with this section;
(iv) Failure to pay the account of another customer as guarantor thereof, unless the city has in writingthe guarantee as a condition precedent to service;
(v) Failure to pay charges arising from an under-billing due to any faulty metering, unless the meter hasbeen tampered with or other reason consistent with applicable law;
(vi) Failure to pay an estimated bill other than a bill rendered pursuant to an approved meter-readingplan, unless the city is unable to read the meter due to circumstances beyond its control;
(vii) Failure to comply with regulations or rules regarding anything other than the type of service beingprovided including failure to comply with septic tank regulations or sewer hook-up requirements;
(viii) Refusal of a current customer to sign a service agreement; or
(ix) Failure to pay standby fees.
(5)
Disconnection for ill customers
. The city, upon approval of the City Manager, will not discontinue service toa delinquent residential customer when that customer establishes that some person residing at that residencewill become seriously ill or more seriously ill if service is discontinued. To avoid disconnection under thesecircumstances, the customer must provide a written statement from a physician to the City Manager prior to thestated date of disconnection. Service may be disconnected in accordance with subsection (a) of this section ifthe next month's bill and the past due bill are not paid by the due date of the next month's bill, unless thecustomer enters into a deferred payment plan with the city, as authorized by the City Manager.
(6)
Disconnection upon customer request
. A utility shall disconnect service no later than the end of the nextworking day after receiving a written request from the customer.
(7)
Service restoration
. City personnel must be available during normal business hours to accept payment onthe day service is disconnected and the day after service is disconnected, unless the disconnection is at thecustomer's request or due to the existence of a dangerous condition related to the type of service provided.Once the past due service charges and applicable reconnect fees are paid or other circumstances whichresulted in disconnection are corrected, the city must restore service within 36 hours.
(8)
Reconnect fees
.
(i) A reconnect fee, or seasonal reconnect fee as appropriate, may be charged for restoring service iflisted in the City's Fee Ordinance or as provided herein.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 67/350
(ii) A reconnect fee may not be charged where service was not disconnected, except in circumstanceswhere a city representative arrives at a customer's service location with the intent to disconnect servicebecause of a delinquent bill, and the customer prevents the utility from disconnecting the service.
(iii) Unless otherwise provided by applicable law, when a customer prevents disconnection at the watermeter or connecting point between the city and customer water lines, a reconnect fee charged for restoringwater service after disconnection for nonpayment of monthly charges shall not exceed $25.00, providedthe customer pays the delinquent charges and requests to have service restored within 45 days. If arequest to have service reconnected is not made within 45 days of the date of disconnection, the city maycharge its approved reconnect fee or seasonal reconnect fee.
(E)
Appeal
.
(1) Any dispute relative to a water bill, disconnection, or exercise of any rule or regulation stated herein, shallbe made to the City Manager not less than ten days after the date of disconnection or conducted disputed.
(2) The City Manager shall investigate and make a determination consistent with the rules and regulations setforth herein and provide a written determination to the customer within ten business days, unless notification isprovided for the need for additional time.
(3) If the customer is not satisfied with the resolution by the City Manager, appeal may be made, in writing,setting forth the basis for the appeal, including any legal authority for the challenge, to the City Council. Suchwritten appeal must be made within five days of the City Manager's determination, and all supporting materialreceived at least five days prior to the Council meeting proposed for the appeal.
(Ord. O-09-12, passed 8-14-12)
Editor
'
s note
–
Ord. No. O-09-12, § 2, adopted Aug. 14, 2012, repealed the former § 52.84 entitled
“
Violations will result in servicetermination
”
, which derived from:
‘
84 Code, § 17-30; and Ord. 357, passed Feb. 14, 1984, and furthermore § 4 of Ord. O-09-12 enacteda new
§ 52.84
as set out herein.
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
*
1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 70.01. Definitions.
For the purpose of this
Title VI
I, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires adifferent meaning.
Alley
. Any public way in the city extending either partly through or through any city block in the rear of city lots and in adirection generally from avenue to avenue, and being not more than 20 feet in width and capable of being traversed by avehicle.
Authorized emergency vehicle
.
(1) A fire department or police vehicle;
(2) A public or private ambulance operated by a person who has been issued a license by the TexasDepartment of Health;
(3) A municipal department or public service corporation emergency vehicle that has been designated orauthorized by the governing body of a municipality;
(4) A private vehicle of a volunteer firefighter or a certified emergency medical services employee or volunteerwhen responding to a fire alarm or medical emergency;
(5) An industrial emergency response vehicle, including an industrial ambulance, when responding to anemergency, but only if the vehicle is operated in compliance with criteria in effect September 1, 1989, andestablished by the Texas Industrial Fire Training Board of the state Firemen's and Fire Marshals' Association; or
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 68/350
(6) A vehicle of a blood bank or tissue bank, accredited or approved under the laws of this state or the UnitedStates, when making emergency deliveries of blood, drugs, medicines, or organs. (Tex. Transp. Code §541.201(1))
Bicycle
. Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two tandem wheels either ofwhich is more than 14 inches in diameter.
Business district
. Any territory contiguous to, and including, a roadway when, within any 600 feet along such roadway, thereare buildings in use for business or industrial purposes which occupy 300 feet collectively on both sides of the roadway.
Crosswalk
. That part of a roadway at any intersection included within the connection of lateral lines of the sidewalks onopposite sides of the street, whether marked or not, measured from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs from the edges ofthe traversable roadway. “Crosswalk” also includes any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctlyindicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface of the roadway.
Daytime and nighttime
. Daytime means from one-half hour before sunrise to one-half hour after sunset; nighttime meansany other hour.
Digging out
. The practice of starting any motor vehicle from a standing position by applying a sudden burst of power, andrecognized by spinning wheels and the noise of tires on the surface of the roadway.
Driver or Operator
. Any person who drives or is in actual physical control of the movement of a vehicle.
Driveway, private
. Any entrance or exit from the sidewalk or sidewalk area of any street affording a means of ingress oregress for vehicles to or from any private property, or the entrance or exit of any private garage into or from any alley.
Driveway, public
. Any entrance or exit crossing the sidewalk or sidewalk area of any street, affording a means of ingress oregress for vehicles on or off any public property.
Intersection
. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or if none, then the lateralboundary lines of the roadway of two streets which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles; or the area withinwhich vehicles traveling upon different streets joining at any other angle may come in conflict. Where a street includes tworoadways, 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided street by an intersection street shallbe regarded as a separate intersection. In the event that such intersecting streets also include two roadways of suchstreets, each shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
Laned roadway
. A roadway which is divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
Limited-access or controlled-access highway
. Any highway, street or roadway in respect to which owners or occupants ofabutting property or land and other persons have no legal right of access to or from same, except at such points only and insuch manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such highway, street or roadway.
Loading zone
. That portion of any roadway set apart, marked and numbered for the sole use of the public as a place forloading or unloading passengers, merchandise, or other cargo.
Moped
. A motor-driven cycle whose speed attainable in one mile is not more than 30 m.p.h. and that is equipped with amotor that produces not more than two-brake horsepower. If an internal combustion engine is used, the pistondisplacement may not exceed 50 cc, and the power drive system may not require the operator to shift gears.
Motor driven cycle
. Every motorcycle with a motor which has an engine piston displacement of not more than 125 cc.
Motor vehicle
. Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained fromoverhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails.
Muffler
. A device consisting of a series of chambers or baffle plates or other mechanical design for the purpose of receivingexhaust gas from an internal combustion engine and/or turbine wheels for the purpose of receiving exhaust gas from adiesel engine, both of which are effective in reducing noise.
No parking zone
. A space on the roadway adjacent to the curb, whether marked by official sign or not, in which no vehiclemay be parked.
Official traffic-control devices
. All signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this chapter which are placed orerected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.
Owner
. A person, other than a lienholder, having the property in or title to a vehicle. The term includes a person entitled tothe use and possession of a vehicle subject to a security interest in another person, but excludes a lessee under a leasenot intended as security.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 69/350
Passenger car
. Every motor vehicle, except motorcycles and motor driven cycles, designed for carrying ten passengers orless and used for the transportation of persons.
Park or Parking
. The standing of a vehicle, occupied or unoccupied, otherwise than a temporary stopping of such vehiclefor the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers, merchandise or other cargo; except aninvoluntary stopping of such vehicle because of mechanical failure or by direction of a police officer.
Parking stall or parking space
. That portion or section of a roadway adjacent to the curbing or edge, set apart, marked andbounded by lines painted or marked upon the surface of the roadway and extending into the roadway for the use of parkingvehicles; or that portion of any alley marked by official signs showing such space to be a parking zone.
Pedestrian
. Any person afoot or walking.
Policeman or police officer
. Any member of the Police Department of the city authorized by law to make arrests for trafficoffenses.
Residential district
. The territory contiguous to and including a street not comprising a business district, when the propertyon such street for a distance of 300 feet or more is, in the main, improved with residences.
Right-of-way
. The privilege of the immediate use of a roadway.
Roadway
. That portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. In the event a street includestwo or more separate roadways, the term shall refer to any such roadway separately, but not to all such roadwayscollectively.
Safety zone
. The area or space officially set apart within or along a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians, and whichis protected, or so marked, or so indicated by adequate and plainly visible signs at all times while set apart as a safetyzone.
School bus
. Every motor vehicle that complies with the color and identification requirements set forth in the most recentedition of standards as produced and sponsored by the National Commission of Safety Education of the National EducationAssociation, Washington, D.C., and is being used to transport children to or from school or in connection with schoolactivities, but not including buses operated by common carriers in urban transportation of school children.
Sidewalk
. That portion of a street between the curb lines or the lateral lines or roadways and the adjacent property lines,which is intended for the use of pedestrians.
Stop
. The complete cessation of motion of a motor vehicle or pedestrian.
Stop, stopping, or standing
. Any stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, when prohibited, except whennecessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or when in compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic-control signor signal.
Street or highway
. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof isopen to use by the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
Traffic
. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, and other conveyances, either singly or together, while such areusing any street for purposes of travel.
Traffic-control signal
. Any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternatelydirected to stop and to proceed.
Truck
. A motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property.
U-turn
. Turning or causing the turning of a vehicle so that when such turning is completed, such vehicle will be heading inthe opposite direction from that in which it was headed before such turning was begun, whether or not such vehicle ispulled into a driveway or any space beyond the curb line of the street.
Vehicle
. A device that can be used to transport or draw persons or property on a highway. The term does not include:
(1) A device exclusively used on stationary rails or tracks; or
(2) Manufactured housing as that term is defined by the Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Act (Tex.Rev. Civ. Stat., Art. 5221f).
(Tex. Transp. Code § 541.201(21))
(‘84 Code, § 20-1)
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 70/350
State Law reference–
Similar statutory definitions, Tex. Transp. Code §§ 541.001 et seq.
Sec. 70.02. Authority to direct traffic.
(A)
Officers of Police Department
. Officers of the Police Department, or such officers as are assigned by the Chief ofPolice, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformance with this Title and other trafficlaws. In the event of fire or other emergencies, to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the PoliceDepartment may direct traffic as conditions require, notwithstanding the provisions of this Title and other traffic laws.
(B)
Officers of Fire Department
. Officers of the fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist thepolice in directing traffic there or in the immediate vicinity.
(‘84 Code, § 20-2)
Sec. 70.03. Obedience to traffic officers.
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer or fire department officialgiven to direct or control traffic as authorized by this Title. (Tex. Transp. Code § 542.501) (‘84 Code, § 20-3)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 70.04. Driver's license required.
No person shall operate upon the streets or alleys in the city any motor vehicle unless such person has a valid driver'slicense, with such exceptions and exemptions as may be made by state law. (Tex. Transp. Code § 521.021) (‘84 Code, §20-61) (Ord. 177, passed 4-19-56)
State Law reference–
Driver's licensing generally, Tex. Transp. Code §§ 521.001 et seq.
Sec. 70.05. Scope of provisions.
(A)
Persons propelling pushcarts, riding animals, and the like
. Every person propelling any pushcart or riding any animalupon a roadway and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle shall be subject to the provisions of this Title applicableto the driver of any vehicle, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no such application.
(B)
Drivers of government vehicles
. The provisions of this Title shall apply to the drivers of any vehicle owned by or usedin the service of the United States Government, this state, county, or this city, and it shall be unlawful for any such driver toviolate any of the provisions of this Title except as otherwise permitted herein or by state statutes.
(C)
Workers and equipment
. The provisions of this Title shall not apply to persons, motor vehicles, or other equipmentwhile actually engaged in work upon the surface of a highway or street, but shall apply to such persons and vehicles whentraveling to and from work.
(D)
Emergency vehicles
.
(1) The provisions of this Title regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall apply toauthorized emergency vehicles, except that a driver, when operating any such vehicle in an emergency or in theimmediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, or when otherwise directed by a police officer,may:
(a) Park or stand, notwithstanding the provisions of this Title;
(b) Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary forsafe operation;
(c) Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions so long ashe or she does not endanger life or property; and
(d) Exceed the prima facie speed limits established by this Title so long as life and property are notendangered; provided, however, that this exception shall not apply to ambulances.
(2) The exemptions granted above shall apply only when the driver of the vehicle sounds a siren, bell, orexhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle displays a lighted red lamp visible fromthe front as a warning to others.
(E)
Minors
.
(1) Any minor who has passed the 14th birthday, but has not reached the 17th birthday, and who drives oroperates an automobile or any other motor vehicle on any street, alley, public way, overpass or avenue within
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 71/350
the corporate limits of the city in such a way as to violate any traffic regulation of the city shall, upon conviction,be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00. The Court shall havepower to suspend and take possession of such minor's operator's license and retain the same until such finehas been paid.
(2) If any such minor shall drive any motor vehicle upon any street, alley, public way, overpass or avenuewithin the corporate limits of the city without having a valid operator's license authorizing such driving, suchminor shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not more than $100.00.
(‘84 Code, § 20-82)
State Law reference–
Jurisdiction over minors in certain traffic cases, Tex. Transp. Code § 729.003; Similar law, Tex. Transp. Code §§542.001 et seq., 546.001 et seq. and 729.001 et seq.
Sec. 70.06. Depositing of glass, nails, and the like prohibited; removal of material.
(A)
Prohibited
. No person shall throw or deposit upon any street or alley any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans,or any other substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle upon such streets or alley.
(B)
Removal of materials
.
(1) Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any street or alley any destructive orinjurious materials shall immediately remove the same or cause it to be removed.
(2) Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from any street or alley shall remove any glass orother injurious substance dropped upon such street or alley from the vehicle.
(Tex. Transp. Code § 600.001) (‘84 Code, § 20-87)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 70.07. Removal or damage of traffic-barriers.
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a city employee or other authorized person, to remove or damage any barriererected under the direction of the Chief of Police or Street Superintendent either in closing a street or for the purpose ofwarning traffic of an obstruction in the street. (‘84 Code, § 20-89)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
State Law reference–
Similar law, Tex. Transp. Code § 472.021.
TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS
Sec. 70.20. Accidents involving damage to vehicles.
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage to a vehicle which is driven or attended by anyperson shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident, or as close thereto as possible, and shallforthwith return to the damaged vehicle and remain on the scene of such accident until he or she has fulfilled therequirements of
§ 70.21
. Every such stop shall be made in such a way as not to obstruct traffic. (Tex. Transp. Code §550.022(a)) (‘84 Code, § 20-11)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 70.21. Duty to give information and render aid.
(A) The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injuries to or death of any person or damage to anyvehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall give his or her name, address and the registration number of thevehicle being driven, and the name of the driver's motor vehicle liability insurer, and shall, upon request, exhibit his or heroperator's driver's license to the person struck, or to the driver or occupant of or persons attending any vehicle collided with,or to any peace officer.
(B) Such person shall render assistance to any person injured in such accident, including the carrying or the making ofarrangements for the carrying of such persons to a physician, surgeon or hospital for medical or surgical treatment, if it isapparent that such treatment is necessary, or if such carrying is requested by an injured person.
(Tex. Transp. Code § 550.023) (‘84 Code, § 20-12)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 72/350
Sec. 70.22. Duty upon striking an unattended vehicle.
The driver of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle which is unattended shall immediately stop and shall then andthere either locate and notify the operator or owner of such vehicle of the name and address of the driver or owner of thevehicle striking the unattended vehicle or shall leave, securely fastened and in a conspicuous place in or on the vehiclestruck, a notice giving the name and address of the driver and of the owner of the vehicle doing the striking and a statementof the circumstances thereof. (Tex. Transp. Code § 550.024) (‘84 Code, § 20-13)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 70.23. Duty upon striking fixtures on public thoroughfare.
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage of fixtures which are legally upon or adjacent to astreet, roadway or highway shall take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or persons in charge of such propertyof such fact, and notify such owner of the driver's name and address and of the registration number of the vehicle beingdriven. Such person shall, upon request and, if available, exhibit his or her operator's driver's license and make report ofsuch accident when and as required in § 70.24. (Tex. Transp. Code § 550.025) (‘84 Code, § 20-14)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 70.24. Reporting accidents.
(A)
Accident reports required
.
(1) The driver of any vehicle involved in any accident within the city resulting in an injury to or death of anyperson or damage to any property, to an apparent extent of $250.00 or more, shall immediately by the quickestmeans of communication give notice of such accident to the Police Department.
(2) The Police Department may require any driver of any vehicle involved in an accident of which a reportmust be made as provided herein to file a supplemental report whenever the original report is insufficient, and itis hereby made the duty of all persons witnessing any accident or collision of a vehicle of any kind to report thesame to the Police Department.
(B)
Filing of report
. Every law enforcement officer, other than members of the city Police Department and StateDepartment of Public Safety, who in the regular course of duty investigates a motor vehicle accident of which a report mustbe made, shall either at the time of and at the scene of the accident or thereafter, by interviewing the participants orwitnesses and within 24 hours after completing such investigation, file a written report of such accident with the PoliceDepartment. Every such accident report shall be made on the appropriate form provided by the Police Department andshall contain all of the information required therein, unless information is not available. Such reports shall be withoutprejudice to the officer so reporting and shall be for the confidential use of the Police Department and the City StreetSuperintendent.
(C)
Inability to report
. When the driver or operator of a vehicle is unable physically to make the required accident report,and if there were other occupants of the vehicle at the time of the accident who are capable of making the report, suchoccupant or occupants shall make or cause to be made such report.
(‘84 Code, § 20-15)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
State Law reference–
Accident reports, Tex. Transp. Code §§ 550.026 and 550.061 et seq.
Sec. 70.25. Reporting of damaged vehicles.
The person in charge of any garage or repair shop to which is brought any motor vehicle which shows evidence of beinginvolved in an accident or struck by any bullet, a report of which must be made required by state law, shall report to thePolice Department within 24 hours after such motor vehicle is received and give the engine number, registration number,and the name and address of the owner or operator of such vehicle. (‘84 Code, § 20-16)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
State Law reference–
Authority to require accident report, Tex. Transp. Code § 550.067.
Sec. 70.26. Removing vehicle from scene.
It shall be unlawful for the driver or any other person to remove any vehicle involved in an accident from the scene of theaccident until authorized to do so by a peace officer of the Police Department of this city; provided, however, that thissection shall not apply if there exists or arises a duty on the part of such driver or other person in control of such vehicle to
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 73/350
use such vehicle in carrying any person injured in the accident to a physician or surgeon for medical or surgical treatment.(‘84 Code, § 20-17)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 70.27. Restrictions on moving wrecked vehicle by wrecker trucks.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle equipped with a crane, hoist, winch or towing device who has answered acall to or is attending the scene of any collision or accident of one or more vehicles on any highway or street in the city toremove, or attempt to remove, any vehicle involved in such collision or accident, or in any way to interfere with or changethe position of any such vehicle, except upon authority or direction and in the presence of a police officer of the city, unlesssuch change is made or attempted for the purpose of releasing a person or persons imprisoned within or under suchvehicle; provided, however, that it shall be unlawful for such operator of any such vehicle equipped with a crane, hoist,winch, or towing device to remove any vehicle from the scene of the accident or collision without the consent of the ownerof the vehicle so removed, unless directed by a police officer to remove such vehicle as a public safety measure or for theprotection of private property. (‘84 Code, § 20-18)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
TRAFFIC SIGNS AND SIGNALS
Sec. 70.40. City to participate in sign replacement program.
The city hereby adopts the usage of the recommended signs and devices, including those international symbols asrecommended by the state and federal authorities, in order for the city to bring its traffic-control system and street signs upto certain state and federal traffic-control device standards, and to participate in the Governor's Sign ReplacementProgram. (‘84 Code, § 20-111) (Ord. 279, passed 2-25-75)
State Law reference–
Uniform System of Traffic Control Devices, Tex. Transp. Code §§ 544.001 and 544.002.
Sec. 70.41. Obedience to devices.
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control devices applicable thereto which have beenplaced in accordance with this subchapter and other traffic ordinances of the city, unless otherwise directed by a policeofficer, subject to the exception granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle. (Tex. Transp. Code § 544.004(a))(‘84 Code, § 20-113)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 70.42. Necessity of signs.
No provisions of this subchapter which require the placing of signs shall be enforced against an alleged violation if anofficial sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever aparticular section does not state that signs are required, such sections shall be effective even though no signs are erectedor in place. (Tex. Transp. Code § 544.004(b)) (‘84 Code, § 20-114)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 70.43. Ratification of existing devices.
All traffic-control signs, signals, devices and marking placed and erected prior to the adoption of this subchapter and in usefor the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic are hereby affirmed, ratified and declared to be official traffic-controldevices; provided, such traffic-control devices are not inconsistent with the provisions of the subchapter or state law. (‘84Code, § 20-115)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 70.44. Unauthorized signs, signals, markings or devices.
(A)
Prohibited or restricted
. No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any road, street or highway anyunauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be, is an imitation of, or resembles an official traffic-controldevice or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interfereswith the effectiveness of any official traffic-control device or any railroad signal or sign, and no person shall place ormaintain, nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway or street, any traffic signal or sign bearing thereon anycommercial advertising. This shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to streets orhighways of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 74/350
(B) A person may not place or maintain a flashing light or flashing electric sign within 1,000 feet of an intersection exceptunder a permit issued by the Texas Transportation Commission.
(C)
Removal
. Every such prohibited sign, signal, marking or device is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and thecity is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice.
(Tex. Transp. Code § 544.006) (‘84 Code, § 20-116)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 70.45. Altering, damaging, and the like of devices.
No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down, or remove any official traffic-control device or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any part thereof. (Tex. Transp. Code § 544.005) (‘84 Code, §20-117)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 70.46. Traffic-control signal legend.
(A) When traffic is controlled by a traffic-control signal exhibiting the word “Go,” “Caution,” or “Stop,” by exhibitingdifferent colored lights successively one at a time, or with arrows, the following colors only shall be used. The followingterms and lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and to pedestrians:
(1)
Green light
.
(a) Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left, unless a sign atsuch place prohibits either such turn, but vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yieldthe right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or in an adjacentcrosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited.
(b) Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarkedcrosswalk.
(2)
Yellow light when shown following the green signal
.
(a) Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red or “Stop” signal will be exhibitedimmediately thereafter, and such vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection when thered or “Stop” signal is exhibited.
(b) Pedestrians facing such signals are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross theroadway, and any pedestrian then starting to cross shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles.
(3)
Red light
.
(a) Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of theintersection, or, if none, then before entering the intersection, and shall remain until the green light isshown alone; provided, that after stopping and yielding to all pedestrians and vehicles, the driver of thevehicle may enter the intersection for the purpose of making a right turn only, if no sign is in placeindicating that such turn cannot be legally made.
(b) No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he or she can do so safely andwithout interfering with any vehicular traffic.
(4)
Red light with green arrow
.
(a) Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movementindicated by such arrow, but shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian lawfully within the crosswalk andto other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
(b) No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he or she can do so safely andwithout interfering with any vehicular traffic.
(B) In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, theprovisions of this subchapter are applicable, except as to those provisions which, by their nature, can have no application.Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in theabsence of any such signs or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal.
(Tex. Transp. Code § 544.007) (‘84 Code, § 20-118)
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 75/350
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 70.47. Flashing signals.
Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used, they shall require the obedience of vehicular traffic as follows:
(A)
Flashing red (stop signal)
. When a red lens is illuminated by rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehiclesshall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at the limit line, when marked, and the rightto proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at any stop sign.
(B)
Flashing yellow (caution signal)
. When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, driversof vehicles may proceed through the intersection or pass such signal only with caution.
(Tex. Transp. Code § 544.008) (‘84 Code, § 20-119)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 70.48. Pedestrian “walk” and “don't walk” signals.
Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words “walk” and “don't walk” are in place, such signals shallindicate the following:
(A)
Walk
. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal andshall be given the right-of-way by the driver of all vehicles.
(B)
Don't Walk
. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of such signal, but anypedestrian who has partially completed crossing on the “walk” signal may proceed to the sidewalk or safety zonewhile the “don't walk” signal is showing.
(Tex. Transp. Code § 552.002) (‘84 Code, § 20-120)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 70.49. Stop intersection.
(A) The city Street Superintendent, with the approval of the City Council, may designate any street intersection as a“Stop” intersection and designate the streets upon which vehicles shall stop before entering such intersections. Wheneverany intersection has been so designated, the Street Superintendent shall cause the same to be identified by the erection ofstop signs indicating which vehicles approaching such intersection shall stop.
(B) It shall be the duty of the driver of any vehicle approaching such sign to bring such vehicle to a complete stop at suchsign or at a nearby marked stop line before entering the intersection, except when directed to proceed by a police officer ora traffic-control signal. After having so stopped, such driver shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have enteredthe intersection or which are approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard. Such driver, after having soyielded, may proceed, and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching on the intersection street shall yield the right-of-wayto the vehicle so proceeding into or across the intersection.
(‘84 Code, § 20-121)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 70.50. Complete stop required.
It shall be unlawful for any person driving or operating any automobile, truck, motorcycle any other vehicle, approachingany such stop signs, to cross over or by any stop sign without first bringing such vehicle to a complete stop, and any personviolating this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (‘84 Code, § 20-122) (Ord. passed 7-6-27; Am. Ord. passed8-10-27; Am. Ord. 52, passed 6-15-37)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 70.51. Yield sign.
(A) The Street Superintendent, as authorized from time to time by the City Council, may install and maintain “Yield” right-of-way signs at intersections where a special hazard may exist or any place vehicles shall be required to yield the right-of-way.
(B) The driver of a vehicle approaching a “Yield” right-of-way sign shall, in obedience to such sign, slow down to a speednot in excess of 15 miles per hour, or shall stop if necessary, and yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian crossing the
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 76/350
roadway being traveled or to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching so closely on another street as to constitute animmediate hazard.
(‘84 Code, § 20-124)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 70.52. Designation of crosswalks and zones; marking traffic lanes.
The Street Superintendent is hereby authorized to:
(A) Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway,crosswalks at any intersection where, in his or her opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing theroadway and at such other places as the Street Superintendent may deem necessary.
(B) Establish safety, quiet, play and other zones of such kind and character and at such places as may bedeemed necessary for the protection of the public.
(C) Mark lanes for traffic on street pavement at such places as may be deemed advisable and which areconsistent with the provisions of this subchapter and other traffic ordinances of the city.
(‘84 Code, § 20-125)
Sec. 70.53. Designation of turning marker.
(A)
Authority for placement
. The Street Superintendent, with the approval of the City Council, is authorized to placemarkers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at suchintersections, and such course to be traveled as so indicated, may conform to but not be limited to those locationsprescribed by any provision of this Title, state law, or city ordinances, rules or regulations.
(B)
Compliance required
. When authorized markers, buttons, or other indicators are placed within an intersectionindicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the direction of suchindicators.
(‘84 Code, § 20-236)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 70.54. Designation of no passing zones.
(A) The City Council is hereby authorized to determine by resolutions those portions of any highway in the city whereovertaking and passing or driving on the left side of the roadway would be expressly hazardous and may, by appropriatesigns or markings on the roadway, indicate the beginning and end of such zones.
(B) When such signs or markings are in place and clearly visible to any ordinarily observant person, every driver of avehicle shall obey the directions thereof.
(‘84 Code, § 20-237)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 70.70. Service of process.
All process issued out of the Municipal Court shall be served by a police officer or marshal of the city under the same rulesas are provided by law for the service of sheriffs and constables of process issuing out of the justice court, so far asapplicable to Tex. Code Crim. Proc. Art. 45.04, and process may be served throughout the county in which the city islocated. (‘84 Code, § 20-91)
State Law reference–
Service of process, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. Art. 45.04.
Sec. 70.71. Cost of court.
The following special expenses and costs are authorized to be collected by the Municipal Court Clerk:
(A) A special expense not to exceed $25.00 for the issuance and service of a warrant of arrest for an offenseunder Tex. Penal Code § 38.10 (bail jumping and failure to appear) pursuant to Tex. Code Crim. Proc. Art.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 77/350
45.06, and for an offense under Tex. Transp. Code § 543.009 (failure to appear) pursuant to Tex. Code Crim.Proc. Art. 45.06, effective September 1, 1983, to be paid to the city.
(B) A special expense, not to exceed $25.00 for the issuance and service of a warrant of arrest, after duenotice, under Tex. Code Crim. Proc. Art. 17.04, dealing with a personal bond.
(‘84 Code, § 20-92)
State Law reference–
Authority to collect special expenses, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. Art. 45.06.
Sec. 70.72. Procedures of payment of fines; pleadings to the Municipal Court.
Payment of fines for cases filed in the Jacksboro Municipal Court are governed by the following:
(A) Defendants before the Municipal Court may plead guilty, nolo contendere or not guilty. All pleadings ofguilty or nolo contendere will be adjudged a fine and the person will make payment of the fine to the cashier forthe city, which is located in the Utility Billing and Collection office. Payment of fines should be accompanied witha form of payment from the Municipal Court.
(B) A defendant wishing to plead guilty or nolo contendere to charges and pay fines by mail rather thanappearing before the Court may do so by signing the pleading form which they received at the time chargeswere made against them, such pleading form listing a fine schedule. For any charges not listed on fine schedule,the defendant will be required to contact the Court. Fines being paid by mail will be mailed to the MunicipalCourt. Upon receipt of these fine payments, the Municipal Court Clerk will prepare a form containing informationsuch as docket number, date and fine due. This form will be presented to the cashier with payment of the fine.
(C) A defendant wishing to plead not guilty shall go before the Judge of the Municipal Court. A defendantwishing to have trail by jury shall present an appearance bond to the Court.
(‘84 Code, § 20-94)
Cross reference–
Municipal Court fines,
§ 32.09
.
Sec. 70.99. General penalty for Title VII.
(A) Whenever in this title an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, orwherever in this title the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specificpenalty is otherwise provided in this Code of Ordinances, the violation shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $200.00;provided, however, that no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense of thelaws of the state.
(B) Any person violating any of the provisions of Ordinance No. O-33-08, codified in
Chapter 73, Schedule III
, shall bedeemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in any sum not more than $500.00.
(C) Each day a violation of this Code or of any ordinance continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Am. Ord. O-17-04, passed 10-14-03; Am. Ord. O-12-04, passed 8-10-04; Am. Ord. O-13-04, passed 8-10-04; Am. Ord. O-33-08, passed 11-10-08)
Cross reference–
Municipal Court fines,
§ 32.09
.
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
*
2
OPERATION OF VEHICLES
Sec. 71.01. Driving upon right half of road.
(A) Upon all roadways, the driver of a vehicle shall drive upon the right half of the roadway except as provided in division(B).
(B) Drivers do not have to drive upon the right half of the roadway as follows:
(1) When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the rules governingsuch movements;
(2) When the right half of the street is closed to traffic while under construction or repair;
(3) Upon a street divided into three marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable thereto; or
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 78/350
(4) Upon a street designated and sign-posted for one-way traffic.
(Tex. Transp. Code § 545.051(a)) (‘84 Code, § 20-31)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 71.02. Passing.
(A)
Vehicles proceeding in same direction
.
(1) Except as provided in division (C), the driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in thesame direction shall pass on the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side of thestreet until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. No vehicle shall be driven on the left side of the center of astreet in overtaking and passing another vehicle while proceeding in the same direction unless such left side isclearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking andpassing to be made completely without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from theopposite direction of any overtaking vehicle. In every event, the overtaking vehicle must return to the right-handside of the street before coming within 200 feet of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction.
(2) No vehicle shall, at any time, be driven to the left of the street for the purpose of passing a vehicleproceeding in the same direction when approaching within 100 feet of, or traversing, any intersection or railroadgrade crossing or when approaching within 100 feet of any bridge, viaduct or tunnel.
(Tex. Transp. Code §§ 545.053(a), 545.054, and 545.056)
(B)
Duty of driver of overtaken vehicle
. It shall be the duty of the driver of a vehicle, upon audible signal that such vehicleis about to be overtaken on the left, to give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle, and the speed of theovertaken vehicle shall not be increased until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. (Tex. Transp. Code §545.053(b))
(C)
Passing on right-hand side restricted
.
(1) The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass to the right of a vehicle proceeding in the same directiononly under the following conditions:
(a) When the overtaken vehicle is making or about to make a left turn;
(b) When a vehicle is being driven upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement of sufficientwidth for two or more lines of moving traffic in each direction and not occupied by parked vehicles.
(2) Whenever a vehicle may be overtaken and passed on the right under conditions permitting suchmovement in safety. In no event shall such movement be made by driving off the pavement or main-traveledportion of the street.
(Tex. Transp. Code § 545.057)
(D)
Vehicles proceeding in opposite directions
. Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass eachother to the right and, upon streets having width for not more than one line of traffic in each direction, each driver shall giveto the other at least one-half of the main-traveled portion of the street, as nearly as possible. (Tex. Transp. Code § 545.052)(‘84 Code, § 20-32)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 71.03. Turning.
(A)
Turning movement generally
. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at any intersection shall do so as follows:
(1) Both the approach for a right turn and the actual right turn shall be made as close as practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
(2) The approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest thecenterline thereof and, after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersectionto the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered.
(3) The approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way street shall be made in the portion of theright-of-way of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where itenters the intersection. A left turn from a one-way street into a two-way street shall be made by passing to theright of the centerline of the street being entered upon leaving the intersection.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 79/350
(4) Where both streets or roadways are one-way, both the approach for a left turn and the left turn shall bemade as close as practical to the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
(Tex. Transp. Code § 545.101)
(B)
Limitations upon U-turns
.
(1) It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the oppositedirection unless such movement can be made in safety and without backing or otherwise interfering with othertraffic.
(2) A complete turn shall not be made at any intersection of any two streets, or upon any street or alley in thecity, where the City Council may determine that it is unsafe to make a complete turn and shall have caused to beposted at such place in the street or alley a sign showing that a complete turn is prohibited.
(‘84 Code, § 20-33)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Cross reference–
U-turns prohibited at certain intersections,
Ch. 73, Sch. V
.
Sec. 71.04. Signals.
(A)
Stopping and turning signals
.
(1) When any other traffic may be affected by turning movements, no person shall turn any vehicle withoutgiving a signal of his or her intention to turn right or left. Such signals shall be given continuously during not lessthan the last 100 feet traveled by the vehicle before turning.
(2) No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an appropriate signalto the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give such signal.
(3) A stop or turn signal required by this section shall be given by means of the hand and arm, or by a signallamp or mechanical signal device of a type approved by the State Department of Public Safety; provided,however, that when the body of the vehicle or the body and load of a vehicle projecting 24 inches or more to theleft of the center of the steering wheel, or under any condition when a hand and arm signal would not be visibleboth to the front and rear of the vehicle, the vehicle must be equipped with and the signals must be given by aturn-indicating lamp or device.
(4) The signal lamp provided for in this section shall be used to indicate an intention to turn, change lanes, orstart from a parking position, and shall not be flashed on a moving vehicle as a courtesy or as a “do pass” signalto operators of other vehicles approaching from the rear.
(Tex. Transp. Code §§ 545.104 § 545.106)
(B)
Manner of giving turning signals
. All signals required by division (A), when given by hand and arm, shall be givenfrom the left side of the vehicle in the following manner, and such signals shall be indicated as follows:
(1) Left turn: hand and arm extended horizontally.
(2) Right turn: hand and arm extended upward, except that a bicycle operator may signal from the right side ofthe vehicle with the hand and arm extended horizontally.
(3) Stop or decrease speed: hand and arm extended downward.
(Tex. Transp. Code § 545.107) (‘84 Code, § 20-35)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 71.05. Driving on laned roadways.
Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly-marked lanes for traffic, the following rules, in addition toall other consistent herewith, shall apply:
(A)
Lane restriction
. The driver of a vehicle shall drive as nearly as practical entirely within a single lane, andshall not move from such lane until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety.
(B)
Three lane roadway
. Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes, the driver of a vehicle shall notdrive in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 80/350
and such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left turn, or where suchcenter lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is proceeding and issign-posted to give notice of such allocations.
(C)
Designated lanes
. Official signs may be erected directing slow-moving traffic to use a designated lane ordesignating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center of theroadway, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign.
(Tex. Transp. Code § 545.060) (‘84 Code, § 20-36)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 71.06. Driving on divided streets.
Whenever any street or highway within the city has been divided into two roadways by leaving an intervening space or by aphysical barrier or clearly indicated dividing sections so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall bedriven only upon the right-hand roadway, and no vehicle shall be driven over, across, or within any such divided space,barrier or section, except through an opening therein, at a cross-over, or at an intersection. (Tex. Transp. Code § 545.063)(‘84 Code, § 20-37)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 71.07. Right-of-way.
(A)
Vehicles approaching or entering intersection
.
(1) The driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection of a different street or roadway shall stop, yield andgrant the privilege of immediate use of such intersection in obedience to any stop sign, yield right-of-way sign, ortraffic-control device erected by public authority, and after so stopping may only proceed thereafter when suchdriver may safely enter the intersection without interference or collision with traffic using a different street orroadway.
(2) The driver of a vehicle on a single lane street or roadway, or a street or roadway consisting of only twotraffic lanes, upon approaching the intersection, not otherwise controlled by traffic signs or signals, of a dividedstreet or roadway or of a street or roadway divided into three or more marked traffic lanes, shall stop, yield andgrant the privilege of immediate use of such intersection to vehicles on the other street which are within theintersection or approaching such intersection in such proximity thereto as to constitute a hazard, and after sostopping, may only proceed when he or she may safely enter the intersection without interference or collisionwith traffic using such different street or roadway.
(3) The driver of a vehicle on an unpaved street or roadway approaching the intersection of a paved roadwayshall stop, yield and grant the privilege of immediate use of such intersection to any vehicle on such pavedroadway which is within the intersection or approaching such intersection in such proximity thereto as toconstitute a hazard, and after so stopping, may only proceed when such driver may safely enter the intersectionwithout interference or collision with traffic using such paved street or roadway.
(4) (a) Except as provided in division (A)(4)(b), the driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection ofa different street or roadway, not otherwise regulated herein, or controlled by traffic control signs or signals,shall stop, yield and grant the privilege of immediate use of such intersection to any other vehicle whichhas entered the intersection from such driver's right or is approaching such intersection from such driver'sright in such proximity thereto as to constitute a hazard, and after so stopping, may only proceed when heor she may safely enter such intersection without interference or collision with traffic using such differentstreet or roadway.
(b) The driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection of a street or roadway from a street or roadwaywhich terminates at the intersection, not otherwise regulated in this section or controlled by traffic-controlsigns or signals, shall stop, yield and grant the privilege of immediate use of the intersection to anothervehicle which has entered the intersection from the other street or roadway or is approaching theintersection on the other street or roadway in such proximity as to constitute a hazard, and after stopping,may only proceed when he or she may safely enter the intersection without interference or collision withthe traffic using the other street or roadway.
(5) A driver obligated to stop and yield the right-of-way in accord with divisions (A)(1), (2), (3) and (4) of thissection who is involved in a collision or interference with other traffic at such intersection is presumed not tohave yielded the right-of-way as required by this chapter.
(Tex. Transp. Code § 545.151)
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 81/350
(B)
Vehicle turning left
. The driver of a vehicle intended to turn to the left within an intersection or into an alley, privateroad or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within theintersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard. (Tex. Transp. Code § 545.152)
(C)
Vehicle entering stop or yield intersection
.
(1) Preferential right-of-way at an intersection may be indicated by stop signs or yield signs as authorized in
§§ 70.50
and
70.53
.
(2) Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal, every driver of a vehicleapproaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop as required by
§ 70.50
and after havingstopped shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another highway orwhich is approaching so closely on the highway as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when suchdriver is moving across or within the intersection.
(3) The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall in obedience to such sign slow down to a speedreasonable for the existing conditions and shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection orapproaching on another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time such driver ismoving across or within the intersection; provided, however, that if such a driver is involved in a collision with avehicle in the intersection, after driving past a yield sign without stopping, such collision shall be deemed primafacie evidence of his or her failure to yield right-of-way.
(Tex. Transp. Code § 545.153)
(D)
Vehicle entering or leaving controlled access highway
. The driver of a vehicle proceeding on an access or feederroad of a controlled access highway shall yield the right-of-way to a vehicle entering or about to enter the road from thehighway or leaving or about to leave the road to enter the highway. (Tex. Transp. Code § 545.154)
(E)
Vehicle entering highway from private road or driveway
. The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highwayfrom an alley, building, private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the highway to beentered. (Tex. Transp. Code § 545.155)
(F)
Emerging from alley, driveway or building
. The driver of a vehicle within a business or residential district emergingfrom an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalkarea extending across any alleyway or driveway, and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary toavoid collision, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway. (Tex.Transp. Code § 545.256)
(‘84 Code, §§ 20-38, 20-190)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 71.08. Backing restricted.
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and withoutinterfering with other traffic. (Tex. Transp. Code § 545.415(a)) (‘84 Code, § 20-39)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 71.09. Emergency vehicles and school buses.
(A)
Approach of authorized emergency vehicle
.
(1) Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle equipped with at least one lighted lampexhibiting red light visible, under normal atmospheric conditions, from a distance of 500 feet to the-front of suchvehicle and, when the driver of such vehicle is giving audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle or bell, the driver ofevery other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as closeas possible to, the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway which is clear of any intersection and shall stop andremain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by apolice officer.
(2) This division (A) shall not operate to relieve the driver of any authorized emergency vehicle from the dutyto drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using any highway or roadway.
(Tex. Transp. Code § 545.156)
(B)
Meeting or overtaking school bus
. The driver of a vehicle upon any of the public streets or highways within the citylimits shall, upon meeting or overtaking from either direction, any school bus which has stopped on the highway for thepurpose of loading or unloading any school children, stop such vehicle when warning lights on such school bus are
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 82/350
activated. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to proceed as long as such warning lights remain activated; however, if anyschool bus has stopped for the purpose of loading or unloading any children on a divided highway, then approaching trafficmay continue at a safe and prudent speed. (Tex. Transp. Code § 545.066)
(‘84 Code, § 20-40)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 71.10. Obstructions prohibited.
(A)
Traffic
. It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, drive or propel a vehicle in such manner as to block or obstruct thetraffic on any street or alley in the city.
(B)
Intersections or crosswalks
. No driver shall enter any intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficientspace on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle being operated without obstructing thepassage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed.
(‘84 Code, §§ 20-41, 20-191)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
State Law reference–
Similar law, Tex. Transp. Code § 545.302.
Sec. 71.11. Following vehicles; distance.
The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having dueregard for the speed of such vehicle and the traffic upon, and the condition of the street. (Tex. Transp. Code § 545.062(a))(‘84 Code, § 20-42)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 71.12. Driving areas prohibited and restricted.
(A)
Sidewalks
. Any driver of any vehicle who shall drive such vehicle upon or across any sidewalk or sidewalk area ofany street within the city, except on a driveway, public or private, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Tex. Transp.Code § 545.422)
(B)
Safety zone
. No driver of any vehicle shall, at any time, drive through or within a safety zone. (Tex. Transp. Code §545.403)
(C)
Fresh pavement
. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle upon any portion of any street in the city thathas been freshly paved, unless all barriers or signal lights have been lawfully removed therefrom, indicating that the streetis ready for travel.
(D)
Other
. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle whatsoever through or upon, or to park suchvehicle upon, any park, hospital ground or other public property within the city except upon officially designated roadwaysor parking areas.
(‘84 Code, § 20-43)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 71.13. “Digging out” prohibited.
Any driver of any motor vehicle who shall use such vehicle to “dig out” or shall cause any such vehicle to makeunnecessary noises by reason of operating such vehicle in such manner as to cause the wheels thereof to spin or slide onthe roadway or any street when starting such vehicle or while making any turning movement shall be deemed guilty of amisdemeanor. (‘84 Code, § 20-44)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 71.14. Control of vehicle required.
It shall be the duty of every person who shall operate any vehicle within the city to keep the same under control at all timesand to avoid, whenever possible, colliding with any other vehicle or person. (‘84 Code, § 20-45)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 71.15. Opening doors into traffic restricted.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 83/350
No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safeto do so, nor shall any person leave a door of a motor vehicle open on the side available to traffic for a period of time longerthan necessary to load or unload passengers. (Tex. Transp. Code § 545.418) (‘84 Code, § 20-46)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 71.16. Corner cutting prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle over any sidewalk area or through any driveway, parking lot, or anybusiness entrance at any intersection, making either a right or left turn, except for the purpose of coming to a complete stopto obtain or render some service or make a sale or purchase. It is the intention of this section to prohibit “corner cutting” -the driving of any vehicle from one street into another across any sidewalk or through any parking lot or driveway. (Tex.Transp. Code § 545.423) (‘84 Code, § 20-47)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 71.17. Restricted access.
No person shall drive his vehicle onto or from any limited roadway except at such entrances and exits as are established bypublic authority. (Tex. Transp. Code § 545.064) (‘84 Code, § 20-48)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 71.18. Overloading or crowding of vehicles restricted.
(A) No person shall drive his or her vehicle when it is loaded with material or passengers so as to obstruct the view of thedriver to the front or sides of the vehicle, or so as to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of thevehicle.
(B) No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere with the driver's view ahead or to the side, or as tointerfere with the control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
(Tex. Transp. Code § 545.417) (‘84 Code, § 20-49)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 71.19. Reckless driving unlawful.
(A) Any person who drives or operates an automobile or any other motor vehicle upon any street or alley in the city in areckless manner as hereafter described and defined shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(B) Reckless driving shall mean the driving by any person of any vehicle in willful or wanton disregard of the rights orsafety of others or without due caution or circumspection or at a speed or in a manner so as to endanger or be likely toendanger a person or property.
(Tex. Transp. Code § 545.401) (‘84 Code, §§ 20-77, 20-78) (Ord. 131, passed 4-1-53)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
State Law reference–
Driving while intoxicated, Tex. Penal Code § 49.04.
Sec. 71.20. Operation on Lost Creek Dam prohibited.
(A) As used in this section, “motor vehicle” means a device in, on or by which a person or property is or may betransported or drawn on a highway, including but not limited to cars, trucks, pickups, vans, mini-vans, motorcycles,motorbikes, mini-bikes, three-wheelers, four-wheelers, mopeds, or any motor-powered two-wheeled vehicles.
(B) A person commits an offense if the person drives or operates a motor vehicle on any part of Lost Creek Dam at LostCreek Reservoir situated within the boundary limits of the city.
(C) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the person driving or operating a motor vehicle on Lost CreekDam was acting under the direction, permission or authorization of the city or its duly authorized agent
(Ord. 8-5-91, passed 8-13-91; Ord. O-12-16, passed 10-24-16)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 71.21. Operating vehicle with exhaust cut-out unlawful; noise.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 84/350
(A) Every motor vehicle shall at all times be equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation toprevent excessive or unusual noise and no person shall use a muffler cut-out, by-pass or similar device upon a motorvehicle on a highway. (Tex. Transp. Code § 547.604)
(B) The engine and power mechanism of every motor vehicle shall be so equipped and adjusted as to prevent theescape of excessive fumes or smoke. (Tex. Transp. Code § 547.605(a))
(‘84 Code, §§ 20-79, 20-90) (Ord. passed 8-16-18)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 71.22. Warning device required.
Every person operating or driving any motor vehicle in the city shall have the same equipped with a horn in good workingorder, capable of emitting an abrupt sound adequate in quality and volume to give warning of the approach of such motorvehicle to pedestrians and to persons riding or driving animals, or to other vehicles. Every person operating or driving amotor vehicle shall sound the horn whenever necessary as a warning of danger, but not at other times or for otherpurposes. (Tex. Transp. Code § 547.501) (‘84 Code, § 20-80) (Ord. passed 7-3-17)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 71.23. Illegal riding prohibited.
No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designated or intended for the use of passengers.However, this provision shall not apply to any employee engaged in the necessary discharge of his or her duty or to aperson riding within truck bodies or spaces intended for merchandise. (‘84 Code, § 20-83)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 71.24. Riding motorcycles restricted.
A person operating a motorcycle shall not ride other than upon the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, nor shallany other person, nor shall any other person ride upon such motorcycle other than upon a firmly attached seat to the rearor to the side of the motorcycle. (Tex. Transp. Code § 545.416) (‘84 Code, § 20-84)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 71.25. Clinging to moving vehicle prohibited.
No person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates, or any toy vehicle shall attach the same orhimself or herself to any moving vehicle upon any roadway. (Tex. Transp. Code § 551.102(d)) (‘84 Code, § 20-85)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 71.26. Reserved.
Editor's note–
Former section 71.26 pertaining to roller skates, coasters and the like prohibited on roads and deriving from the 1984Code, § 20-86, was deleted in its entirety by Ord. O-16-19, passed 8-12-19.
Sec. 71.27. Projecting loads.
(A) Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four feet or more beyond the bed or body of such vehicle,there shall be displayed at the extreme rear end of the load a red light during nighttime hours which must be visible from adistance of at least 500 feet to the side and rear of the vehicle. Such red light shall be in addition to the red rear lightsrequired for every vehicle.
(B) At any other time there shall be displayed at the extreme rear end of such load a red flag or cloth no less than 12inches square and so hung that the entire area is visible to the driver of a vehicle approaching from the rear.
(Tex. Transp. Code § 621.206(b)) (‘84 Code, § 20-88)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 71.28. One-way streets and alleys.
(A) Whenever any ordinance of the City Council designates any one-way street or alley, the Street Superintendent shallplace and maintain signs giving notice thereof. No such regulation shall be effective until such signs are in place.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 85/350
(B) Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement oftraffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. Upon those streets, or parts of streets, or in those alleys which are designated“one-way” streets or alleys, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction where signs indicating the direction oftraffic are erected and maintained at every intersection and where movement in the opposite direction is thereby prohibited.
(‘84 Code, § 20-136)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Cross reference–
One-way streets,
Ch. 73, Sch. II
.
Sec. 71.29. Fire apparatus and ambulances; right-of-way; following too closely; driving over unprotected hose;exceptions.
(A)
Definitions
. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates orrequires a different meaning.
Ambulance
. The term is defined in
§ 70.01
.
Fire apparatus
. Means and includes any fire truck, engine, hose truck or other vehicle used and operated by the FireDepartment of the city, in answering any fire or other alarm or in fighting and extinguishing fire or controlling other publicdangers.
Other public danger
. Any emergency which the governing authorities or Fire Chief of the city shall direct the FireDepartment and apparatus to reach and attend.
Streets
. Any street, alley, avenue or other public way within the city.
(B)
Right-of-way
. Except as hereinafter provided, any person engaged in operating a motor vehicle upon the streets ofthe city shall immediately upon the sounding of the fire alarm of the city move his or her vehicle to the right-hand curb of thestreet and there remain stopped until the fire apparatus or ambulance shall have passed or it has been determined thatsuch apparatus will not pass along the street on which the vehicle is being operated.
(Tex. Transp. Code § 545.156) (Ord. 58, passed 9-21-37)
(C)
Following fire apparatus and ambulance prohibited
.
(1) The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling inresponse to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where the fireapparatus has stopped to answer a fire alarm.
(2) No driver of a vehicle, except on official business, may follow closer than 500 feet behind an ambulancewhen the flashing red lights of the ambulance are operating. No driver of a vehicle may drive or park his or hervehicle at a place where an ambulance has been summoned for an emergency call in a manner calculated tointerfere with the arrival or departure of the ambulance.
(Tex. Transp. Code § 545.407)
(D)
Driving over unprotected hose
. No driver of a vehicle shall drive over an unprotected hose of a Fire Department whenlaid down on any street or private driveway, which hose is to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of theFire Department official in command. (Tex. Transp. Code § 545.408)
(E)
Exceptions
.
(1) Volunteer firefighters, police and ambulance personnel shall be exempted from this section whileresponding to an emergency; provided, they are in private vehicles clearly indicated by signs, emergencyflashing lights, or other clearly visible indicators of their volunteer or ambulance personnel status.
(2) Nothing in this section shall relieve the volunteer firefighter, police or ambulance personnel from observingall other traffic laws, ordinances, rules or regulations contained herein, or imposed by law.
(‘84 Code, §§ 20-161, 20-162, 20-163, 20-164)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
SPEED LIMITS
Sec. 71.45. Drivers to maintain reasonable and prudent speed.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 86/350
No person shall drive a vehicle on a road, street or alley at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under theconditions then existing, having regard to the actual and potential hazards when approaching and crossing an intersectionor a railway grade crossing, when approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hill crest, when travelingupon any narrow or winding roadway, or when special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reasonof weather or highway conditions, and in every event speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid collidingwith any person, vehicle or other conveyance on or entering the highway, in compliance with legal requirements and duty ofall persons to use care. (Tex. Transp. Code § 545.351) (‘84 Code, § 20-171) (Ord. 122, passed 2-25-52)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 71.46. Speed limits established.
(A) Where no special hazard exists that requires lower speed for compliance with
§ 71.45
, the speed of any vehicle notin excess of the limits specified in this section or established as hereinafter authorized shall be lawful.
(B) Any speed in excess of the limits specified in this section or established as hereinafter authorized shall be prima facieevidence that the speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful:
(1) Thirty miles per hour in any business or residential district unless signs which designate a different speedare erected in accordance with this subchapter.
(2) Those speed limits as set forth in
Chapter 73, Schedule III
, Speed limits.
(3) Fifteen miles per hour speed limit in all city parks.
(‘84 Code, § 20-172)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
State Law reference–
Prima facie speed limits, Tex. Transp. Code § 545.351.
Sec. 71.47. Alterations authorized.
The prima facie speed limits as set forth in
§ 71.46
and
Chapter 73, Schedule III
may be altered as hereinafter authorizedby authority of the Texas Transportation Commission on determination of an engineering and traffic investigation, as morefully set out in Tex. Transp. Code §§ 545.356 et seq., as amended; and this subsection, insofar as it pertains or applies toincorporated towns or cities, is hereby adopted in its entirety the same as if fully incorporated herein. (Ord. 122, passed 2-25-52; ‘84 Code, § 20-173)
Sec. 71.48. State law provisions incorporated.
The provisions of Tex. Transp. Code §§ 545.356 et seq., pertaining to the authority by city ordinance to alter prima faciespeed limits, is hereby adopted in its entirety, and the same is fully incorporated herein. (‘84 Code, § 20-174; Ord. 122,passed 2-25-52)
Sec. 71.49. Subchapter to supplement state law; school zone restrictions.
(A) School zones are hereby established in the following locations:
(1) West Union Street from North 5th Street to North 7th Street.
(2) West College Street from North 4th Street to North 7th Street.
(3) West Live Oak Street from North 4th Street to North 7th Street.
(4) North 4th Street from West Belknap Street to West College Street.
(5) North 4th Street from West Live Oak Street to North Main Street.
(6) North 5th Street from West Live Oak Street to North Main Street.
(7) South 5th Street from West Pine Street to West Belknap Street.
(8) North 6th Street from West Union Street to North Main Street.
(9) North 7th Street from West Live Oak Street to West Union Street.
(10) North 7th Street from West Belknap Street to West College Street.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 87/350
(B) A speed limit of 20 miles per hour shall be effect in such school zones Monday through Friday every week of theschool semesters of the school districts serving the city when specially marked signs are erected. The school zones shallbe marked by means of special signs stating “SCHOOL - 20 MPH,” during specific times. The Chief of Police is herebyauthorized to coordinate the time of school zones with the appropriate school authorities.
(C) The placement of traffic control devices by the city shall be prima facie evidence that the device is installed andmaintained pursuant to the authority granted herein, in accordance with state law, in proper position and in full force andeffect.
(‘84 Code, § 20-175; Ord. 92, passed 10-19-48; Am. Ord. 122, passed 2-25-52; Am. Ord. O-10-03, passed 8-12-03; Am.Ord. O-19-05, passed 11-15-05; Am. Ord. O-06-08, passed 3-11-08; Am. Ord. O-05-12, passed 6-12-12)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 71.50. Racing prohibited.
Any person who shall race or engage in a contest for speed between motor vehicles of any kind upon any public street oralley within the city shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. The fact that the actual speed attained by any vehicleengaged in racing or in a contest for speed is less than the prima facie legal speed limit shall be no defense to a complaintof racing or engaging in a contest for speed in violation of this section. (‘84 Code, § 20-176)
State Law reference–
Tex. Transp. Code § 545.420)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 71.51. Minimum limits.
No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement oftraffic, except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or compliance with law. (‘84 Code, § 20-177)
State Law reference–
Tex. Transp. Code § 545.363(a)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 71.52. Exemptions.
The provisions of this subchapter and other ordinances of the city regulating the speed of vehicles shall not apply tovehicles of the Fire Department when responding to a call, nor to police patrol vehicles, physicians' vehicles, or ambulanceswhen actually engaged in responding to emergency calls; provided, however, that this section shall not authorize anyambulance driver to exceed the speed of 45 miles per hour, or the speed limit, whichever is greater. (‘84 Code, § 20-178)
State Law reference–
Tex. Transp. Code § 545.365; Authority to regulate speed of ambulances, Tex. Transp. Code § 545.365(b).
PEDESTRIANS
Sec. 71.65. Application of subchapter.
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals as provided in this Title, but in all other places pedestrians shall begranted those rights and be subject to those restrictions stated in this subchapter. (‘84 Code, § 20-221)
Sec. 71.66. Right-of-way.
(A)
Within crosswalk
. When traffic-control signals are not in place or are not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shallyield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk whenthe pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching soclosely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger, but no pedestrian shall suddenly leave the curb or place ofsafety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield. Whenever anyvehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk, or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection, in order to permit a pedestrianto cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stoppedvehicle.
State Law reference–
Tex. Transp. Code § 552.003
(B)
When pedestrian to yield right-of-way
.
(1) Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk, or within anunmarked crosswalk at any intersection, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 88/350
(2) Any pedestrian crossing the roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossinghas been provided shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(‘84 Code, § 20-222)
State Law reference–
Tex. Transp. Code § 552.005(a))
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 71.67. Crossing restrictions.
(A)
Between adjacent intersections
. Pedestrians shall cross roadways only at a marked crosswalk when crossingbetween adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in operation.
(B)
Crosswalks at intersections
.
(1) Any crossing by any pedestrian of any intersection within the corporate limits of the city shall be madewithin the crosswalks of such intersection.
(2) It shall be unlawful for a pedestrian to cross the street at any place other than an intersection, but whenany such crossing is made by any pedestrian, such pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles uponsuch street approaching such place of crossing and in proximity thereto. It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian tocause any vehicle to stop or to cause any interference with the movement of any vehicle by reason of suchcrossing at such place.
(C)
Crossing at right angles
. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to thecurb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb, except in a crosswalk.
(‘84 Code, § 20-223)
State Law reference–
Tex. Transp. Code §§ 552.005(b), (c))
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 71.68. Walking on roadways.
(A)
With sidewalks
. Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon anadjacent roadway.
(B)
Without sidewalks
. Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along or upon a street or highwayshall, when practical, walk only on the left side of the roadway or upon its shoulder facing traffic which may approach fromthe opposite direction.
(‘84 Code, § 20-224)
State Law reference–
Tex. Transp. Code § 552.006)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 71.69. Hitchhiking.
It shall be unlawful for any person to stand in any street or other roadway in the city for the purpose of hitchhiking orotherwise soliciting a ride from the driver of any vehicle. (‘84 Code, § 20-225)
State Law reference–
Tex. Transp. Code § 552.007(a))
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 71.70. Duty of drivers to pedestrians.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subchapter, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoidcolliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway, shall give warning by sounding a horn when necessary, and shall exerciseproper precautions upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated person upon any roadway. (‘84 Code, § 20-226)
State Law reference–
(Tex. Transp. Code § 552.008)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 89/350
Sec. 71.71. Use of crosswalk.
Pedestrians shall move, whenever possible, upon the right half of the crosswalk. (‘84 Code, § 20-227)
State Law reference–
Tex. Transp. Code § 552.004.
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 71.72. Blind pedestrians.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person, except persons wholly or partially blind, to carry or use on the public streets of thecity any cane or walking stick which is white in color or white with a red end.
(B) Any driver of any vehicle, operator of a motor-driven vehicle, or pedestrian who approaches or comes in contact witha person who is wholly or partially blind and is carrying such walking stick or cane as above described may take actiondeemed necessary to avoid accident or injury to the person carrying such cane or walking stick.
(‘84 Code, § 20-228)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
CHAPTER 72: STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
*
3
Sec. 72.01. Vehicle owner assumed responsible for violation.
If any vehicle is found upon any street in violation of any provision of this chapter regulating the standing, stopping, orparking of vehicles and the identity of the operator cannot be determined, the owner or person in whose name such vehicleis registered shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation.
(‘84 Code, § 20-186) (Ord. 62, passed 2-20-40)
Sec. 72.02. Impoundment of standing or parked vehicles.
(A)
Authority
. Any vehicle which shall be or remain standing or parked upon any public street, avenue, way, alley, orother public place may, under the following circumstances, be removed by or upon the order of the Chief of Police andplaced in storage in a privately-operated garage or other place designated or maintained by the city:
(1) When any vehicle is found upon a street, avenue, alley way or public place and a report has beenpreviously made that such vehicle has been stolen, or a complaint has been filed and a warrant issued thereon,charging that such vehicle has been stolen or converted in violation of the law;
(2) When any police officer of the city has reasonable grounds to believe that any vehicle has beenabandoned for longer than 48 hours;
(3) When any police officer arrests any person driving, or in control of, a vehicle for an alleged offense andsuch officer is or may be required by law to take the one arrested immediately before a magistrate, or if thearrested person is immediately taken before a magistrate, or when the arrested person is the sole occupant orthe owner of the vehicle and is immediately placed in custody;
(4) When a vehicle is so disabled that its normal operation is impossible or impractical and the person incharge of the vehicle is incapacitated by reason of physical injury or other causes to such an extent as to beunable to provide for its removal or custody, or cannot be found, or is not in the immediate vicinity of suchvehicle;
(5) When any vehicle is left standing or parked unattended for more than 48 hours in violation of anyapplicable provision of state law, city ordinance, rules or regulations; provided, however, that in the event thevehicle is adjacent to property owned by the owner of such vehicle or property rented by the owner of thevehicle, before such vehicle shall be removed, the owner thereof shall be given an additional 24 hours toremove or cause to be removed such vehicle. Such written notice may be given by depositing the same,addressed to the owner at the address given on the registration receipt of the vehicle or his or her last knownaddress, in the United States mail.
(B)
Claiming of vehicle by owner
. In order to obtain possession of any vehicle stored under the provisions of this section,the claimant must produce satisfactory evidence of the ownership or right to possession within 30 days from the date ofsuch storage, and in addition thereto, must pay all charges for storage and removal of such vehicle in addition to any fine.
(C)
Sale of vehicle
. If the vehicle removed under this section is not claimed within 30 days from the date of storage, thesame may be sold by the garage where the same is stored for recovery of charges, as provided by law.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 90/350
(D)
Liability to city
. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to relieve from, or lessen the responsibility of,any person who shall leave his or her vehicle parked on the streets of the city in such a manner that the same may beimpounded, nor shall the city be held as assuming any liability by reason of the impounding, or the causing to beimpounded, of such vehicle.
(‘84 Code, § 20-187) (Ord. 4-83, passed 1-10-83)
State Law reference–
Removal of unlawfully stopped vehicles, Tex. Transp. Code § 545.305.
Sec. 72.03. Unattended vehicles.
No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine,locking the ignition, removing the keys from the ignition, and effectively setting the brakes thereon, and when standing uponany grade, turning the front wheels toward the curb or side of the roadway. (Tex. Transp. Code § 545.404) (‘84 Code, § 20-188) (Ord. 4-83, passed 1-10-83)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 72.04. Prohibited parking.
(A)
Specified places
. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with othertraffic or in compliance with law, the direction of a police officer, or a traffic-control device, in any of the following places:
(1) On the roadway side of a vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street;
(2) On a sidewalk;
(3) In an intersection;
(4) On a crosswalk;
(5) Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of a place on the curb immediately oppositethe ends of a safety zone, unless the city designates a different length by signs or markings;
(6) Alongside or opposite a street excavation or obstruction if stopping, standing, or parking the vehicle wouldobstruct traffic;
(7) On a bridge or other elevated structure on a highway or in a highway tunnel;
(8) On a railroad track; or
(9) Where an official sign prohibits stopping.
(Tex. Transp. Code § 545.302)
(B)
Moving of vehicles
. No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her control into any prohibited areaspecified above or any distance from a curb, except as permitted by law. (Tex. Transp. Code § 545.304)
(C)
Specified purposes
. No person shall park a vehicle upon any street in the city for the principal purpose of:
(1) Displaying such vehicle for sale;
(2) Washing, greasing, or repairing such vehicle, except such repairs as necessitated by an emergency;
(3) Advertising, except by permit issued by the Chief of Police and under the conditions stipulated therein.
(D)
Specified minimum roadway
. No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street in such a manner orunder such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of width of either lane of a roadway for free movement ofvehicular traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or unloading of passengers or, whennecessary, in obedience to traffic regulations, traffic signs, or signals of a police officer.
(‘84 Code, § 20-189)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 72.05. Designation and marking of special parking stalls and areas.
(A) The Street Superintendent shall cause parking stalls to be maintained and marked off in and on such streets or partsthereof as may be designated by the City Council from time to time, and such person shall cause spaces in which parking is
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 91/350
prohibited to be maintained and marked off in and on such streets and parts thereof as may be designated by the CityCouncil from time to time. The Street Superintendent shall also cause time-limit parking areas to be marked off andmaintained in and on such streets or parts thereof as may be designated by the City Council from time to time. All suchspaces or areas shall be clearly indicated by appropriate signs or by marking on the pavement or curb.
(B) In areas designated as time-limit parking areas, parking may be limited to any period prescribed by the City Council,the same areas to be designated with clearly distinguished markings or signs at both ends of the time limit areas and atreasonable intervals between the beginning and ending of such time-limit areas, indicating which parking established underthis section shall apply on such days and between such hours as prescribed by the City Council.
(‘84 Code, § 20-192)
Cross reference–
Parking schedules,
Ch. 74
.
Sec. 72.06. Parking in prohibited areas.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit, or suffer any vehicle registered in such person's name or ownedand operated by such person or in such person's possession or under such person's control to be or remain in any space orarea in which parking is prohibited, as provided in
§ 72.05
, or in a time-limit parking area for a longer period of time thanthat designated by the marking on the street or by clearly visible signs. (‘84 Code, § 20-193)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 72.07. Parallel and angle parking.
(A)
Parallel parking
. No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of theroadway and headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within 18inches of the curb or edge of the roadway, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. On a one-way street, vehicles maybe parked on the left side of the street with the left-hand wheels within 18 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway, unlesssigns prohibit such parking.
(B)
Angle Parking
. The Street Superintendent, with the approval of the City Council, shall determine upon which streetsangle parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets, but such angle parking shall not be indicated on anyfederal-aid or state highway within this city unless the Texas Department of Transportation has determined by resolution ororder, entered into its minutes, that the roadway is of sufficient width to permit angle parking without interfering with the freemovement of traffic. Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where passing traffic would thereby becaused or required to drive upon the left side of the street or upon any railroad track.
(C)
Compliance
. Upon those streets which have been signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall park or standa vehicle other than at the angle to, and with the hood or front end of such vehicle next to, the curb or edge of the roadwayindicated by such signs or markings.
(D)
Marked stalls
. Whenever parking spaces are marked by lines on the pavement, whether for parallel or angle parking,a vehicle must be parked entirely within the lines of the parking space.
(‘84 Code, § 20-194)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Cross reference–
Angle and parallel parking schedules,
Ch. 74, Sch. II
and
III
.
Sec. 72.08. Parking or standing in alleys restricted.
(A)
Obstruction of alley
. No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as toblock the free passage of other vehicles in such alley.
(B)
Parking within fire limits
. Notwithstanding the provision of division (A), it shall be unlawful for any person to park avehicle in the alley within the fire limits of the city, except when such vehicle is actually being used for the purpose ofloading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
(‘84 Code, § 20-196)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 72.09. Parking in excess of 48 hours prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any vehicle to allow, cause or permit such vehicle to remain standing orparked on any street, alley, avenue or public way within the city for more than 48 hours continuously. (‘84 Code, § 20-197)(Ord. 4-83, passed 1-10-83)
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 92/350
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 72.10. Starting a parked vehicle.
No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked unless and until such movement can be made withsafety. (Tex. Transp. Code § 545.402) (‘84 Code, § 20-198) (Ord. 4-83, passed 1-10-83)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Sec. 72.11. Designation of loading and unloading zones.
The Street Superintendent is hereby authorized to determine and designate the locations of passenger and freight curbloading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which theprovisions therefor are applicable. (‘84 Code, § 20-199)
Sec. 72.12. City Council authorized to establish bus stops.
The City Council is hereby empowered and authorized to establish bus stops on such public streets in such number and atsuch places as it shall determine necessary for the greatest benefit and convenience to the public, and such stops shall bedesignated by appropriate signs. (‘84 Code, § 20-200) (Ord. 62, passed 2-20-40)
Sec. 72.13. Prohibited parking of enumerated vehicles.
(A)
Definitions
. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates orrequires a different meaning.
Commercial motor vehicle
. A motor vehicle designed or used for the transportation of property, or for delivery purposes, notincluding a passenger bus, passenger automobile, motorcycle, panel delivery truck or pickup truck or vehicle used in thedelivery of the United States mail.
Mobile home/HUD code manufactured housing
. Structures/vehicles as defined by state law, Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., § 5221f, asamended.
Pole trailer
. A vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle bymeans of a reach or pole, or by being boomed, or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used fortransporting long or irregularly shaped loads such as poles, pipes, or structural members capable, generally, of sustainingthemselves as beams between the supporting connections.
Recreational vehicle/travel trailer/camper
. A vehicular portable structure designed for a temporary or short term occupancyfor travel, recreation or vacation. The term does not apply to mobile homes or HUD Code Manufactured Housing which aredesigned for year round occupancy.
Semi-trailer
. A vehicle designed or used with a motor vehicle so that part of the weight of the vehicle and its load rests on,or is carried by, another vehicle.
Trailer
. A vehicle that is designed or used to carry a load wholly on its own structure and is drawn and designed to be drawnby a motor vehicle.
Truck-tractors
. A motor vehicle designed or used primarily for drawing another vehicle and not constructed to carry a loadother than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load to be drawn.
Vehicle
. Any of the enumerated types of vehicles, trailers or trucks stated herein.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, park or stand any of the following vehicles upon any public street, publicright-of-way, highway or alley within the corporate limits of the city, except as otherwise provided herein:
(1) Boat;
(2) Boat-trailer;
(3) Mobile home;
(4) Camper;
(5) Travel trailer;
(6) Recreational vehicle;
(7) Truck-tractor;
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 93/350
(8) Semi-trailer;
(9) Pole trailer; or
(10) Commercial motor vehicle or trailer exceeding five tons or containing two or more axles.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, park or stand any vehicles in a public or private parking lot or vacant lotovernight unless the same is an allowed use in the zoning ordinance.
(D) Parking shall only be upon an improved surface. For purposes of this section, an improved surface shall be concrete,asphaltic concrete or similar impervious surfaces and/or as otherwise designated in the city's construction standards andzoning ordinance, as adopted or amended. It shall be a violation to park on an unimproved surface such as grass or dirt inany zoning district.
(E) It shall be unlawful to use designated parking and loading areas for the repair, storage, display for sale, dismantlingor service (except for normal maintenance of a private vehicle) of vehicles or equipment, or for the storage of materials orsupplies, or for any other use in conflict with the designated parking and loading areas.
(F) If any vehicle listed above is found to be in violation of any provision of this section, or of a state statute regulating thestopping, standing or parking of a vehicle, and the identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner or person inwhose name such vehicle is registered is presumed to be the person who parked said vehicle at the time and place theoffense occurred. This presumption is rebuttable and shall have the effects and consequences set forth in Tex. Penal Code§ 2.05. The Texas Department of Transportation's computer-generated record of the registered vehicle owner is prima facieevidence of the contents of the record.
(G) These provisions shall not apply to temporary parking or standing of said vehicles for the purpose of loading orunloading passengers or contents, for the connection or disconnection of such vehicles or trailers, or for the performance ofthe function for which the vehicle was intended; provided however, that the permitted activities herein stated shall occurduring the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. and shall be of only the necessary duration to accomplish the permitted activity.
(H) Any person desiring to park any of the said vehicles in a residentially zoned district shall first obtain from the CityPolice Department a permit for such parking. Any person desiring a permit under this section shall make application forsuch permit to the Police Department, setting forth the location, time and date of said parking, the name and address of theperson requesting the parking permit, and the vehicle identification number. The parking permit shall be issued uponpayment of a fee of $25.00.
(I) Four parking permits may be issued per year per household covered by the permit application. No other parkingpermits shall be issued for that location during that year, which year consists of 365 days. Each parking permit shall be validfor three consecutive days, being Friday, after 6:00 p.m. until 7:00 a.m. on the succeeding Monday. No more than fourpermits shall be issued for any one premise during said year.
(J) For purposes of this section, only one permit shall be necessary for a combination of not more than two vehicles,including but not limited to a truck and semitrailer, truck and trailer, coupled together by a towing device; provided however,that a boat or other such vehicle is permitted to be coupled to the trailer to the extent the combination is not longer than thetrailer itself, and the vehicle to be towed is securely attached to the trailer.
(K) Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this section shall be fined an amount not to exceed the sumof $500.00, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs orcontinues.
(‘84 Code, § 20-153) (Ord. 4-2-96, passed 4-23-96; Am. Ord. O-12-02, passed 12-10-02)
CHAPTER 73: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
*
4
Schedule I. Four-way stops.
All traffic entering the following intersections shall come to a complete stop before proceeding:
Four-Way Stop Intersection
Ord. No.
Date Passed
West College Street and North Fourth Street
232
8-25-64
West College Street and North Sixth Street
232
8-25-64
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 94/350
North Second Street and West Archer Street
O-09-03
8-12-03
North Third Street and West College Street
O-09-03
8-12-03
North Third Street and West Thompson Street
O-09-03
8-12-03
North Fourth Street and West Thompson Street
O-09-03
8-12-03
North Fifth Street and West Thompson Street
O-09-03
8-12-03
North Sixth Street and West Thompson Street
O-09-03
8-12-03
North Ninth Street and West College Street
O-16-03
10-14-03
North Eighth Street and West College Street
O-16-03
10-14-03
South Seventh Street and West Pine Street
O-16-03
10-14-03
South Fifth Street and West Pine Street
O-16-03
10-14-03
Union Street and North Fifth Street travelingNorth and South
O-08-05
8-9-05
(‘84 Code, § 20-123)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Schedule II. One-way streets.
The following street, or portions of streets, are hereby designated as one-way streets and all traffic on such streets shall,during the times given, move only in the direction given or the direction posted on such streets:
One-Way Streets
Times
Direction
Ord. No.
DatePassed
Alley between Archer andBelknap Streets
All hours
From north to south
5-1-86
- -86
North West Street from WestBelknap Street to West ArcherStreet
All hours
From south to north
O-12-15
7-14-15
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 95/350
South Street between SouthMain and South Church Streets
All hours
From west to east
241
1-10-67
(‘84 Code, §§ 20-137, 20-138, 20-139; Am. Ord. O-14-08, passed 5-13-08; Am. Ord. O-04-12, passed 6-12-12; Am. Ord.O-12-15, passed 7-14-15)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Schedule III. Speed limits.
(A)
Generally
. Where no special hazard exists that requires lower speed for compliance with
§ 71.45
, the speed of anyvehicle not in excess of the limits specified in this section or established as hereinafter authorized shall be lawful, but anyspeed in excess of the limits specified in this section or established as hereinafter authorized shall be prima facie evidencethat the speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful:
(B)
Speed zones established
. Upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation heretofore made as authorizedby the provisions of Tex. Transp. Code § 545.356, the following prima facie speed limits hereafter indicated for vehicles arehereby determined and declared to be reasonable and safe, and such speed limits are hereby fixed at the rate of speedindicated for vehicles traveling upon the named streets and highways, or parts thereof, as follows:
Street
Speed Limit(mph)
Ord. No.
DatePassed
All streets in city parks
15
–
–
Alley between Archer and Belknap Streets
10
5-1-86
- -86
College Street from Sixth Street to Fourth Street(during school days and hours)
15
–
–
Fourth Street from College Street to BelknapStreet (during school days and hours)
15
–
–
MP 0.000, south 1.668 miles to MP 1.668
55
9-10-98
9-8-98
MP 19.107 to MP 20.150; 1.043 miles
65
O-03-14
5-13-14
MP 20.134 to MP 21.134; 0.984 miles
55
O-03-14
5-13-14
MP 21.134 to MP 21.418; 0.280 miles
40
O-03-14
5-13-14
MP 21.418 to MP 22.024; 0.606 miles
30
O-03-14
5-13-14
MP 22.785 to MP 24.065; 1.280 miles
55
O-33-08
11-10-08
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 96/350
MP 22.785 to MP 24.359; 1.574 miles
45
O-02-14
4-22-14
MP 24.065 to MP 24.359; 0.294 miles
45
O-33-08
11-10-08
MP 24.359 to MP 24.858; 0.499 miles
35
O-02-14
4-22-14
MP 24.359 to MP 24.902; 0.543 miles
35
O-33-08
11-10-08
MP 30.000 to MP 20.325; 0.325 miles
35
O-33-08
11-10-08
MP 30.325 to MP 30.900; 0.575 miles
45
O-33-08
11-10-08
MP 30.900 to MP 31.936; 1.036 miles
55
O-33-08
11-10-08
School zone: MP 23.288 to MP 23.865; 0.577miles (30 mph when flashing, 45 mph at all othertimes)
30/45
O-33-08
O-02-14
11-10-08
4-22-14
State Highway 59 (a certain posted portion)southwesterly to approximately 516 feet north ofOakwood Avenue
55
–
–
State Highway 59 from approximately 516 feetnorth of Oakwood Avenue southerly to theintersection of East Thompson Street
40
–
–
State Highway 59 from the intersection of EastThompson Street southerly and westerly to theintersection of U.S. Highways 281, 380 and StateHighways 114, 199
30
–
–
State Highway 59 Mile Point 20.888, south 0.246miles to Mile Point 21.134
55
O-06-05
7-26-05
State Highway 59 Mile Point 21.134, south 0.284miles to Mile Point 21.418
40
O-06-05
7-26-05
State Highway 59 Mile Point 21.148, south 0.606miles to Mile Point 22.024
30
O-06-05
7-26-05
State Highway 148 (a certain posted portion)south to the intersection of U.S. Highway 281 and
45
–
–
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 97/350
State Highway 114
State Highway 148 Mile Point 16.461 south 1.547miles to Mile Point 18.008
60
O-18-04
11-9-04
U.S. Highway 281 and State Highway 114 (acertain posted portion) to approximately 276 feetsoutheast of North 3rd Street
55
–
–
U.S. Highway 281 and State Highway 114 fromapproximately 276 feet southeast of North 3rdStreet southerly to approximately 260 feetsoutheast of McConnell Street
45
–
–
U.S. Highway 281 and State Highway 114 fromapproximately 260 feet southeast of McConnellStreet southerly to approximately 316 feet northof Sewell Street
30
–
–
U.S. Highways 281, 380 and State Highways 114,199 from approximately 316 feet north of SewellStreet southeasterly to approximately 248 feetnorth of Park Road 61
45
–
–
U.S. Highways 281, 380 and State Highways 114,199 from approximately 248 feet north of ParkRoad 61 southeasterly to a certain posted portion
55
–
–
U.S. Highway 380 (a certain posted portion)northeasterly to approximately 180 feet west ofSeventh Street
45
–
–
U.S. Highway 380 (Belknap) approximately 180feet west of Seventh Street easterly toapproximately 70 feet east of Stewart Street
35
–
–
U.S. Highway 380 (West Belknap) approximately70 feet east of Stewart Street to the intersection ofU.S. Highway 281 and State Highway 199
30
–
–
From Station 73+44, east 0.482 miles, to Station48+00
45
9-16-96
9-24-96
From Station 48+00, east 0.663 miles, to Station13+00
35
9-16-96
9-24-96
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 98/350
From Station 13+00, east 0.246 miles, to Station0+00
30
9-16-96
9-24-96
From Station 42+00, east 0.303 miles, to Station26+00 (25 mph for school zone when lights onschool zone sign are flashing; 35 mph at all othertimes)
35/25
9-16-96
9-24-96
(‘84 Code, § 20-172; Am. Ord. O-33-08, passed 11-10-08; Am. Ord. O-02-14, passed 4-22-14; Am. Ord. O-03-14, passed5-13-14)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Schedule IV. Truck routes.
(A)
Definition
. The term “truck” when used in this schedule shall mean any motor vehicle having a weight in excess of15,000 pounds. The 15,000 pound limit shall include the vehicle plus any additional weight or load it may be carrying orpulling.
(B)
Designation of truck routes
. The truck routes in the city consist of the following streets:
Truck Route
Ord. No.
DatePassed
East and West Belknap Streets **
266
10-1-71
Hull Street from South Main Street, west to South Phillips Street
O-07-14
6-24-14
North and South Main Streets *
266
10-1-71
North Bowie Street **
266
10-1-71
Oakwood Avenue
266
10-1-71
* Also designated as State Highway 199, State Highway 114, U.S. Highway 281 and partially State Highway 380 and StateHighway 148.
** Also designated as parts of State Highway 59 and State Highway 380.
(‘84 Code, §§ 20-151, 20-152; Am. Ord. 266, passed 10-1-71; Am. Ord. O-07-14, passed 6-24-14)
Schedule V. U-turns prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of any vehicle to make a complete U-turn at any of the following intersectionsor any point between any of the intersections:
Street Intersection
Ord. No.
DatePassed
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 99/350
Archer Street and Church Street
62
2-20-40
Archer Street and West Street
62
2-20-40
Belknap Street and Church Street
62
2-20-40
Belknap Street and Main Street
62
2-20-40
Belknap Street and West Street
62
2-20-40
Belknap Street and Wichita Street
62
2-20-40
Main Street and North Street
62
2-20-40
Main Street and South Street
62
2-20-40
South Main Street and Second Street
62
2-20-40
(‘84 Code, § 20-34)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Schedule VI. School zones.
The following areas of the city are hereby fixed as school zones. Traffic in the following zones shall be subject to provisionsof § 71.49.
Street Intersection
Ord. No.
DatePassed
West Union Street from North 5th Street to North 7th Street
O-05-12
6-12-12
West College Street from North 4th Street to North 7th Street
O-05-12
6-12-12
West Live Oak Street from North 4th Street to North 7th Street
O-05-12
6-12-12
North 4th Street from West Belknap Street to West CollegeStreet
O-05-12
6-12-12
North 4th Street from West Live Oak Street to North Main Street
O-05-12
6-12-12
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 100/350
North 5th Street from West Live Oak Street to North Main Street
O-05-12
6-12-12
South 5th Street from West Pine Street to West Belknap Street
O-05-12
6-12-12
North 6th Street from West Union Street to North Main Street
O-05-12
6-12-12
North 7th Street from West Live Oak Street to West Union Street
O-05-12
6-12-12
North 7th Street from West Belknap Street to West CollegeStreet
O-05-12
6-12-12
(Ord. O-10-03, passed 8-12-03; Am. Ord. O-06-08, passed 3-11-08; Am. Ord. O-05-12, passed 6-12-12)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Schedule VII. Stop intersections.
(A) Collective authority for stop sign placements is given to the Streets Superintendent, Chief of Police and City Manager,consistent with and by authority of Chapter 70, § 70.49 and in accordance with Section 26, Regulatory Signs, of theMUTCD of the State of Texas.
(B) Authorization is given to direct and cause the Street Division, Municipal Services Department to erect and locate thestop signs upon the collective decision of the Streets Superintendent, Fire Chief [Chief of Police] and City Manager.
(Ord. O-03-16, passed 3-28-16)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
CHAPTER 74: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule I. No parking.
No parking is permitted on the following streets:
Street
Side of Street
Ord. No.
DatePassed
East Jasper Street from the intersection ofNorth Church and North Jack Streets
South
O-04-13
5-14-13
North Third between West Thompson andLiveoak Streets
East
346
10-26-82
North Third between West College and WestThompson during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to4:00 p.m. on school days
East
O-13-04
8-10-04
North Fourth Street for a distance of 10 feetfrom the east curb line of North Fourth Street,and being approximately one car breadth inwidth
East
340
–
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 101/350
North Sixth between the southwest corner ofHigh School Stadium to West College Street
East
233
9-22-64
North Sixth between the southwest corner ofHigh School Stadium to a point 166 feet south
East
9-17-96
9-24-96
North Sixth Street starting 160 feet north of itsintersection with West Belknap and continuingnorth to the existing no parking zone
East
4-4-00
4-25-00
North Sixth Street between West Belknap andWest Archer during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to4:00 p.m. on school days
West
9-17-00
9-26-00
North Main between North Main and StateHighway 199
–
184
9-4-56
North Main between the southwest corner tothe northwest corner of the Methodist Churchparking lot
East
226
2-11-64
Main Street between 250 feet north of SewellStreet to 150 feet south of Sewell Street
West
189
3-4-58
Main Street between Thompson and LiveoakStreets
West
189
3-4-58
South Street between Church and South MainStreets
North
181
7-24-56
South Third Street between West Belknap andRichardson Street
West
O-07-15
4-14-15
Thompson Street between North Main andKnox Streets
–
147
8-23-54
West Archer from its intersection with NorthSixth Street west a distance of 200 feet
South
9-17-00
9-26-00
West Street between Archer and BelknapStreets
East
81
6-24-47
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 102/350
West Belknap between TxDOT HighwayStation No. 21+65 and Highway Station No.57+100
–
7-3-99
7-13-99
(‘84 Code, § 20-195; Ord. 7-3-99, passed 7-13-99; Am. Ord. 4-4-00, passed 4-25-00; Am. Ord. 9-17-00, passed 9-26-00;Am. Ord. O-13-04, passed 8-10-04; Am. Ord. O-14-08, passed 5-13-08; Am. Ord. O-04-13, passed 5-14-13; Am. Ord. O-07-15, passed 4-14-15)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
.
Schedule II. Angle parking.
Angle parking is permitted on the following streets:
Street
Ord. No.
DatePassed
Around Block 21, Original Townsite
209
5-9-61
Archer Street between Church and Main Streets
81
6-24-47
Archer Street between Main and Knox Streets
–
–
Church Street between Archer and East Belknap Streets
–
–
(‘84 Code, § 20-194)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
; angle parking regulations,
§ 72.07
.
Schedule III. Parallel parking.
The following areas of the city are hereby fixed as parking zones and parallel parking is required:
Street
Side of Street
Ord. No.
DatePassed
East Belknap between Church and East Streets
–
189
3-4-58
East Belknap between Main and ChurchStreets
South
210
5-19-61
Belknap between Main and West Streets
North
211
6-13-62
Main Street between Archer and North Streets
West
189
3-4-58
Main Street between Belknap and Archer
East
210
5-19-61
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 103/350
Streets
Main Street between Belknap and East PineStreets
East
189
3-4-58
Main Street between Belknap and West PineStreets
West
–
–
Main Street and the Court House Square
–
210
5-19-61
Main Street and Gwaltney
South
210
5-19-61
(‘84 Code, § 20-194)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 70.99
; parallel parking regulations,
§ 72.07
.
Schedule IV. Handicapped parking.
Handicapped parking is designated on the following streets:
Street
Side of Street
Ord. No.
DatePassed
East Jasper Street beginning 30 feet from theintersections of North Church Street and EastJasper and ending 60 feet from the intersectionof East Jasper Street and North Jack Street
North
O-04-13
5-14-13
(Ord. No. O-04-13, passed 5-14-13)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
*
1
Sec. 90.01. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires adifferent meaning.
Animal
. Any living vertebrate creature or invertebrate creature including but not limited to mammals, reptiles, fish and fowl,but specifically excluding human beings.
Animal control officer
. Any person designated by the supervisor of animal control to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
Animal control
. The animal control section of the city.
Cattery
. Any authorized commercial establishment where three or more cats over four months of age or eleven or more catsover four months of age are kept for boarding or breeding purposes, except veterinary facilities.
Commercial stable
. Any facility where a fee is charged to house, pasture or rent horses or other livestock.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 104/350
Dangerous wild animal
. A lion, tiger, ocelot, cougar, leopard, cheetah, jaguar, bobcat, lynx, serval, caracal, hyena, bear,coyote, jackal, baboon, chimpanzee, orangutan, gorilla or any hybrid of any animal listed in this definition.
Exotic fowl
. Any avian species that is not indigenous to this state excluding ostriches, emus, and rheas.
Exotic livestock
. Grass-eating or plant-eating, single hooved or clovenhooved mammals that are not indigenous to this stateand are known as ungulates, including animals from the swine, horse, tapir, rhinoceros, elephant, deer and antelope family.
Kennel
. Any authorized commercial establishment where three or more dogs over the age of four months are kept forbreeding or boarding purposes, except veterinary facilities.
Large livestock
. Any member of the domesticated equine family, including horses, ponies, mules, donkeys and burros, andall members of the domesticated bovine family, including but not limited to cows. Large livestock shall also includeostriches, emus and rheas.
Local rabies control authority
. The animal control officer designated by the city council in accordance with section826.017 of the Texas Health and Safety Code.
Owner
. Any person or group of persons living in the same household, firm or corporation having title to or custody of anyanimal, or any person who has, harbors, keeps, or causes or permits to be harbored or kept an animal in his or her care orcustody, or any person who feeds an animal for seven days, or who allows an animal to remain on or about his or herpremises for ten days.
Pen
. Any small place of confinement or enclosure used to contain an animal(s) or livestock.
Restraint
. An animal shall be deemed restrained when it is:
(1) Confined on the premises of the owner within a building, walled or fenced enclosure;
(2) Fastened or picketed by a lead or chain, not more than 20 feet in length, so as to keep the animal on theowner's premises;
(3) Under the control of a person by a leash;
(4) On or within a vehicle being driven or parked; or
(5) At heel beside a competent person and obedient to that persons command. Minors shall not beconsidered competent persons.
Running at-large
. Not completely confined by a building, wall, or fence of sufficient strength or construction to restrain theanimal, except when such animal is on a secured leash or chain not more than 20 feet in length or held in the hands of theowner or keeper, or under the direct supervision of the owner or keeper within the limits of the owner's private property.
Small livestock
. All types of domesticated swine, sheep and goats.
Supervisor of animal control
. The person designated by the city manager to supervise all aspects of animal control.
Vicious animal
. Any individual animal of any species that has on two previous occasions, without provocation, attacked orbitten any person or other animal, or any individual animal which the supervisor of animal control has reason to believe hasa dangerous disposition, or any species of animal which the supervisor of animal control has reason to believe has adangerous disposition likely to be harmful to humans or other animals.
Wild animal
. Any poisonous or dangerous reptile, or any other animal which can normally be found in the wild state, notnormally capable of being domesticated, including but not limited to skunks, foxes, raccoons, leopards, panthers, cougars,tigers, lions, lynx, ferrets, and opossums, unless certified for medical, biological, herpetological, or other scientific researchor study.
(‘84 Code, § 3-1) (Ord. 358, passed 2-28-84; Am. Ord. 4-8-97, passed 4-8-97; Am. Ord. 12-10-01, passed 12-11-01; Ord. O-10-18, passed 7-9-18)
Sec. 90.02. Enforcement of chapter; authority to issue citation.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 105/350
(A) Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the Supervisor of Animal Control or any Animal ControlOfficer.
(B) Any Animal Control Officer shall have the authority to issue citations for any violation of this chapter.
(‘84 Code, § 3-2(a), (b)) (Ord. passed 4-17-11; Am. Ord. passed 5-29-18; Am. Ord. 358, passed 2-28-84)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 90.03. Interference with animal control officers.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with any Animal Control Officer in the performance of his or her duties.
(B) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the interference alleged consisted of constitutionally protectedspeech only.
(‘84 Code, § 3-2(c)) (Ord. passed 4-17-11; Am. Ord. passed 5-29-18; Am. Ord. 358, passed 2-28-84)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 90.04. Running at large prohibited; authority to impound.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any dog or other animal possessed, kept or harbored to run at large.
(B) The Supervisor of Animal Control and Animal Control Officers acting under his or her direction are authorized toimpound such animals running at large, other than a cat, and may impound a cat under conditions specified in § 90.08.
(‘84 Code, § 3-3(a), (e)) (Ord. 13, passed 8-6-02; Am. Ord. passed 4-17-11; Am. Ord. passed 5-29-18; Am. Ord. 332,passed 6-24-80; Am. Ord. 358, passed 2-28-84)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Cross reference–
Fine for dogs running at large,
Fee Appendix
to this Code.
State Law reference–
Authority to regulate animals running at large, Tex. Local Gov't Code § 215.026.
Sec. 90.05. Number of animals permitted.
No owner shall possess, harbor or keep more than a total of four dogs and cats over the age of four months or ten puppiesor kittens over the age of four months except for a kennel, cattery or veterinary facility. (‘84 Code, § 3-3(b)) (Ord. 13,passed 8-6-02; Am. Ord. passed 4-17-11; Am. Ord. passed 5-29-18; Am. Ord. 332, passed 6-24-80; Am. Ord. 358, passed2-28-84)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 90.06. Special restraint required for certain animals.
(A)
Fierce, dangerous, or vicious dogs
. The owner shall confine within a building or secure enclosure every fierce,dangerous or vicious dog, and not take such dog out of such enclosure unless such dog is securely muzzled.
(B)
Female dog or cat in season
. Every female dog or cat in season shall be confined in a building or a secure enclosureor a veterinary hospital or boarding facility in such a manner that another dog or cat cannot come in contact with it exceptfor controlled breeding purposes.
(‘84 Code, § 3-3(c), (d)) (Ord. 13, passed 8-6-02; Am. Ord. passed 4-17-11; Am. Ord. passed 5-29-18; Am. Ord. 332,passed 6-24-80; Am. Ord. 358, passed 2-28-84)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 90.07. Animal registration and vaccination required.
(A)
Vaccination of dogs and cats required; metal and paper certificates
. All dogs and cats over the age of four monthsmust be vaccinated annually for rabies with an anti-rabies vaccine approved by the Texas Department of Health andadministered by a veterinarian licensed by the state. A metal certificate of vaccination with the year of vaccination, acertificate number and the name, address, and phone number of the vaccinating veterinarian or veterinary clinic must besecurely attached to a collar or harness that must be worn by the dog or cat at all times. In addition to the metal certificate,a paper certificate must be issued stating the name of owner, address of the owner, telephone number of the owner, adescription of the animal, the date of vaccination, number of the metal certificate, kind of vaccine used, and signed by theadministering veterinarian.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 106/350
(B)
Registration procedures and requirements
.
(1) No owner shall have within the city any dog or cat over four months of age unless such dog or cat iscurrently registered with Animal Control. A current metal registration certificate, issued by Animal Control, mustbe affixed to the collar or harness and must be worn by the dog or cat at all times. No dog or cat shall beregistered until it has a current rabies vaccination.
(2) Application for initial issuance or renewal of each registration must be made by the owner, in writing or inperson, and must be accompanied by the paper vaccination certificate, and a fee as set forth in the
FeeAppendix
to this Code, unless animal has been surgically sterilized, and proof of such sterilization is provided.The license fee for such surgically sterilized animals shall be as set forth in the
Fee Appendix
to this Code. If theoriginal current registration certificate is lost or destroyed, the owner may obtain a duplicate from Animal Control,for a fee as set forth in the
Fee Appendix
to this Code. The registration fee shall be waived for any dog or catwho has its rabies vaccination in conjunction with the firefighter's annual vaccination clinic.
(3) Registration certificates shall be issued annually and shall run concurrently with vaccination certificates.Registration certificates must be obtained within 30 days of vaccination. A registration or vaccination certificateshall be valid only for the animal to which it was originally issued.
(4) If there is a change of ownership in a dog or cat currently registered with Animal Control, transfer ofregistration shall be may upon request of the owner, and there shall be no charge for such transfer.
(5) Fee-exempt registrations may be issued for the following:
(a) Police Department or Sheriff's Department dogs (not privately owned); and
(b) Dogs trained to assist those with impaired hearing or vision.
(6) Eligibility for fee-exempt registration does not relieve the owner of his or her responsibility under theprovisions of this chapter.
(C)
Denial of registration
.
(1) The Supervisor of Animal Control may refuse to register a dog or cat or may revoke a registration issuedto any person who has been convicted in a court of law in the state of any of the following:
(a) Cruelty to animals as defined in the Tex. Penal Code § 42.09, inhumane treatment, or negligence toan animal; and
(b) Four or more separate and distinct violations of an animal control ordinance of a municipality in thestate within a 12-month period.
(2) Any person denied such a registration may appeal the refusal to a committee made up of the Chief ofPolice or his or her designated representative, the City Manager or his or her designated representative, and theCity Attorney or his or her designated representative. This committee shall uphold or overturn the Supervisor ofAnimal Control's refusal of registration.
(D)
Guard dogs, special provision
. Every person having care or custody of a dog which has received guard training mustregister such dog with the Supervisor of Animal Control. It shall be unlawful for any person having ownership, occupancy orcontrol of any property in the city to permit or hire a guard dog to guard such property without such dog having first beenregistered with the Supervisor of Animal Control pursuant to this division. Any dog which has received guard dog trainingmay be destroyed, if necessary, when such dog is running at large. The owner, keeper, or person in charge of a guard dogshall be subject to the other provisions of this chapter. Registration tags identifying the animal as a guard dog must be wornby such animal at all times, and the animal must be securely muzzled and leashed when not in covered confinement, orfenced, while in actual performance of its duties.
(‘84 Code, § 3-4) (Ord. 217, passed 3-13-62; Am. Ord. 358, passed 2-28-84)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Cross reference–
Fine for lack of rabies vaccination,
Fee Appendix
to this Code.
State Law reference–
Rabies Control Act, Tex. Health and Safety Code §§ 826.001 et seq.
Sec. 90.08. Impoundment.
(A)
Animals subject to impoundment
. The following animals are subject to impoundment:
(1) Cats or dogs not exhibiting evidence of being vaccinated or registered, as described in
§ 90.07
.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 107/350
(2) Any animal running at large, other than a cat; provided, however, a cat may be impounded under theconditions specified in division (B) of this section.
(3) Any animal treated in a manner determined by an Animal Control Officer as cruel or inhumane.
(4) Any animal that has bitten, scratched or viciously attacked a person, or needs to be placed underobservation for rabies, as determined by an Animal Control Officer.
(5) Any animal in violation of any provision of this chapter.
(B)
Right of property owner to confine; notification of Animal Control
. If any animal named in this chapter is found on thepremises of any person, the owner or occupant of the premises shall have the right to confine such animal in a humanemanner until he or she can notify Animal Control to impound the animal. When so notified, it shall be the duty of an AnimalControl Officer to have such animal impounded as herein provided.
(C)
Notification of animal owner by Animal Control
. Reasonable effort shall be made by Animal Control to contact theowner of any animal impounded which is wearing current registration or vaccination certificates; however, final responsibilityfor location of an impounded animal is that of the animal owner.
(D)
Reclaiming of impounded animals generally
. The owner may resume possession of any animal impounded uponpayment of impoundment fees, handling fees, and any veterinary expenses incurred by Animal Control for the welfare ofthe animal, and upon compliance with vaccination and registration provisions of this chapter, except where prohibited indivisions (E) and (F) of this section.
(E)
Reclaiming animals impounded on the grounds of suspicion of cruel or inhumane treatment
. Disposition of animalsimpounded on the grounds of suspicion of cruel or inhumane treatment shall be by the court of jurisdiction.
(F)
Reclaiming animals under rabies quarantine
. If any animal is being held under quarantine or observation for rabies,the owner shall not be entitled to possession until it has been released from such quarantine.
(G)
Designation of place of impoundment
. The City Manager shall select and establish a place for impounding allanimals impounded under any provision of this chapter.
(H)
Disposition of unreclaimed animals generally
. Any animal except vicious, wild, or unvaccinated bite-case animals, notreclaimed by the owners, may be humanely destroyed by Animal Control after being held 72 hours, except that any animalwearing current registration or vaccination metal certificates shall be held seven days prior to disposition.
(I)
Disposition of impounded vicious or wild animals
. Any vicious animal impounded, unless there is reason to believesuch animal has an owner, may be immediately disposed of as deemed appropriate by the Supervisor of Animal Control.Any impounded wild animal, unless such animal is an endangered species, may be immediately disposed of as deemedappropriate by the Supervisor of Animal Control. Wild animals that are considered endangered species will be immediatelyreported to and turned over to the Texas Department of Parks and Wildlife for disposition.
(J)
Disposition of nursing baby animals
. Any nursing baby animal impounded without the mother, or where the mothercannot or will not provide nutritious milk, may be immediately euthanized by Animal Control to prevent further suffering ofsuch baby animals.
(K)
Adoption of impounded dogs and cats authorized
. Any impounded dog or cat not wearing current registration orvaccination certificates may be given up for adoption after 72 hours, except those under quarantine. Any impounded dog orcat wearing current registration or vaccination certificate may be given up for adoption after being held seven days. If therightful owner of the animal appears within seven days of adoption, he or she may redeem the animal by paying theadoptee all documented expenses incurred, and reasonable board equal to the established daily impoundment rate for theanimal.
(L)
Disposition of animal upon direction of owner
. An owner who no longer wants responsibility for an animal, or whobelieves an animal to be ill or injured, may sign a written waiver, supplied by Animal Control, allowing animal to beeuthanized in a humane manner; provided, that such warm-blooded animal has not bitten any human. Such animal that hasbitten shall be held for ten days quarantine except where laboratory examination is provided for.
(M)
Disposition of injured or ill animals
. Any impounded animal that appears to be suffering from extreme injury or illnessmay be euthanized or given to a nonprofit humane organization for the purpose of veterinary medical care, as determinedby the Supervisor of Animal Control.
(‘84 Code, § 3-5) (Ord. 13, passed 8-6-02; Am. Ord. passed 2-2-11; Am. Ord. passed 4-17-17; Am. Ord. passed 5-29-18;Am. Ord. 358, passed 2-28-84; Am. Ord. 10-14-98, passed 10-27-98)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 90.09. Impoundment fees; adoption procedure for dogs and cats.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 108/350
(A)
Impoundment fees generally
. Impoundment fees for each impoundment within a 12-month period shall beestablished from time to time by the City Council and shall be on file with the City Clerk.
(1) Fees shall be determined for the following classes:
Class
Description
Class A-1:
Surgically sterilized dogs and cats
Class A-2:
Dogs and cats
Class B:
Small livestock
Class C:
Large livestock
Class D-1:
Wild animal unconfined
Class D-2:
Wild animal confined
(2) If proof of surgical sterilization is provided within 15 days from the date an animal is released, thedifference in impoundment fees between altered and unaltered animals shall be refunded. Dogs and cats underthe age of six months shall be charged the same impoundment fee as sterilized animals. Animals may beexempted from sterilization upon written recommendation from a veterinarian licensed to practice in the statethat such sterilization would be harmful or dangerous to the animal, and owners of such animals will be subjectto the lower impoundment fee.
(3) Animals not listed hereinabove shall be disposed of at the discretion of Animal Control. Any animalimpounded more than four times in a 12-month period will not be released to the owner without the writtenapproval of the Supervisor of Animal Control. Impoundment for such animal will be double the highest fee.
(B)
Daily handling fee
. A daily handling fee shall be charged for every day or fraction of a day that an animal is held atthe animal control facility. The fee shall be based on the class of animal identified in division (A) of this section, and shall beestablished from time to time by the City Council and shall be on file with the City Clerk.
(C)
Quarantine fee
. The owner of any animal held in quarantine for observation purposes shall be charged a feeestablished by the City Council and on file with the City Clerk for every day or fraction of a day the animal is held at thefacility. This fee is in addition to any impoundment fee.
(D)
Adoption procedures
.
(1) An individual may adopt an animal (dogs and cats only) from the city animal shelter under the followingconditions:
(a) The animal has been classified as adoptable by the Supervisor of Animal Control;
(b) The prospective adopter has proper facilities to care for the animal;
(c) The prospective adopter obtains all necessary vaccinations and registrations; and
(d) The adopter shall pay an adoption fee as set forth in the
Fee Appendix
to this Code.
(2) The purchaser of any dog or cat must have it vaccinated and obtain a city license within 30 days afterpurchase.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 109/350
(3) The Supervisor of Animal Control may refuse to allow a person to adopt an animal whom he or she hasreason to believe:
(a) Would not be able to obtain a registration certificate under the restrictions of this chapter;
(b) Would not have proper facilities to contain or care for the animal as required by this chapter; or
(c) Wants the animal for resale or purpose other than pet ownership.
(‘84 Code, § 3-6) (Ord. 13, passed 8-6-02; Am. Ord. passed 4-17-11; Am. Ord. passed 5-29-18; Am. Ord. passed 10-22-18;Am. Ord. 358, passed 2-28-84)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 90.10. Animal quarantine.
(A)
Authority to quarantine
. The Supervisor of Animal Control shall have the authority to order quarantine of animalsresponsible for biting incidents, or suspected of having any zoonotic disease considered to be a hazard to the human oranimal population.
(B)
Animals subject to quarantine; conduct of quarantine
.
(1) Every animal that bites a human or attacks another animal in an unnatural manner, or has rabies or anyother zoonotic disease, or is under suspicion of having rabies or any other zoonotic disease shall beimmediately confined by the owner, who shall promptly notify Animal Control or an Animal Control Officer of theplace where such animal is confined and the reason therefor. The owner shall not permit such animal to come incontact with any other person or animal. The owner shall surrender possession of such animal to Animal Controlon demand for supervised quarantine. Supervised quarantine shall be at the animal shelter, or a veterinaryhospital, or by any other method of adequate confinement approved by the Supervisor of Animal Control. Thequarantine shall be not less than ten days and shall be under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian, whoshall submit to Animal Control reports on the quarantined animal's physical condition on the first, fifth, and tenthdays immediately following the date of bite incidents or any of the other above enumerated purposes forquarantine. A release from quarantine may be issued if no signs of rabies or other diseases have been observedduring the quarantine period.
(2) Any animal quarantined other than at the animal shelter shall be observed by the same veterinarianthroughout the entire quarantine period in the same manner as outlined above, and the owner and veterinarianshall immediately notify Animal Control as to the veterinarian and location of quarantine. Animals being held inquarantine resulting from bite episodes may not be held in quarantine at a veterinarian located more than fivemiles outside the corporate city limits except with written approval by the Supervisor of Animal Control. If theSupervisor orders quarantine other than in the animal shelter or a veterinary hospital, the owner shall beresponsible for confining the animal. He or she shall also be required to obtain the same veterinary supervisionof the animal and release from quarantine as would be required in a veterinary hospital or at the animal shelter.
(C)
Violation of quarantine, cause for seizure and impoundment
. The violation of quarantine by any person shall be justcause for seizure and impoundment of the quarantined animal by Animal Control. It shall be unlawful for any person tointerrupt the observation period of any animal for any reason.
(D)
Investigation of animal bite reports; killing of biting animal prohibited
. All animal bite reports shall be investigated byAnimal Control. Without the permission of the Supervisor of Animal Control, it shall be unlawful for any person to kill orremove from the city limits any animal that has bitten any person or other animal, or that has been placed under quarantine,except when it is necessary to protect the life of any person or other animal.
(E)
Authority to direct disposition of suspected rabid animals
. The Supervisor of Animal Control shall direct thedisposition of any animal suspected of being rabid or of having any zoonotic disease considered to be a hazard to anyother animal or human being.
(F)
Surrender of carcasses of dead animals suspected of having rabies
. The carcass of any dead animal exposed torabies or suspected of having been rabid shall, upon demand, be surrendered to Animal Control.
(G)
Manner of disposing of animals exposed to rabies
. Every animal exposed to rabies shall be immediately confined bythe owner, who shall promptly notify Animal Control of the place where such animal is confined and the reason therefor.The owner shall not permit such animal to come in contact with any person or animal. Any animal exposed to rabies shallbe handled in one of the following manners:
(1) Humane destruction, with notification to or under the supervision of Animal Control;
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 110/350
(2) If not currently vaccinated, quarantine under veterinary supervision for at least 12 months immediatelyfollowing exposure; or
(3) If currently vaccinated, immediate re-vaccination and quarantine under veterinary supervision for at least90 days immediately following exposure.
(H)
Refusal to surrender animal on demand for rabies control purposes
. No person shall fail to or refuse to surrender ananimal for supervised quarantine or humane destruction, as required herein for rabies control, when the demand therefor ismade by the Supervisor of Animal Control or officers acting under his or her direction.
(I)
Notification to Animal Control upon escape, sickness, or death of quarantined animals
. Any person having possessionof or responsibility for any quarantined animal shall immediately notify Animal Control if such animal escapes, or becomesor appears sick, or dies, and in the case of death of the animal while under quarantine shall immediately surrender thedead animal to Animal Control for diagnostic purposes.
(‘84 Code, § 3-7) (Ord. 217, passed 3-13-62; Am. Ord. 358, passed 2-28-84)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 90.11. Limitations on sale or giving away; changing color of certain animals.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, barter, or give away as toys, premiums or novelties, babychickens or ducklings or other fowl under three weeks old or rabbits under two months old, unless the manner or method ofdisplay is first approved by the Supervisor of Animal Control.
(B) It shall be unlawful to color, dye, stain or otherwise change the natural color of any chickens, ducklings, other fowl orrabbits, or to possess, for the purpose of sale or to be given away any of the above mentioned animals which have been socolored.
(‘84 Code, § 3-8(a), (b)) (Ord. 358, passed 2-28-84)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 90.12. Keeping wild and dangerous wild animals prohibited; permitting wild and dangerous or viciousanimals to run at large.
(A) It shall be unlawful to keep any wild animal inside the corporate city limits.
(B) It shall be unlawful to release or to allow to run at large any wild or vicious animal, or any animal that has knownvicious tendencies.
(C) It shall be unlawful to own, possess, confine or care for any dangerous wild animal.
(‘84 Code, § 3-8(c), (d)) (Ord. 358, passed 2-28-84; Am. Ord. 12-10-01, passed 12-11-01)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 90.13. Vicious animals.
(A)
Authority to destroy if found at large
. Any vicious animal found running at large may be destroyed by any peaceofficer or Animal Control Officer in the interest of public safety.
(B)
Authority to require removal from city; appeals from orders to remove
. The Supervisor of Animal Control may orderany owner or person having care, control, or custody of any vicious animal to remove such animal permanently from thecity. This animal must be removed immediately following receipt of such order, even if an appeal is initiated. This order maybe appealed in writing within ten days to a committee made up of the City Manager or his or her designated representative,the Chief of Police or his or her designated representative, and the City Attorney or his or her designated representative.Such committee may uphold, reverse, or modify the order given by the Supervisor of Animal Control, and may stipulaterestrictions on the animal as a condition to allowing the animal to remain in the city. If the committee upholds the order asgiven by the Supervisor of Animal Control, the owner or person having care, control or custody shall not bring the animalback inside the city limits.
(C)
Failure to remove; grounds for impoundment or destruction
. If the parson having care, custody, or control of a viciousanimal fails to remove such animal, as provided for herein, such animal may be impounded or destroyed.
(D)
Owner to report disposition and relocation
. The owner or person having care, custody or control of a vicious animalmust report the disposition and relocation of such animal to the Supervisor of Animal Control, in writing, within ten daysafter the expiration date for removal of such animal from the city. Each day thereafter such information is not provided shallconstitute a separate offense.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 111/350
(E)
Search and seizure warrants authorized
. The Supervisor of Animal Control shall be authorized to obtain a search andseizure warrant if there is reason to believe that an animal ordered removed from the city for being vicious has not been soremoved. Such warrant may also be obtained if the owner of such animal that has been involved in a bite incident or issuspected of having rabies or any other zoonotic disease fails to surrender such animal for quarantine purposes or forhumane destruction.
(‘84 Code, § 3-9) (Ord. 358, passed 2-28-84)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 90.14. Livestock regulations.
(A) It shall be unlawful for a person to keep, or cause to be kept, for any purpose whatever, any swine within the city. Thisshall include pot-bellied pigs.
(B) Any foal, calf, kid or lamb six months of age or older shall be considered to be an adult in determining the number oflivestock permitted in a given area. The number of adult small and/or large livestock or combination thereof permitted shallnot exceed one adult per one-third acre for the first two acres, and two adults per acre for each additional acre over twoacres, excepting stabled animals. The persons in lawful possession of the premises, as owner or tenant, may keep thereonlivestock belonging to others, but the limitations as to the number of livestock on the premises and the area and distancerequirements of this section shall apply and keeping livestock for others shall not be done as a business in violation of thezoning ordinance.
(C) In cases involving a scientific or educational program, a nonprofit organization show, exhibition, or humane activity, oranimals owned by the city, the Supervisor of Animal Control may waive certain requirements of this section. Any personkeeping an animal involved in a scientific or educational program shall furnish to the Animal Control Officer a signedstatement by the person in charge of such scientific or educational program the name of the person keeping the animal, theaddress of the person keeping the animal, the type of animal being kept, the length of time the animal will be kept and theprogram for which the animal is being kept.
(D) Any enclosure, pasture, pen, corral or other restrictive area for large or small livestock shall be of sufficient strengthand construction so as to keep such livestock confined.
(E) All gates must be of sufficient strength and construction so as to keep livestock confined.
(F) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep on the premises under his, her or its control, within thecorporate limits of the city, any small or large livestock in violation of the following restrictions:
(1) No more than two small or large livestock shall be kept on the premises unless they are enclosed within apen or corral, the nearest point of which is at least 100 feet from any human habitation, church, school orbusiness, other than that of the owner's or keeper's living quarters.
(2) Not more than three small or large livestock shall be kept on the premises unless they are enclosed withwithin a pen or corral, the nearest point of which is at least 150 feet from any human habitation, church, schoolor business other than that of the owner's or keeper's living quarters.
(3) Not more than four small or large livestock shall be kept on the premises unless they are enclosed within apen or corral, the nearest point of which is at least 200 feet from any human habitation, church, school orbusiness other than that of the owner's or keeper's living quarters.
(4) Six or more small or large livestock may be kept on the premises as long as they are enclosed within apen or corral, the nearest point of which is at least 250 feet from any human habitation, church, school orbusiness other than that of the owner's or keeper's living quarters.
(G) Large or small male livestock capable of breeding will be confined in such a manner that such animal will not bedangerous to human beings, and all breeding will be done under the control of the owner, handler, or a licensedveterinarian.
(H) Distance requirements may be waived under special circumstances with the approval of the Animal Control Officer.
(‘84 Code, § 3-10) (Ord. passed 4-17-11; Am. Ord. 108, passed 6-13-50; Am. Ord. 313, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 328, passed6-24-80; Am. Ord. 358, passed 2-28-84; Am. Ord. 4-8-97, passed 4-8-97)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 90.15. Keeping of fowl and rabbits regulated.
Fowl and rabbits shall be kept in a secure pen or enclosure that is at least 100 feet from an inhabited dwelling other thanthe residence of the person keeping such animals. (‘84 Code, § 3-11) (Ord. 358, passed 2-28-84; Am. Ord. 4-8-97, passed
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 112/350
4-8-97)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 90.16. Sanitary conditions required; specified.
The owner or person in possession of animals shall keep yards, pens and enclosures in which animals are confined in sucha manner so as not to give off odors offensive to persons of ordinary sensibilities residing in the vicinity, or to breed orattract flies, mosquitoes or other noxious insects or in any manner to endanger the public health or safety. (‘84 Code, § 3-12) (Ord. 358, passed 2-28-84; Am. Ord. 4-8-97, passed 4-8-97)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 90.17. Pet and animal care guidelines.
The following are established as guidelines for pet and animal care and are not intended to contravene the provisions foranimal cruelty contained in the Texas Penal Code.
(A)
Provision for food, shelter, and care, generally
. No owner shall fail to provide his or her animal withsufficient good and wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection from the weather, veterinary carewhen needed to prevent suffering, and with humane care and treatment.
(B)
Abuse of animals, animal fighting
. No person shall beat, cruelly ill-treat, torment, overload, overwork orotherwise abuse an animal, or cause, instigate or permit any dogfight, cockfight, bullfight or other combatbetween animals or between animals and humans.
(C)
Abandonment
. No owner shall abandon any animal. Any animal left without proper food, water, or shelterfor more than seven days shall be considered abandoned. Animal Control shall take any abandoned animal intoprotective custody until owners of such animals can be located or prosecuted.
(D)
Striking with a vehicle
. Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic animal shallstop at once and shall immediately report such injury or death to the animal's owner. In the event that the ownercannot be ascertained or located, such operator shall at once report the accident to the appropriate lawenforcement agency.
(‘84 Code, § 3-13) (Ord. 358, passed 2-28-84)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
State Law reference–
Cruelty to animals, Tex. Penal Code § 42.09.
Sec. 90.18. Keeping of exotic animals prohibited.
(A) The keeping of exotic animals are prohibited within the corporate limits of the city, except as provided below.
(B) Exotic animals may be kept within the corporate limits of the city if approved by a 3/4 vote of the City Council.
(C) Exotic animals approved by the City Council will be required to meet all regulations of this chapter and otherstipulations that may be prescribed by the City Council.
(D) Exotic animals approved by City Council will be required to obtain all necessary international, federal, state and locallicenses and/or permits, if required.
(Ord. 4-8-97, passed 4-8-97)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 90.19. Chaining and tethering animals.
(A) It shall be unlawful to keep an animal or livestock on a chain or rope placed in a manner that makes it possible tobecome entangle with the restraints of other animals or livestock or with any other objects.
(B) It shall be unlawful to keep any animal or livestock on a chain or rope that is of insufficient length to allow the animalor livestock complete access to food, water and shelter at all times.
(C) It shall be unlawful to attach a chain to an animal or livestock in a manner so as to cause injury or discomfort to theanimal or livestock.
(D) It shall be unlawful to stake a cat outside on a leash, rope, chain or similar apparatus.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 113/350
(E) It shall be unlawful to restrain a dog outside with a chain or tether unless:
(1) A person is holding the chain or tether; or
(2) The dog's owner or handler remains outside, within 50 feet of the dog, throughout the period of restraint.
(F) An owner may not leave a dog outside and unattended by use of a restraint that unreasonably limits the dog'smovement:
(1) Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.;
(2) Within 500 feet of the premises of a school; or
(3) In the case of extreme weather conditions, including condition in which:
(a) The actual or effective outdoor temperature is below 32 degrees Fahrenheit;
(b) A heat advisory has been issued by a local or state authority or jurisdiction;
(c) A hurricane, tropical storm, or tornado warning has been issued for the jurisdiction by the NationalWeather Service.
(G) Violations of this Ordinance shall be punishable by a penalty of up to $2,000.00 dollars per violation.
(Ord. O-16-13, passed 10-8-13)
Sec. 90.20. Feral cats.
(A)
Feral cat colonies
. Feral cat colonies shall be permitted and feral cat colony caretakers shall be entitled to maintainand care for feral cats by providing food, water, shelter and other forms of sustenance, provided the feral cat colonies areregistered with the animal services department.
(B)
Registrations of feral cat colonies
. Each feral cat colony within the city limits must be registered annually with theanimal service department. This registration shall include:
(1) The name and contact information for the primary colony caretaker;
(2) The location of the feral cat colony;
(3) The number of cats in the colony;
(4) Documentation showing the number of cats that have been microchipped, spayed or neutered, andvaccinated in the colony in the past year.
(C)
Feral cat colony caretaker responsibilities
.
(1) Registering the colony with the animal services department.
(2) Taking all appropriate and reasonable steps to have the colony population vaccinated for rabies.
(3) Taking all appropriate steps to have the colony population spayed or neutered by a license veterinarian.
(4) Providing food, water and, if feasible, shelter for colony cats.
(5) Obtaining proper medical attention for any colony cat that appears to require it.
(6) Obtaining written authorization from the appropriate property owner to enter on to private property toprovide colony care.
(D)
Withdrawal of feral cat colony caretaker
. In the event a registered caretaker is unable or unwilling to continue theirduties with a colony, the caretaker must notify the animal services department in writing. If no replacement caretaker isreadily available, the Animal Control Officer will determine the disposition of the abandoned feral cat colony.
(Ord. O-16-13, passed 10-8-13)
Sec. 90.21. Animal trapping and poisoning.
(A) No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, including antifreeze, whether mixed with food or not, sothat such poisonous substance shall be liable to be consumed by any domestic animal or person. This section is not
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 114/350
intended to prohibit the proper use of herbicides, insecticides, or rodent control materials.
(B) No person shall expose an open trap of a metal jaw type that shall be liable to injure any domestic animal or person,however this shall not preclude use of humane box traps.
(C) The city shall maintain, for use by persons in the city upon application, animal traps for the capture of animalsrunning loose in the city.
(D) Any person desiring to use an animal trap belong to the city shall be charged a $75.00 deposit.
(E) The applicant shall be responsible for and shall take care of in an ordinary prudent manner, any animal trap used byhim. Upon return of the animal trap to the Animal Control Officer without damage other than reasonable normal wear andtear, the deposit held by the city shall be refunded to the trapper.
(F) The person applying for and using the trap shall be responsible for picking up and returning the trap, and shall alsobe responsible for the setting of and the operation of the animal trap. If an animal is trapped, the city shall pick up the trapand the trapped animal, and the deposit shall then be returned to the trapper.
(G) A trap checked out shall be returned on or before ten days after issuance, or the applicant shall reapply on or beforeten days after issuance of a trap for an additional ten-day period of use.
(H) Any person desiring to trap nuisance animals with traps not obtained from the city shall apply for a trapping permitwith the Animal Control Officer. All traps must be humane box traps, and must be inspected and approved by the AnimalControl Officer prior to use. Any animals trapped must be reported to the Animal Control Officer for proper disposal.
(I) Any person caught trapping animals within the city limits without a permit is subject to a penalty of up to $2,000.00 perviolation.
(Ord. O-16-13, passed 10-8-13)
CHAPTER 91: FAIR HOUSING
*
2
Sec. 91.01. Purpose.
The general purposes of this chapter are:
(A) To secure for all people equal access to housing in all neighborhoods; and
(B) To preserve the public safety, health and welfare.
(Ord. 10-6-88, passed 10-25-88)
Sec. 91.02. Acts prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, real estate broker, real estate salesperson or agent:
(A) To refuse to sell, lease, rent, assign or otherwise transfer the title or other interest in any housing or realproperty upon which residential housing is to be constructed to any person, or to discriminate in the terms orconditions of the sale, rental or leasing of any resident housing unit because of race, color, sex, religion ornational origin.
(B) To refuse to negotiate with any person for the sale, rental, or leasing of any residential property, or torepresent that such property is not available for inspection, sale, or lease when in fact it is so available, becauseof such person's race, color, sex, religion or national origin.
(C) To solicit or induce, or attempt to solicit or induce, any person owning any interest in any residentialhousing to sell, rent or lease, or not to sell, rent or lease such housing to any person on the grounds of loss ofvalue due to the present or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person of persons of another race,color, sex, religion, or national origin, either by direct solicitation or inducement of the purchase of other propertyin the neighborhood for the purpose of such inducement, or to distribute, or cause to be distributed material ormaking statements designed to induce a residential property owner to sell or lease his or her property due tosuch change in neighborhood.
(D) To file a complaint alleging a violation of this chapter with knowledge that such complaint is false in anymaterial respect, or to file such complaint for the sole purpose of harassment.
(Ord. 10-6-88, passed 10-25-88)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 115/350
Sec. 91.03. Exemptions.
(A) Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any religious organization, association, society or private club, or a religiousnonprofit organization, operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, orsociety from limiting the sale or rental of dwelling units owned and operated for other than a commercial purpose.
(B) Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any single-family house sold or rented by an owner; provided, that such privateindividual owner does not own more than three such single-family houses and was not the most recent resident of suchhouse prior to such sale with the exception granted to one such sale within a 24-month period; provided further, that suchowner does not own or retain in his or her behalf title to a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than threesuch single family houses at any one time; provided further, that such sale or rental of such single-family house shall beexcepted if such house sold or rented without the use in any manner of a sale or rental facilities or employee thereof.
(C) Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied byno more than four families living independent of each other and the owner actually occupies one such living quarter as hisor her residence.
(Ord. 10-6-88, passed 10-25-88)
Sec. 91.04. Fair Housing Board created; duties.
(A) There is hereby created a Fair Housing Board of the city, composed of the members of the City Council.
(B) It shall be the duty of the Fair Housing Board to:
(1) Initiate, receive, and investigate complaints, charging unlawful housing practices;
(2) See conciliation of such complaints, hold hearings, make findings of fact, and publish its findings of fact;and
(3) Adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary within the limits of this chapter, and carry out thepurpose and provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 10-6-88, passed 10-25-88)
Sec. 91.05. Procedure.
(A) Any person aggrieved by discriminatory practice prohibited by this chapter may file with the Fair Housing Board acomplaint in writing under oath. The complaint shall be signed by the person claiming to be aggrieved, and shall state thename and address of the person alleged to have violated the provisions of this chapter, and shall further set forth theparticulars of the violation, and may include such other information as may be required by the Board. Complaints filed underthis section must be filed within 30 days after the alleged violation, and failure to file within such time shall be considered awaiver of the application of this chapter. The Board may issue a complaint on its own initiative at any time it is within theknowledge of the Board that a person has violated any of the provisions of this chapter.
(B) The Board shall investigate each complaint filed with the Board and shall attempt any adjustment of such complaintby means of conference and conciliation. 60 days shall be allowed for the purpose of investigation, conference andconciliation. Upon determination that a complaint is not well founded, the Board shall dismiss such complaint and notify theComplainant and Respondent in writing of the dismissal. If the Board takes no action within 90 days of the filing of thecomplaint, it shall be considered as dismissed.
(C) If conference or conciliation does not result in compliance with this chapter, the Board shall cause to be issued andserved in the name of the city a written notice, together with a copy of the complaint, requiring the person named in thecomplaint (Respondent) to answer the charges of the complaint at a hearing before the Board at a time and place to bespecified in the notice.
(D) At the hearing provided for in division (C), the complaint shall be heard by the Board. At the hearing the, theComplainant or person aggrieved may appear in person or by counsel, and the Respondent may file a written answer to thecomplaint and may appear in person or by legal counsel. The Board, when conducting any hearing pursuant to this section,may permit amendments to any complaint or answer, and the testimony taken at the hearing shall be under oath, and shallbe transcribed as the request of either party, or at the direction of the Board. If the Board finds at the hearing that theRespondent has engaged in any discriminatory practice or practices prohibited by this chapter, it shall state its findings offact, and shall so certify the matter to the City Attorney for appropriate action. No prosecution shall be brought under thischapter except upon such certification. If the Board, upon hearing, finds that Respondent had not engaged in anydiscriminatory practice, it shall state its findings of fact, and shall issue and file an order, dismissing the complaint. TheBoard shall establish rules and regulations to govern and expedite and effectuate the foregoing procedure, and shallmaintain the files provided for herein.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 116/350
(Ord. 10-6-88, passed 10-25-88)
Sec. 91.06. Notices.
Any and all notices required under the provisions of this chapter to be served upon any person may be served personallyon such person, or by mailing a copy thereof by certified or registered mail, with return receipt requested, to the mostcurrent business or residence address of such person.
(Ord. 10-6-88, passed 10-25-88)
CHAPTER 92: FIRE PREVENTION
*
3
Sec. 92.01. Arson reward.
The city hereby offers a reward of $500.00 for the arrest and conviction of any person found guilty of committing the crimeof arson within the corporate limits of the city. This reward is a standing offer and shall be paid out of the General Fund ofthe city.
(‘84 Code, § 9-2) (Ord. passed 9-6-15; Am. Ord. 79, passed 5-27-47; Am. Ord. 261, passed 3-23-71; Am. Ord. O-22-05,passed 12-13-05)
Sec. 92.02. Fire zone limits.
(A) The following shall be and are hereby declared to be the limits of the fire zones within the city to comply with theInternational Building Code, as adopted and as it may be amended.
(B) The fire zones will be in reference to the planning and zoning map which is displayed in the office of the BuildingOfficial at City Hall. All areas designated by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council as areas Office andProfessional Services District (OPD), Neighborhood Retail (NR), Thoroughfare Commercial (TC) and Manufacturing-Industrial (MI) are to be known as fire zones or any other area that may be designated outside of a given area by the fireauthority.
(C) Fire Zone One will consist of OPD, NR and TC areas along the thoroughfares and within Jack County Court HouseSquare: beginning within the center of the intersection of North Main and Union Streets; thence west along the center ofUnion Street to the center of North Knox Street; thence south on the center of North Knox Street to the center of WestCollege Street; thence west along the center of West College Street to a line within the center of Gwaltney Street; thencesouth on a line with center of Gwaltney Street 300 feet from the center of West Belknap to a point 200 feet west of thecenter of South Knox Street; thence south from that point within 200 feet of the center of South Knox Street to Lost Creek;thence east above the north bank of Lost Creek across South Main Street to a line within the center of South ChurchStreet; thence north on a line with the center of South Church Street to the center of McComb Street; thence east on thecenter of McComb Street to a line with the center of East Street; thence north on a line with the center of East Street to thecenter of East Thompson Street; thence west on the center of East Thompson Street to the center of North Church Street;thence north on the center of North Church Street to the center of Oakwood Avenue; thence west on a line with the centerof Oakwood Avenue to the center of North Main Street.
(D) Fire Zone Two will consist of OPD, NR, TC and MI and other designated areas within 200 feet of the center of Northand South Main Streets, within 200 feet of designated areas along the center of West Belknap Street, beginning withboundaries of Fire Zone One, then to the city limits and all areas designated within the residential sections of the city.
(E) Within Fire Zone One, no building or structure of wooden, ironclad, stucco or veneer type construction, or anybuilding whose outside walls contain wood supports, shall be permitted. Brick walls shall be not less than 12 inches thick,except one story buildings with the floor areas of 750 square feet or less may have walls eight inches thick.
(F) No building shall hereafter be built, enlarged or altered within Fire Zone One except in accordance with this chapterand the International Building Code, as adopted and as it may be amended.
(G) Within Fire Zone Two, no buildings shall hereafter be built, enlarged or altered within the designated areas in the cityunless the outside walls are constructed of brick, blocks, stone, tile, concrete or other fireproof materials and in accordancewith the International Building Code, as adopted and as it may be amended.
(‘84 Code, § 9-11) (Ord. passed 8-28-84; Am. Ord. O-22-05, passed 12-13-05)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Cross reference–
International Building Code adopted,
§§ 151.01
and
151.40
.
CHAPTER 93: HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
*
4
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 117/350
CLEANLINESS OF PREMISES
Sec. 93.01. Definitions.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires adifferent meaning, and any words not herein defined shall be construed in the context used and by ordinary interpretationand not as a word of art.
Brush
. Scrub vegetation or dense undergrowth.
Carrion
. The dead and putrefying flesh of any animal, fowl or fish.
City
. The City of Jacksboro, Texas, or its agents.
Dump
. To dispose, discharge, place, deposit, throw, leave, sweep, scatter, unload, or toss.
Filth
. Any matter in a putrescent state.
Garbage
. Any kitchen refuse, food stuffs or related material, including all decayable waste.
Impure or unwholesome matter
. Any putrescible or nonputrescible condition, object or matter that may, could or tends tocause injury, death or disease to human beings.
Junk
. All worn out, worthless or discarded material, including but not limited to any of the following materials, or parts ofsaid materials or any combination thereof: new or used iron, steel or nonferrous metallic scrap, brass or waste materials;used and/or inoperative household appliances, household electrical or plumbing fixtures, floor coverings and/or windowcoverings not currently in use; used lumber, brick, cement block, wire, tubing and pipe, tubs, drums, barrels and/or roofingmaterial not currently in use; air conditioning and heating equipment not currently in use; used vehicle components andparts not currently in use; used furniture other than that designed for outdoor use or that which would normally beconsidered as antique furniture; used and/or inoperative residential lawn care equipment and machinery not currently inuse; used pallets, windows or doors not currently in use; new or used sheet metal, structural steel and/or chain not currentlyin use; used and/or inoperable vending machines, radios and/or televisions not currently in use; and any other type of usedand/or inoperable machinery or equipment not currently in use.
Matter
. That of which any physical object is composed.
Nuisance
. Any condition, object, material or matter that is dangerous or detrimental to human life or health; or that rendersthe ground, the water, the air or food a hazard or likely to cause injury to human life or health; or that is offensive to thesenses; or that threatens to become detrimental to the public health; and shall include but not be limited to: any abandonedor uncovered (including unsecured covered) wells, shafts or basements, abandoned refrigerators, stagnant orunwholesome water, sinks, privies, filth, carrion, rubbish, junk, trash, debris or refuse, impure or unwholesome matter ofany kind, and any objectionable, unsightly, or unsanitary matter of whatever nature.
Objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter
. Any matter, condition or object that is objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary toa person of ordinary sensitivities.
Owner
. Any person or entity shown as the property owner on the latest property tax assessment rolls or any person havingor claiming to have any legal or equitable interest in the property, including any agent who is responsible for managing,leasing or operating the property.
Person
. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, business, corporation or other entity.
Property
. All privately owned, occupied or unoccupied property, including vacant land, and/or a building designed or usedfor residential, commercial, business, industrial or religious purposes. The term shall also include a yard, ground, wall,driveway, fence, porch, steps or other structure appurtenant to the property.
Putrescible
. The decomposition of organic matter with the formation of foul-smelling, incompletely oxidized products.
Refuse
. Heterogeneous accumulation of worn out, used, broken, rejected or worthless materials, including but not limited togarbage, rubbish, paper or litter, and other decayable or nondecayable matter.
Rubbish
. Junk, trash, debris, rubble, stone, useless fragments of building materials, and other miscellaneous, uselesswaste or rejected matter.
Trash and debris
. All manner of refuse, including but not limited to mounds of dirt, piles of leaves, grass and weed clippings,paper trash, useless fragments of building materials, rubble, furniture other than appliances, items of salvage, such asscrap metal and wood, old barrels, appliances, items of salvage, such as scrap metal and wood, old barrels, old tires,
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 118/350
objects that hold water for an extended period of time, tree and brush trimmings, dead standing or fallen trees, and othermiscellaneous wastes or rejected matter.
Vegetative growth
. Any grass, weeds, scrubs, trees, brush, bushes or vines.
Weeds
. Any vegetation that because of its height is objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary, excluding: shrubs, bushes, trees,cultivated flowers and cultivated crops.
(Ord. O-13-02, passed 12-10-02)
Sec. 93.02. Prohibited accumulations, dumping, stagnant water, trash, and other unsightly or unsanitary matterdeclared a nuisance.
(A) It shall be unlawful and declared a nuisance for any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision orcontrol of any real property, occupied or unoccupied, within the corporate limits of the city, to permit or allow any stagnant orunwholesome water, sinks, refuse, filth, carrion, weeds, rubbish, refuse, trash, debris, junk, garbage, impure orunwholesome matter of any kind, or other objectionable or unsightly matter of whatever nature, to accumulate or remainupon any such real property or within any public easement on or across such real property or upon any adjacent publicstreet or alley right-of-way between the property line of such real property and where the paved surface of the street or alleybegins.
(B) It shall be unlawful and declared a nuisance for any person to dump, or permit to be dumped, upon or along anydrain, gutter, alley, sidewalk, street, park, right-of-way or vacant lot into or adjacent to water, or any other public or privateproperty within the corporate limits of the city, any unwholesome water, refuse, rubbish, trash, debris, filth, carrion, weeds,brush, junk, garbage, impure or unwholesome matter of any kind, or other objectionable or unsightly matter of whateverkind.
(C) It shall be the duty of all persons to keep the sidewalks in front of their property free and clear of all such matter, andto fill up, drain or regrade any lots, ground or yards that have stagnant water thereon, and to cleanse and disinfect anyhouse, building, establishment, lot, yard or ground from refuse, rubbish, trash, filth, carrion, or objectionable, unsightly orunsanitary matter of any kind, or other impure or unwholesome matter of any kind.
(Ord. O-13-02, passed 12-10-02)
Sec. 93.03. Weeds, brush and unsightly matter.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property,occupied or unoccupied, within the corporate limits of the city, to permit weeds, brush or any objectionable or unsightlymatter to grow to a height greater than ten inches upon such real property within 200 feet of any property line that abutsstreet rights-of-way, alleys, utility easements, subdivided additions, developed property or any buildings or other structures.It shall be the duty of such person to keep the area from the line of his property to the curbline next adjacent to it (or, if thereis no curbline, then to the centerline of the adjacent unpaved street, or to the edge of the pavement) cleared of the matterreferred to above. All vegetation (including hay, unless the hay is cultivated on property that has been granted anagricultural property tax exemption on the most recent tax roll as certified by the county appraisal district in the county inwhich the property is located), except regularly cultivated row crops, that exceeds ten inches in height shall be presumed tobe objectionable and unsightly matter; provided further that regularly cultivated row crops shall not be allowed to growwithin the right-of-way of any public street or easement, nor shall such crops be allowed to obstruct the necessary view toand from adjacent rights-of-way, but shall be kept mowed as provided herein.
(B) With respect to lots, tracts or parcels of land of five or more acres, the provisions of this section shall not apply to anyarea situated more than 200 feet from any open public street or thoroughfare, as measured from the right-of-way line of thatstreet or thoroughfare, and situated more than 200 feet from any adjacent property under different ownership and on whichany building is located or on which any improvement exists, as measured from the property line.
(Ord. O-13-02, passed 12-10-02)
State Law reference–
Additional authority to abate dangerous weeds without notice, Tex. Health and Safety Code § 342.008.
Sec. 93.04. Inspections.
(A) For purposes of ascertaining whether violations of this subchapter exist, the Chief of Police or Code EnforcementOfficer, or his or her designee, is authorized to inspect the exterior of a structure and premises that contain no structure.
(B) If entry onto the property is refused, the Chief of Police or Code Enforcement Officer, or his or her designee, shallhave every recourse provided by law, including but not limited to an administrative search warrant or an injunction to secureentry. If the owner, occupant, or person in control cannot be identified or located, the Chief of Police or Code EnforcementOfficer, or his or her designee, shall be authorized to enter the property to the extent allowed by law.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 119/350
(Ord. O-13-02, passed 12-10-02)
Sec. 93.05. Duty of owner or occupant to cut and remove weeds, brush and unsightly matter.
It shall be the duty of any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property,occupied or unoccupied, as described in
§§ 93.02
and
93.03
, to remove, drain and/or fill all prohibited matter or conditionsand to cut and remove all weeds, brush, vegetative growth, and other objectionable or unsightly matter as often as may benecessary to comply with
§§ 93.02
and
93.03
and to use every precaution to prevent the same from occurring or growingon such property. Failure to so comply shall be a violation of this subchapter. (Ord. O-13-02, passed 12-10-02)
Sec. 93.06. Notice of violation and to abate; failure to comply; correction by city.
(A) If a person violating the terms of this subchapter fails or refuses to comply with the demand for compliance containedin the aforementioned notice within seven days after the date of notification as provided herein, the city shall have theauthority as provided by law to enter upon such property and do or cause to be done the work necessary to obtaincompliance with this subchapter. All reasonable costs, charges and expenses (hereinafter “charges”) incurred in doing or inhaving such work done shall be a charge to, and be a personal liability of, such person.
(B) It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or Code Enforcement Officer, or his or her designee, to give a maximum ofseven days official notice, in writing, to such person violating the terms of this subchapter, subject to the provisions hereinstated. The notice shall be in writing and may be served on such person violating the terms of this subchapter:
(1) By delivering it to him or her in person;
(2) By forwarding or sending a letter or written notice addressed to such person at the person's address asrecorded in the appraisal district in which the property is located and delivered by United States Certified Mail,return receipt requested, with a second optional copy by United States Regular Mail; or
(3) If personal service cannot be obtained,
(a) By publication at least once within seven consecutive days in the city's official newspaper;
(b) By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the violationrelates; or
(c) By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to whichthe violation relates, if the property contains no buildings.
(C) If the city mails a notice to the property owner in accordance with division (B) and the United States Postal Servicereturns the notice as “refused” or “unclaimed”, the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice shall be considered asdelivered.
(D) The city, in the notice provided herein, may inform the owner by certified mail, return receipt requested, or regularmail and a posting on the property, or by personally delivering the notice, that if the owner commits another violation of thesame kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety on or before the first anniversary of the date ofsuch notice, the city, without further notice, may correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess the expenseagainst the property. If the violation covered by a notice under this division occurs within said one-year period, and the cityhas not been informed in writing by the owner of an ownership change, then the city, without notice, may take any actionpermitted by division (A) herein, and assess its reasonable expenses incurred as provided by
§ 93.08
, below.
(Ord. O-13-02, passed 12-10-02)
State Law reference–
Notice requirements, Tex. Health and Safety Code § 342.007.
Sec. 93.07. Additional authority to abate nuisance.
(A) The city may abate, without notice, weeds that:
(1) Have grown higher than 48 inches; and
(2) Are an immediate danger to the health, life or safety of any person.
(B) Not later than the tenth day after the date the city abates weeds under this section, the city shall give notice to theproperty owner in the manner required by
§ 93.06
. The notice shall contain:
(1) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the property;
(2) A description of the violation(s) of the subchapter that occurred on the property;
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 120/350
(3) A statement that the city abated weeds; and
(4) An explanation of the property owner's right to request an administrative hearing about the city'sabatement of the weeds.
(C) The city shall conduct an administrative hearing before the City Council on the abatement of weeds under thissection if, not later than the 30th day after the date of the abatement of the weeds, the property owner files with the city awritten request for a hearing. An administrative hearing conducted under this section shall be conducted not later than the20th day after the date a request for a hearing is filed. The owner may testify or present any witnesses or writteninformation relating to the city's abatement of the weeds.
(D) The city may assess reasonable expenses and create liens under this section as it assesses expenses and createsliens under
§ 93.08
. A lien created under this section is subject to the same conditions as a lien created under
§ 93.08
. Theauthority granted the city by this section is in addition to the authority granted by
§ 93.08
.
(Ord. O-13-02, passed 12-10-02)
Sec. 93.08. Expenses incurred by city; lien.
(A) If a notice as provided for herein is delivered to the owner of such real property, and he or she fails or refuses tocomply with such demand for compliance within the seven-day time period established herein, the aforementioned chargesshall be, in addition to a charge to and personal liability of said owner, a privileged lien upon and against such real property,including all fixtures and improvements thereon. In order to perfect such a lien, the Chief of Police or Code EnforcementOfficer, or his or her designee, first shall give such owner written notice or demand for payment of such charges. Suchwritten notice may be given by any one of the methods provided for herein for the giving of the initial notice demandingcompliance with the terms of this subchapter.
(B) If such owner fails or refuses to make complete payment of said charges within 30 days of his or her receipt of saidnotice, the Mayor, municipal health authority or other municipal official designated by the Mayor, such as the Chief of Policeor Code Enforcement Officer, shall file a written statement of such charges with the County Clerk for filing in the CountyLand and Deed Records. The statement shall be deemed sufficient if it contains the following minimum information;however, it also may contain such other additional information deemed appropriate by the Mayor, the Chief of Police or theCode Enforcement Officer, or his or her designee or duly appointed representative:
(1) The name of the owner of the real property, if known;
(2) A legal description of the real property;
(3) A statement of the charges incurred by the city in doing or in having such work done as necessary to bringthe real property into compliance with this subchapter; and
(4) A notarized affidavit executed by the Chief of Police or Code Enforcement Officer, or his or her designee,stating that all prerequisites required by this subchapter for the imposition of all charges and the affixing of thelien have been met and that all statements and/or representations made therein are true and correct.
(5) The lien attaches upon the filing of the lien statement with the County Clerk.
(C) All such charges bear interest at the rate of 10% per annum from the date of payment by the city. The lien obtained issecurity for the expenditures made and is inferior only to tax liens and liens for street improvements. The city may bring suitto collect the charges, institute foreclosure proceedings, or both. The written statement of such charges provided for herein,or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of the city's claim for charges or right to foreclose the lien. Theowner of real property or any other person claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of the real property shall bejointly and severally liable for such charges.
(D) This remedy is in addition to any penal provision provided herein.
(Ord. O-13-02, passed 12-10-02)
State Law reference–
Assessment of expenses, lien and foreclosure, Tex. Health and Safety Code § 342.007.
Sec. 93.09. Enforcement.
The provisions of this subchapter shall be enforced by the Chief of Police or Code Enforcement Officer, or his or herdesignee, and it shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or hinder the Chief of Police or Code Enforcement Officer,or his or her designee, in the exercise of their duties under this subchapter. Notwithstanding any provisions containedherein to the contrary, the Chief of Police or Code Enforcement Officer, or his or her designee, are hereby granted theauthority to issue immediate citations to persons violating any provision of the subchapter in their presence. (Ord. O-13-02,passed 12-10-02)
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 121/350
Sec. 93.10. Penalty upon failure to comply.
(A) Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision or requirement of this subchapter, who continues to violateor fail to comply with same within seven days after notice is given and received as set forth in
§ 93.06
, shall also bedeemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $2,000.00, suchoffense being a violation of the health and safety ordinances of the city. A separate offense shall be deemed committedupon each day during or on which a violation or failure to comply occurs or continues to occur. This section shall be inaddition to and cumulative of the provisions for abatement of the nuisance by the city and charging the cost of sameagainst the owner of the property.
(B) Notwithstanding the foregoing, any violation of any provision of this subchapter that constitutes an immediate dangeror threat to the health, safety and welfare of the public may be enjoined in a suit brought by the city for such purpose.
(C) In addition to any other remedies or penalties contained herein, the city may enforce the provisions of this chapter tothe applicable provisions of Tex. Local Gov't Code Ch. 54, which provides for the enforcement of municipal ordinances.
(D) Allegation and evidence of culpable mental state is not required for the proof of an offense defined by thissubchapter.
(Ord. O-13-02, passed 12-10-02)
SMOKING
Sec. 93.20. Smoking in public places.
(A)
Definitions
. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates orrequires a different meaning.
Administrative area
. The area of an establishment not generally accessible to the public, including but not limited toindividual offices, stockrooms, and employee lounges, or meeting rooms.
Bar
. A lounge bar or restaurant bar, which are defined as follows:
(1)
Lounge bar
. All areas of any establishment having 50% of its gross sales from sale of alcoholic beveragesfor on-premises consumption.
(2)
Restaurant bar
. Any area of a restaurant, excluding the dining area, that is primarily devoted to the servingof alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which food service, if any, is onlyincidental to the consumption of such beverages.
Dining area
. Any area containing a counter, booths or tables upon which meals are served.
Director
. The duly appointed City Manager and/or the City Manager's authorized representative who shall have the fullauthority to enforce and administer the smoking regulations of the city.
Educational facility
. Any day care center, nursery school, elementary school, middle school, junior high school, senior highschool, vocational school, special education center, college or university.
Employee
. Any person who is employed by any employer for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, or is in a positionthat would lead one to believe that such person is so employed.
Employer
. Any person, partnership, corporation, association or other entity, that employs one or more persons.
Enclosed areas
. All space between a floor and ceiling that is enclosed on all sides by smoke impermeable walls or windows(exclusive of doorways) that extend from that floor to the ceiling, including all space therein screened by partitions, “officelandscaping” or similar structures that do not extend from the floor to the ceiling or are not smoke-impermeable.
Public place
. Any enclosed indoor area that may be used by the general public, and includes, but is not limited to: stores,offices, and other commercial establishments; restaurants; public and private institutions of higher education; and healthcare facilities.
Public service area
. Any area to which the general public routinely has access for municipal services or which is designateda public service area in a written policy.
Restaurant
. Any coffee shop, cafeteria, luncheonette, tavern, cocktail lounge, sandwich stand, soda fountain, private andpublic school cafeteria or eating establishment, and any other eating establishment, organization, club, including veterans'club, boardinghouse or guesthouse, which gives or offers for sale food to the general public or employees as well askitchens in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere, including catering facilities, except that the term
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 122/350
“restaurant” shall not be construed to include any portion of the establishment that constitutes a “restaurant bar.” A “loungebar” shall not constitute a restaurant for any purpose.
Retail and service establishment
. Any enclosed area in any portion of which goods or services of any nature are sold oroffered for sale directly to consumers including, but not limited to grocery stores, convenience stores, dry goods stores,banks, department stores and specialty shops.
Service line
. Any indoor line at which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind whether or notsuch service involves the exchange of money.
Smoke or smoking
. Includes the carrying or holding of a lighted pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind, or any other lightedsmoking equipment or device, and the lighting of, emitting or exhaling of the smoke of a pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind.
Work area
. All portions of an indoor workplace that is not assigned as a work station for a particular employee and which isopen and accessible to more than one employee in the ordinary course of business, such area does not include assignedsingle occupant offices with floor to ceiling walls or partitions and closable doors.
Workplace
. Any enclosed area of a structure, or portion thereof, intended for occupancy by employees who provideprimarily clerical, professional, or business services of a business entity, or which provide primarily clerical, professional, orbusiness services to other business entities, or to the public, at that location. The enclosed indoor area under the control ofthe employer shall include those areas to which employees have access during the course of employment, including butnot limited to work areas, employee lounges, employee restrooms, employee conference rooms, and employee cafeterias.A private residence is not a place of employment.
(B)
Smoking in public places generally prohibited
.
(1) A person commits an offense if the person smokes or possesses a burning tobacco product, lighted cigar,cigarette, or any lighted smoking product in any of the following indoor public places:
(a) An elevator used or which may be used by the public;
(b) A hospital or nursing home;
(c) Any conference room, meeting room, public service area, municipal court area, public civic centerarea, city offices, and all city workplaces;
(d) Any retail or service establishment or financial institution serving the general public, including but notlimited to any department store, grocery store, drug store, clothing store, shoe store, hardware store, bank,savings and loan, credit union, laundromat, hair salon or barbershop.
(e) Any facility of a public or primary or secondary school or library;
(f) Any room in which meetings and/or hearings are open to the public; or
(g) Any enclosed area owned, operated and managed by the city.
(2) The owner or person in control of an establishment or area defined in division (A) of this section shall posta sign, conspicuous to ordinary public view, at or near each public entrance to the establishment. The sign shallcontain the words “No Smoking, City of Jacksboro Ordinance,” the universal symbol for “no smoking,” or otherlanguage that clearly prohibits smoking.
(3) It is a defense to prosecution under this section if the person was smoking:
(a) As a participant in an authorized theatrical performance;
(b) In a situation in which the person is present at an event in which an entire room or hall is used for asocial function sponsored by a private entity or individual and seating arrangements are under the controlof the sponsor of the function and not the proprietor or person in change of the place; unless the sponsorof the social function has designated the area where the person is smoking a nonsmoking area;
(c) In an area not accessible to anyone else, such as a private office or dining room in an enclosed area,provided the area is separately ventilated and situated such that air is not drawn into common areas of thefacility or workplace; or
(d) Within an area specifically designated for smoking tobacco.
(C)
Smoking in public restaurants and food service establishments generally prohibited; designation of smoking areas
.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 123/350
(1) It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly or intentionally smoke or be in possession of burning tobaccoin any public restaurant.
(2) In conformity with this section, a person having ownership, possession or control of a public restaurantmay, but is not required to, designate areas in which smoking is permitted. It shall be an affirmative defense tothe application of the offense if the person is in possession of a lighted tobacco product or smokers tobaccoexclusively within an area designated for smoking tobacco.
(3) Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any person having ownership, possession or control ofa public restaurant to establish an area to accommodate the preference of smokers. Any area that is designatedpursuant to this section must be created and maintained in strict compliance with this section.
(4) A food service establishment that has indoor or enclosed dining areas shall provide separate indoor orenclosed dining areas for smoking and nonsmoking patrons.
(5) A nonsmoking area must:
(a) Be separated from the smoking areas by a minimum of ten feet of contiguous floor space or a wall;
(b) Be ventilated and situated so that air from the smoking area is not drawn into or across thenonsmoking areas, or the smoking area shall be separately ventilated;
(c) Have ash trays or other suitable containers for extinguishing smoking;
(d) 1. In a public restaurant, be publicized with:
A. A sign conspicuously posted at each entrance stating “smoking permitted” and “no-smoking areas available”; and
B. A wall chart conspicuously posted and available for review near the main entrance clearlydesignating the smoking permitted and no smoking areas.
2. Any sign that is required to be posted pursuant to division (C)(5)(d) of this section shall beprinted in proportion and proportionally spaced letters of a color clearly contrasting with thebackground upon which they are printed, which letters, except with respect to restaurant table cards,shall have a height of not less than one inch.
(6) Each food establishment that has an enclosed dining area shall have signs, conspicuous to ordinary publicview, at each public entrance to the establishment indicating that nonsmoking seating is available.
(7) Non-dining areas of food establishments affected by this section to which patrons have general access,including, but not limited to, food order areas, food service areas and restrooms, shall be designated asnonsmoking areas.
(8) (a) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the food establishment is:
1. An establishment that has indoor seating arrangements for less than 20 patrons; or
2. A physically separated bar area or a food service establishment otherwise regulated.
(b) The defense set forth in division (C)(8)(a) of this section shall apply if the food establishment hasposted a sign or signs, conspicuous to ordinary public view, at each public entrance to the establishment,containing the words “This Establishment Does Not Provide For a Non-Smoking Section.”
(9) A person commits an offense if he smokes or possesses a burning tobacco, weed, or other plant product,or any lighted or burning pipe, cigar, cigarette of any kind, or smoking device in an area of a food serviceestablishment designated as nonsmoking.
(D)
Rules and regulations
. The Director may promulgate rules and regulations consistent with this section with respect toinspection, hearing and appeal procedures. The Director may also promulgate forms that must be utilized for the purpose offiling complaints and appeals hereunder.
(E)
Public education
. The Director shall engage in a program to explain and clarify the purposes of this section to citizensaffected by it, and to guide owners, operators and managers in their compliance with it.
(F)
Other smoking prohibitions not affected
. Nothing in this section shall be construed to repeal or excuse compliancewith smoking prohibitions imposed by the fire code. To the extent that any offense specified in this section also constitutesan offense under the fire code, the offense shall be punishable pursuant to the fire code.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 124/350
(G)
Penalties
. Any person, firm, corporation, agent, or employee who violates any provision of this section shall, uponconviction, be fined an amount not more than $200.00, provided, however, that a defendant shall be fined an amount notmore than $500.00 for a second conviction hereunder, and shall be fined an amount not more than $2,000.00 for a thirdconviction hereunder and for each conviction thereafter. Each day that a violation is committed or permitted to exist shallconstitute a separate offense.
(H)
Owner reporting requirements
. This section does not require the owner, operator, employer, or manager or anyemployee of an establishment to report a violation or to take any action against any individual violating any provision of thissection.
(I)
Conflicting provisions
. This section shall be cumulative of all provisions of ordinances and of the Code of Ordinances,as amended, except where the provisions of this section are in direct conflict with the provisions of such ordinances andsuch Code, in which event, conflicting provisions of such ordinances and such Code are hereby repealed.
(Ord. 8-5-01, passed 8-28-01; Am. Ord. O-13-02, passed 12-10-02)
Cross reference–
Standard fire prevention code adopted,
§ 151.01
(A)(4).
CHAPTER 94: JUNKED VEHICLES
*
5
Sec. 94.01. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires adifferent meaning.
Antique vehicle
. A passenger car or truck that is at least 25 years old.
Inoperable
. Not capable of being used or operated due to legal or mechanical incapability.
Junked vehicle
. A vehicle that is self-propelled and:
(1) Does not have lawfully attached to it:
(a) An unexpired license plate; or
(b) A valid motor vehicle inspection certificate; and
(2) Is:
(a) Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or
(b) Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than:
1. 72 consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or
2. 30 consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property.
Motor vehicle collector
. A person who:
(1) Owns one or more antique or special interest vehicles; and
(2) Acquires, collects, or disposes of an antique or special interest vehicle or part of an antique or specialinterest vehicle for personal use to restore and preserve an antique or special interest vehicle for historicinterest.
Special interest vehicle
. A motor vehicle of any age that has not been changed from original manufacturer's specificationsand, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist.
(Ord. O-14-02, passed 12-10-02)
Sec. 94.02. Junked vehicle declared to be a nuisance.
A junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle, that is visible from a public place or public right-of-way:
(A) Is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the public;
(B) Tends to reduce the value of private property;
(C) Invites vandalism;
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 125/350
(D) Creates a fire hazard;
(E) Is an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors;
(F) Produces urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of municipalities; and
(G) Is a public nuisance.
(Ord. O-14-02, passed 12-10-02)
Sec. 94.03. Offense.
(A) A person commits an offense if the person maintains a public nuisance described by
§ 94.02
.
(B) An offense under this section is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $200.00.
(C) The court shall order abatement and removal of the nuisance on conviction.
(Ord. O-14-02, passed 12-10-02)
Sec. 94.04. Authority to abate nuisance; procedures.
(A)
General
.
(1) The city, by this division, is adopting procedures for the abatement and removal of private or publicproperty or a public right-of-way of a junked vehicle or part of a junked vehicle as a public nuisance.
(2) This chapter shall be administered by the Chief of Police, Code Enforcement Officer or his or her designeeprovided the same is a regularly salaried, full-time employee of the city. Any authorized person may remove thenuisance.
(3) A person authorized to administer these procedures may enter private property to examine a publicnuisance, to obtain information to identify the nuisance, and to remove or direct the removal of the nuisance.
(4) The removal of a junked vehicle that is a public nuisance to another location in the city after a proceedingfor the abatement and removal of a junked vehicle has commenced has no effect on the proceeding if thejunked vehicle constitutes a public nuisance at the new location.
(B)
Notice
.
(1) Notice of the nature of the nuisance must be personally delivered or sent by certified mail with a five-dayreturn requested to:
(a) The last known registered owner of the nuisance;
(b) Each lienholder of record of the nuisance; and
(c) The owner or occupant of:
1. The property on which the nuisance is located; or
2. If the nuisance is located on a public right-of-way, the property adjacent to the right-of-way.
(2) The notice must state that:
(a) The nuisance must be abated and removed not later than the tenth day after the date on which thenotice was personally delivered or mailed; and
(b) Any request for a hearing must be made before that ten-day period expires.
(3) If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the nuisance is unknown, notice may beplaced on the nuisance or, if the owner is located, personally delivered.
(4) If notice is returned undelivered, action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier thanthe 11th day after the date of the return.
(5) No notice is required for issuance of a citation for an offense under this chapter.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 126/350
(6) If the city mails a notice to the property owner in accordance with this division and the United States PostalService returns the notice as “refused” or “unclaimed”, the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice isconsidered as delivered.
(C)
Hearing
.
(1) The municipal court judge shall conduct hearings relative to the abatement of junked vehicles.
(2) A public hearing must be conducted prior to the removal of the public nuisance not earlier than the 11thday after the date of service of notice.
(3) If a hearing is requested by a person for whom notice is required under division (B)(1)(c) herein, thehearing shall be held not earlier than the eleventh day after the date of the service of notice.
(4) At the hearing, the junked motor vehicle is presumed, unless demonstrated otherwise by the owner, to beinoperable.
(5) If the information is available at the location of the nuisance, a resolution or order requiring removal of thenuisance must include the vehicle's:
(a) Description;
(b) Vehicle identification number; and
(c) License plate number.
(6) As part of the order authorizing removal or abatement of the pubic nuisance, the court shall:
(a) Prohibit a vehicle from being reconstructed or made operable after removal; and
(b) Require that notice identifying the vehicle or part of the vehicle be given to the Department of PublicSafety not later than the fifth day after the date of removal. On receipt of notice of removal, the Departmentshall immediately cancel the certificate of title issued for the vehicle.
(7) The municipal court shall have full authority to enforce the abatement procedures, including but not limitedto issuing all necessary orders.
(Ord. O-14-02, passed 12-10-02)
Sec. 94.05. Exceptions.
(A) Procedures adopted herein shall not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part thereof:
(1) That is completely enclosed in a building in a lawful manner and is not visible from the street or otherpublic or private property; or
(2) That is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of alicensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, or that is an antique or special interest vehicle stored by a motor vehiclecollector on the collector's property, if the vehicle or part thereof and the outdoor storage area, if any, are:
(a) Maintained in an orderly manner;
(b) Do not constitute a health hazard; and
(c) Screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means, including a fence, rapidly growing trees,or shrubbery. A vehicle or part thereof, covered by a tarp, car blanket, or similar covering does not meetthe requisite screening requirements of this chapter.
(B) For purposes of this section, “ordinary public view” means the view from private or public property, or public right-of-way from average grade of the surrounding property.
(Ord. O-14-02, passed 12-10-02)
CHAPTER 95: PARKS AND RECREATION
*
6
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 95.01. Definitions.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 127/350
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires adifferent meaning.
Alcoholic beverage
. Alcohol and any beverage containing more than 0.5% of alcohol by volume which is capable of usefor beverage purposes, either alone or when diluted.
Amplified sound
. Any sound projected or transmitted by artificial means, including but not limited to amplifiers,loudspeakers or any similar device.
Department
. The City Department of Parks and Recreation.
Person
. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
Public display or exhibition of beer, wine or liquor
. The carrying, possession, or exhibiting of open cans, bottles, glasses,or any other container of beer, wine, or liquor, even though appearing empty, on or within any public park as defined hereinor within any vehicle that is upon a public park as defined herein. This definition does not include carrying or transportingbeer, wine or liquor from retail or wholesale liquor or beer establishments in sacks, cases, boxes, cartons or other similarcontainers if the seal for the alcoholic beverage container is unbroken; nor does this definition include those situationswherein the alcoholic beverage container is being transported or carried to a recycling center or garbage disposal site; nordoes this definition include transportation of alcoholic containers in a compartment of a vehicle that is outside the passengerarea of the vehicle and which is not accessible to the driver and passenger of the vehicle from the passenger area while thevehicle is in operation.
Public park
. Any land designated, used, obtained or acquired by the city for use as a public park, recreation or playgroundarea, and any building or facility thereon, operated by the city as a public park, recreation or playground area, whether or notsuch areas have been formally dedicated to such purpose.
Supervisor
. The person designated and occupying the position of Supervisor of the Department of Parks and Recreation.
Vessel
. Includes any device of human conveyance on the water, whether propelled by motor, wind or human power. Theterm includes but is not limited to any boat, yacht, cruiser, canoe, raft or other watercraft.
(‘84 Code, § 15-1; Ord. O-12-16, passed 10-24-16; Ord. O-03-17, passed 4-10-17)
Sec. 95.02. Prohibited conduct.
Within the limits of any public park, it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to do any of the acts hereinafter specified,except as may be otherwise provided:
(A) Hitch, fasten, lead, ride, drive or let lose any animal or fowl of any kind; provided, that this shall not applyto dogs when led by a cord or chain not more than six feet long.
(B) Operate or use any bicycle, motorcycle, motor scooter or any other vehicle in and upon the public parks ofthe city, save in certain areas, drives and pathways specifically designated or authorized for such purpose.
(C) Carry or discharge any firearm, air gun or slingshot, or rocket, torpedo or any other firework.
(D) Damage, cut, break, injure, deface, disturb, displace or remove any natural or human-made propertieswithin a public park.
(E) Cut or remove any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand, gravel, mulch or fertilizer.
(F) Leave garbage, cans, bottles, papers or other litter or refuse elsewhere than in receptacles providedtherefor.
(G) Overnight camping is prohibited, unless a permit is obtained. Exceptions may be granted by theSupervisor of the Parks and Recreation Department in accordance with this chapter.
(H) For any person to consume or have in his or her possession any alcoholic beverage without a special usepermit issued by the city manager or his/her designated official to: (i) a private individual or organization; or (ii) toan organizations(s) sponsoring a community event that involves neighborhood-wide or communitywide impact.
(1) The special use permit will require a security deposit and permit fee in accordance with the city's feeschedule.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 128/350
(2) The special use permit may restrict consumption of alcoholic beverages to specific areas within theboundaries of the park(s), and may require security for public or private events when attendance isestimated to be over 200 persons.
(I) Operate a motor vehicle at any time without a muffler in good working order, or to operate a motor vehiclein such a manner as to create excessive or unusual noise, or to use a muffler cut-out, bypass or similar device.
(J) Park vehicles or trailers upon the grass, lawn, or anywhere else within a park, other than in those areasdesignated for that purpose.
(K) Park vehicles or trailers anywhere but within and between the visible lines designating a single vehicleparking space of any parking lot of the city parks when such visible parking space lines have been placed uponsuch parking lots.
(L) Park any vehicle or trailer in any parking lot or parking area so as to obstruct, block or hinder ingress oregress of such parking lot or parking area.
(M) Play or bet at or against any game which is played, conducted, dealt or carried on with cards, dice orother device, for money, chips, shells, credit or any other representative of value, or to maintain or exhibit anygambling table or other instrument of gambling or gaming.
(N) Distribute, post, place or erect any advertising, handbill, circular, bill, notice, paper or other advertisingdevice.
(O) Practice, carry on, conduct or solicit for any trade, occupation, business or profession unless such personhas obtained a permit from the Supervisor of the Parks and Recreation Department in accordance with thischapter.
(P) Swim, bathe or wade in any water or waterway in any park except in such water or waterway as may bedesignated for such purpose.
(Q) Operate or use any vessel in any water or waterway except where the water or waterway is specificallydesignated for that purpose.
(R) Start or maintain any outdoor fire except for cooking fires, which shall be started and maintained only in astove, fireplace, barbecue pit or portable camp stove.
(S) Leave a started fire unattended without first completely extinguishing the fire.
(T) Operating any motor vehicle on any designated hike, bike and equestrian trail within the city limits, exceptcertain motor vehicles shall be exempt from this subsection (T), including emergency vehicles and motorvehicles used in the maintenance of such hike, bike and equestrian trails.
(‘84 Code, § 15-2) (Am. Ord. 1-1-97, passed 1-14-97; Ord. O-12-16, passed 10-24-16; Ord. O-03-17, passed 4-10-17)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 95.03. City park operating hours.
City parks will have the following operating hours. Anyone wishing to participate in any activity within a park outsideoperating must obtain a permit from the Parks and Recreation Department.
(A) Twin Lakes from 6:00 a.m. until 12:00 a.m. (midnight).
(1) Exceptions include anyone camping at the, fishing at Lake Jacksboro or Lost Creek Reservoir, orany permitted event.
(B) Neighborhood parks Sunday through Thursday from 8:00 a.m. until 10:00 p.m., and Friday throughSaturday 8:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m.
(C) Sewell Park Sunday through Thursday from 8:00 a.m. until 10:00 p.m., and Friday through Saturday 8:00a.m. until 11:00 p.m.
(‘84 Code, § 15-10) (Ord. 2-4-97, passed 2-25-97; Ord. O-12-16, passed 10-24-16)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 129/350
PERMITS
Sec. 95.15. Permit required for certain activities.
In addition to any other provision of this chapter that requires the obtaining of a permit prior to engaging in a given activity,no person in a park shall conduct, operate, present, manage or take part in any of the following activities unless a permit isobtained prior to the start of the activity, with the exception of activities sponsored or cosponsored by the Parks andRecreation Department:
(A) Any exhibit, dramatic performance, play, motion picture, radio or television broadcast, fair, circus, musicalevent or any similar activity.
(B) Any public meeting, assembly, parade, ceremony, address, speech, political meeting, or any othergathering composed of 500 or more persons.
(C) Any use of a park facility by a group of persons to the exclusion of others.
(D) Any use involving amplified sound.
(‘84 Code, § 15-3; Ord. O-12-16, passed 10-24-16)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 95.16. Park permit application; contents.
(A) A person seeking the issuance of a permit to carry on an activity in a park shall file an application with the Supervisorof the Parks and Recreation Department not less than seven days nor more than 365 days before the date of the proposeduse or activity.
(B) The application shall state:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the person and organization, and its officers, applying for thepermit.
(2) If the use or activity is to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by any person other than the applicant, thename, address and telephone number of that person.
(3) The exact nature of the use or activity for which the permit is being sought.
(4) The day and hours for which the permit is desired.
(5) The park and the portion of the park desired to be used to carry out the proposed use or activity.
(6) An estimate of the anticipated attendance.
(7) Any other information that the Supervisor finds to be reasonably necessary in order to determine whetherto issue a permit.
(‘84 Code, § 15-4; Ord. O-12-16, passed 10-24-16)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 95.17. Criteria for granting permit.
The Supervisor shall consider the application and grant the permit if it is found that the activity or use will satisfy thefollowing criteria:
(A) The proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the generalpublic's use and enjoyment of the park.
(B) The proposed activity or use of the park will not create an unreasonable risk of damage or destruction ofpublic park property.
(C) The proposed activity or use of the park will not create an unreasonable risk of injury to the participants ofthe activity or any other person, or the public generally.
(D) Adequate provision has been made for supervision and security of the activity or use of the park.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 130/350
(E) The facilities desired have not been reserved for another activity or use at the day and time requested inthe application.
(F) The application does not contain any false or misleading information, and no required information isomitted.
(G) The activity or use will not violate any federal, state or local law.
(‘84 Code, § 15-5; Ord. O-12-16, passed 10-24-16)
Sec. 95.18. Conditions on granting permits.
The Supervisor may impose reasonable conditions or restrictions on the granting of a permit, including but not limited to anyof the following:
(A) Restrictions on fires, fireworks, amplified sound, dancing, sports, use of animals, equipment or vehicles,the number of persons to be present, the location of any bandstand or stage, or such other restrictions as maybe reasonable considering the intended use or activity, its effect on the general public use and enjoyment of parkproperty, and the possible injury or damage to persons or property.
(B) A requirement that the applicant post a reasonable deposit of security for the repair of any damage to parkproperty or the cost of cleanup, or both.
(C) A requirement that the applicant pay a reasonable fee to defray the cost of furnishing adequate securityforces by the city at the proposed use or activity if required.
(D) A requirement that the permittee furnish additional sanitary and refuse facilities that might be reasonablynecessary based on the use or activity for which the permit is being sought.
(‘84 Code, § 15-6; Ord. O-12-16, passed 10-24-16)
Sec. 95.19. Permit nontransferable without consent.
Permits shall not be transferable without the written consent of the Supervisor of the Department of Parks and Recreation.(‘84 Code, § 15-7; Ord. O-12-16, passed 10-24-16)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 95.20. Notice of decision; appeal.
Within seven days after submission of an application, the Supervisor shall inform an applicant in writing of his or herapproval or reasons for refusing a permit or of any conditions attached to the issuance of a permit, and any aggrieved personshall have the right to appeal in writing within six days to the City Council, which shall consider the application. (‘84 Code,§ 15-8; Ord. O-12-16, passed 10-24-16)
Sec. 95.21. Permittee bound by rules and regulations.
A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all applicable ordinances as fully as though the same wereinserted in his or her permit. (‘84 Code, § 15-9; Ord. O-12-16, passed 10-24-16)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
LAKE JACKSBORO
Sec. 95.35. Fishing rules and regulations.
Fishing in Lake Jacksboro and Lost Creek Reservoir shall be subject to the same rules and laws prescribed by state law inthe methods of taking, baits allowed, seasons, limits, and in all other matters, unless specifically modified by action of theCity Council. (‘84 Code, § 15-17; Ord. O-12-16, passed 10-24-16)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 95.36. Swimming regulated.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 131/350
Swimming is prohibited in Lake Jacksboro and Lost Creek Reservoir in the following areas. Prohibited areas will be markedwith appropriate signs.
(A) Boat ramps.
(B) Directly from either dam (exiting and entering the water from the dam is prohibited).
(C) Gate control towers.
(‘84 Code, § 15-18; Ord. O-12-16, passed 10-24-16)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 95.37. Going upon Lake Jacksboro gate control tower prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to go about, on or upon the gate control tower situated on Lake Jacksboro and Lost CreekReservoir. (‘84 Code, § 14-9; Ord. 107, passed 5-2-50; Ord. O-12-16, passed 10-24-16)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 95.38. Washing vehicles at Lake Jacksboro and Lost Creek Reservoir prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to wash automobiles, trucks, or any other motor vehicle on the causeway from the waterat Lake Jacksboro, or to use the water from the lake to wash vehicles by means of carrying water from the lake and washingvehicles in the public road, allowing the waste water to drain back into the lake. (‘84 Code, § 14-10; Ord. 107A, passed 5-13-50; Ord. O-12-16, passed 10-24-16)
Sec. 95.39. Spillway.
(A) It is an offense for any person to walk, stand, fish, travel by foot or operate a motor vehicle over the spillway betweenLake Jacksboro and Lost Creek Reservoir during periods of high waters when barricades are in place or signs have beenposted advising that the spillway is closed. Periods of high waters include those periods when water is flowing across thespillway.
(B) The operator of a motor vehicle or pedestrian shall comply with all applicable traffic control devices, barricades,gates, instructions, signals, warnings or markings of a warning sign, being a signal, marking or device place on a barricade,during periods of high water, to warn or regulate motor vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(C) It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to walk, run, drive or otherwise pass, by any means, around abarricade, meaning an obstruction placed in, on, before or across the spillway, by the city, to prevent the passage ofpersons, pedestrians or motor vehicles over the spillway.
(D) It shall be unlawful for any person, as a pedestrian, or as an operator of a motor vehicle, to fail to comply with allapplicable traffic control devices, barricades, warnings, signs, signals, markings or gates placed to prohibit, direct or deterpersons, pedestrians or vehicular traffic.
(E) It shall be a defense to the offenses listed herein if the person was following the directions of a peace officer or is aperson whose duties require the person to go beyond or around a barricade.
(F) It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to move, destroy, alter, a barricade, traffic control device, gate,instruction, signal, warning or marking of a warning sign placed to prevent the passage of persons, pedestrians or motorvehicles over the spillway.
(G) Any person violating any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon convictionthereof shall be fined in a sum not to exceed $500.00. Proof and evidence of a culpable mental state are not required forproof of an offense stated herein.
(Ord. O-02-07, passed 5-8-07; Ord. O-12-16, passed 10-24-16)
CHAPTER 96: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
*
CHAPTER 97: CURFEW HOURS FOR MINORS
*
Sec. 97.01. Definitions.
(A) In this section:
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 132/350
(1)
Curfew hours
means between the hours of:
(a) 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. on thefollowing day;
(b) 12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Friday or Saturday; and
(c) 9:00 a.m. until 2:30 p.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday.
(2)
Emergency
means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls forimmediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, orany situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
(3)
Establishment
means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public isinvited, including, but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment.
(4)
Guardian
means:
(a) A person who, under court order, is the guardian of a minor; or
(b) A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court.
(5)
Minor
means any person under 17 years of age.
(6)
Operator
means any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation or other legal entity operating,managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association orpartnership and the officers of a corporation.
(7)
Parent
means a person who is:
(a) A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another person; or
(b) At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of aminor.
(8)
Police department
means the City of Jacksboro Police Department or any successor thereto.
(9)
Public place
means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access andincludes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartmenthouses, office buildings, transport facilities, restaurants, theaters, game rooms and shops, shopping centers orany other place that offers for sale services or merchandise.
(10)
Remain
means to:
(a) Linger or stay; or
(b) Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer, the owner, operator, or otherperson in control of the premises.
(11)
Serious bodily injury
means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death,serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member ororgan.
(Ord. O-02-15, passed 2-10-15; Ord. O-01-2021, passed 1-11-21)
Sec. 97.02. Offenses.
(A) A minor commits an offense if he knowingly remains, walks, runs, stands, drives, or rides about in or upon any publicplace or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours.
(B) A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, theminor to remain, walk, runs, stand, drive, or ride about in or upon any public place or on the premises of any establishmentwithin the city during curfew hours.
(C) The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly allows a minor toremain, walk, run, stand, drives, or ride about in or upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours.
(Ord. O-02-15, passed 2-10-15; Ord. O-01-2021, passed 1-11-21)
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 133/350
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 97.05
.
Sec. 97.03. Defenses.
(A) It is a defense to prosecution under
§ 97.02
that the minor was:
(1) Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian or accompanied by another adult approved by the parentor guardian;
(2) On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;
(3) In a motor vehicle involved in intrastate or interstate travel or transportation through which passagethrough the curfew area is the most direct route;
(4) Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, withoutany detour or stop;
(5) Involved in an emergency;
(6) On an errand made necessary by an illness, injury or medical emergency;
(7) On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if theneighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's presence;
(8) Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and/or sponsoredby the City of Jacksboro, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, orgoing to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious or other recreationalactivity supervised by adults and sponsored by the City of Jacksboro, a civic organization or another similarentity that takes responsibility for the minor;
(9) Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exerciseof religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or
(10) Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with Tex. Fam. CodeCh. 31.
(B) It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under
§ 97.02
(C) that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishmentpromptly notifies the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hoursand refused to leave.
(C) It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under
§ 97.02
with respect to the curfew hours of 9:00 a.m., until 2:30 p.m.,Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday, that the offense occurred during the scheduled vacation of or on aholiday observed by the school in which the minor is enrolled, or that the minor has graduated from high school, or receiveda high school equivalency certificate; or that the minor has permission to be absent from the school from the school or be ina public place from an authorized school official or a parent or guardian. In case of a minor being educated in a homeschool, a parent or guardian shall be deemed a school official.
(Ord. O-02-15, passed 2-10-15; Ord. O-01-2021, passed 1-11-21)
Sec. 97.04. Enforcement.
Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and thereason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless theofficer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, nodefense in
§ 97.03
is present. (Ord. O-02-15, passed 2-10-15; Ord. O-01-2021, passed 1-11-21)
Sec. 97.05. Penalties.
(A) A person who violates a provision of this Chapter is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day duringwhich the violation is committed, continued or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not toexceed $500.00.
(B) When required by Tex. Fam. Code § 51.08, as amended, the municipal court shall waive original jurisdiction over aminor who violates
§ 97.02
(B) of this Chapter and shall refer the minor to juvenile court.
(C) In assessing punishment for either a parent or minor, municipal court judges are encouraged to consider acommunity service program.
(Ord. O-02-15, passed 2-10-15; Ord. O-01-2021, passed 1-11-21)
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 134/350
CHAPTER 98: CODE ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 98.01. Short title.
This chapter shall be cited as the “Notice of Violation Chapter.” (Ord. O-04-10, passed 3-23-10)
Sec. 98.02. Purpose.
This chapter provides procedural and substantive rules relation to the issuance of citations by non-peace officers todefendants accused of violation criminal ordinances of the City of Jacksboro. (Ord. O-04-10, passed 3-23-10)
Sec. 98.03. Application.
This chapter applies to the issuance of citations alleging criminal violations within the jurisdiction of the municipal court. Theprocedures of this chapter apply only to offenses alleged to occur on or after the date of enactment. (Ord. O-04-10, passed3-23-10)
Sec. 98.04. Definitions.
(A)
General
. Words and phrases used in the chapter shall have the meanings set forth in this section. Terms that are notdefined below, but are defined elsewhere in the Code of Ordinances, shall be given the meanings set forth in the Code.Words and phrases not defined in the Code of Ordinances shall be given their common, ordinary meaning unless thecontext clearly requires otherwise. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense shall include thefuture tense; words in the plural number shall include the singular number (and vice versa). The word “shall” is alwaysmandatory, while the word “may” is merely directory. Headings and captions are for reference purposes only.
(B)
Specific
.
City
. The City of Jacksboro, an incorporated municipality located in Jack County, Texas.
Notice of violation
. When issued in the form set forth in
§ 98.07
, shall also be known and treated as a citation and theterminology is merely to distinguish forms issued by peace officers and shall not be afforded any legal distinction.
Person
. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, business, corporation or other entity.
(Ord. O-04-10, passed 3-23-10)
Sec. 98.05. Relation to related laws.
A citation issued pursuant to this chapter does not relate to the issuance of a citation by a peace officer pursuant to Tex.Code of Criminal Procedure, Article 14.06(b) or Tex. Transportation Code § 543.003. (Ord. O-04-10, passed 3-23-10)
Sec. 98.06. Authority to issue notice of violations.
Pursuant to this chapter, and the scope of their assigned duties, a notice of violation may be issued by any of the followingindividuals:
(A) Health Inspector
(B) City Inspector
(C) Building Inspector or Official
(D) Road Inspector
(E) Code Enforcement or Code Compliance officer
(F) Fire Inspector
(G) Any other individual authorized to enforce the city's Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. O-04-10, passed 3-23-10)
Sec. 98.07. Form and content of notice of violation.
Notice of violation issued under this section must be in a form approved by the Municipal Court Clerk that includes thefollowing information:
(A) The name, address, date of birth or driver's license number and physical description, and telephonenumber of the person cited;
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 135/350
(B) The offense for which the person is charged;
(C) The date and location of the offense;
(D) An appearance date;
(E) A statement requiring the person receiving the notice of violation to appear at Municipal Court on or beforethe appearance date indicated on the notice of violation;
(F) A statement of the person's promise to respond to the citation, pursuant to Tex. Code of CriminalProcedure Article 27.14, by the appearance date indicated on the citation, including a place for the person citedto provide the person's signature, and;
(G) The signature of the person issuing the citation.
(Ord. O-04-10, passed 3-23-10)
Sec. 98.08. Pleading subsequent to the issuance of a notice of violation.
All pleas arising from the issuance of a notice of violation under this chapter shall be made pursuant to Tex. Code ofCriminal Procedure Article 27.14. (Ord. O-04-10, passed 3-23-10)
Sec. 98.09. Issuance of notice of violation by mail.
(A) Notice of violation may be sent certified mail or regular mail consistent with applicable city ordinances and state lawfor the offense alleged.
(B) A notice of violation issued by mail must be in the same form and of the same content, as that contained in
§ 98.07
,to the extent practicable.
(C) No warrant shall be issued for failure to appear for any notice of violation issued under this section, unless furtherjudicial action is taken as provided in divisions (D) and (E) of this section.
(D) If the notice of violation is by any manner other than personal delivery where a signature is obtained, the court mayissue a summons for the person with a copy of the complaint attached ordering the appearance of the person to appear inperson, by legal counsel or in a manner authorized by Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure Article 27.14.
(E) If a defendant fails to appear in response to a summons a capias warrant may issue consistent with Tex. Code ofCriminal Procedure Article 23.03.
(Ord. O-04-10, passed 3-23-10)
Sec. 98.10. Ordinance violation of written promise to appear.
A person issued a notice of violation, as authorized by this chapter, commits an offense if the person fails to appear or entera plea pursuant to
§ 98.08
on or before the appearance date indicated on the citation. (Ord. O-04-10, passed 3-23-10)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 98.99
.
Sec. 98.11. Ordinance violation failure to appear.
A person issued a notice of violation, as authorized by this chapter, commits an offense if the person fails to appear or entera plea pursuant to
§ 98.08
on or before the appearance date indicated on the summons. Such a person may also be held incontempt, consistent with state law. (Ord. O-04-10, passed 3-23-10)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 98.99
.
Sec. 98.12. Interference or obstruction of issuance.
A person commits an offense if the person interferes with or obstructs the issuance of a notice of violation under thischapter. (Ord. O-04-10, passed 3-23-10)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 98.99
.
Sec. 98.13. Providing false or fictitious name.
A person commits an offense if the person gives a false or fictitious name, address, or other information to an individualauthorized to issue a citation under this chapter. (Ord. O-04-10, passed 3-23-10)
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 136/350
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 98.99
.
Sec. 98.14. Deferred disposition.
Any person, upon agreement with the prosecution, and order of the court, may receive deferred disposition on any citycode violation. (Ord. O-04-10, passed 3-23-10)
Sec. 98.15. Culpable mental state.
Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state is not required for the proof of an offense defined by this chapter. (Ord.O-04-10, passed 3-23-10)
Sec. 98.99. Penalty.
Each violation under this section is a misdemeanor offense, punishable upon conviction by a fine not to exceed $500.00.(Ord. O-04-10, passed 3-23-10)
CHAPTER 99: GARAGE OR HOME SALES
*
9
Sec. 99.01. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires adifferent meaning.
Garage or home sale
. Refers to the sale of personal property on the same lot as a residential dwelling within a residentialzoning district and means to include yard sales, estate sales, and moving sales. It shall not include the sale of retailmerchandise sold for the benefit of a commercial retail establishment.
(Ord. O-16-10, passed 10-12-10)
Sec. 99.02. Exclusion.
It shall be unlawful under this article for a commercial retail establishment (e.g., department stores, warehouses, and thelike) to sell or offer for sale merchandise at a garage sale. (Ord. O-16-10, passed 10-12-10)
Sec. 99.03. Permit.
(A) Prior to the commencement date of any garage or home sale, the person desiring to engage in the sale shall obtainfrom the City Building Inspector a permit for such sale.
(B) Any person desiring a permit under this article shall make application for such permit to the Building Inspector, settingforth the location, time and date of said sale, the name and address of the person holding said sale and the type of goods,wares and merchandise to be sold.
(C) The permittee shall be responsible for compliance with the requirements of this section.
(Ord. O-16-10, passed 10-12-10)
Sec. 99.04. Permit fee.
A non-refundable permit fee of $5.00 shall accompany the permit application to cover the cost of administration of thisprovision. (Ord. O-16-10, passed 10-12-10)
Sec. 99.05. Number, duration of sales.
(A) Four garage or home sales may be held per year per household covered by the permit application. No other suchsales shall be held at that location during that year, which year consists of 365 days, between January 1st and December31.
(B) Each sale may be held from Thursday through Saturday, dawn to dusk, and no more than three consecutive days induration.
(C) If the sale continues for more than one day, the days must be consecutive.
(D) No more than four permits shall be issued for any one premises during said year.
(Ord. O-16-10, passed 10-12-10)
Sec. 99.06. Signs.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 137/350
(A) The permittee shall be entitled to one on-premises sign placed one day prior to the garage sale.
(B) The permittee shall be entitled to post four additional signs off-premises for the purpose of notifying the public of thedate, time and location of the sale; provided, however, no sign shall be placed in a public right-of-way, in any sight visibilitytriangle, utility pole, official sign, tree, nor be in excess of three feet above ground level or exceed six square feet in area.
(C) The off-premise signs may be placed one day prior to the sale.
(D) All signs or notices posted in regard to any garage or home sale for which a permit is issued under the provisions ofthis article shall be located so as not to constitute an impairment to or obstruction of traffic.
(E) All signs must be removed before 8:00 a.m. the day after the sale has concluded.
(Ord. O-16-10, passed 10-12-10)
Sec. 99.07. Number of sale participants.
No more than two extra persons may participate in the garage sale with the applicant. At the time of application, theapplicant must list the names and address of the persons participating in the garage or home sale with the applicant. Allpersons involved in the sale, the applicant as well as the other participants must be a person who does not hold himself outas engaging in, or does not habitually engage in, the business of selling such property at retail. (Ord. O-16-10, passed 10-12-10)
Sec. 99.08. Churches conducting sales.
The congregation for churches in residentially zoned portions of the city may conduct sales provided that all the rules,regulations, and restrictions in this article are adhered to (Fee Exempt). (Ord. O-16-10, passed 10-12-10)
Sec. 99.09. Nonprofit organizations and project fund raising organizations.
Any nonprofit organization or project fund raising organization that benefits a particular group of citizens in Jack Countymay conduct sales provided that all the rules, regulations, and restrictions in this article are adhered to (Fee Exempt). (Ord.O-16-10, passed 10-12-10)
Sec. 99.10. Properties not in residentially zoned districts.
Any property that is not in a residentially zoned district may not conduct a garage sale at any time. Residentially zoneddistricts are to include single-family residential, two-family residential, and multifamily residential districts only. (Ord. O-16-10, passed 10-12-10)
Sec. 99.11. Right to refuse permit.
Should any person be cited or warned for violations of this article two or more times during any 12-month period, the citymay refuse to issue that individual a permit to conduct a garage/home sale anytime during the subsequent 12-month periodwhether or not said person resides at the same property where the violation occurred. (Ord. O-16-10, passed 10-12-10)
Sec. 99.12. Offense.
It shall be an offense to:
(A) Hold a garage sale without a permit;
(B) Have more than four garage sales in one year;
(C) Exceed the sign limitations in
§ 99.06
;
(D) Fail to remove the signs as indicated;
(E) Have more than two extra people participating.
(Ord. O-16-10, passed 10-12-10)
Sec. 99.13. Culpable mental state.
Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state is not required for the proof of an offense defined by this chapter. (Ord.O-16-10, passed 10-12-10)
Sec. 99.99. Penalty.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 138/350
Each violation under this section is a misdemeanor offense punishable upon conviction by a fine not to exceed $500.00.(Ord. O-16-10, passed 10-12-10)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 110: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
*
Sec. 110.01. Permit required and permit fees established.
(A) With respect to the sale of alcoholic beverages including mixed beverages, it shall be unlawful for any person tomake such sales within the City without having first obtained proper certification and approval from the office of the CitySecretary and paid the annual permit fee, in addition to all other certificates or licenses required. As allowed by the TexasAlcohol Beverage Code permit fees shall be as follows:
(1) For on-premises consumption, the city hereby levies an annual fee in a sum equal to fifty percent of theState's third renewal fee for a mixed beverage permit, except a temporary or agent's license issued for premiselocations within the corporate limits of the city; and
(2) For off-premises consumption, the city hereby levies an annual fee in a sum equal to fifty percent of theState's fee for a retailer's off-premises license.
(B) The City Secretary shall issue a receipt for all permit fees and shall keep a record of the same in the City Secretary'soffice. All receipts issued for the payment of permit fees under the terms of this section shall terminate at midnight on theday before the anniversary date of their issuance, and no receipt shall be issued covering a longer term than one (1) year.
(Ord. O-14-16, passed 11-21-16)
Sec. 110.02. Processing procedures established.
(A) Before the City Secretary shall sign or certify any application for a permit or license under the Texas AlcoholicBeverage Code, or any annual renewal, such application shall be submitted to the appropriate city departments to ensurethat the application complies with all city ordinances and zoning regulations and are for establishments located in a wetarea.
(B) Before sales of any alcoholic beverages including mixed beverages may begin, a city permit must be obtained. inorder to obtain a city permit an application must be filed with the City Secretary along with:
(1) A copy of a current and valid Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission permit; and
(2) Payment of a permit fee to the city in the amount of one-half of the state fee for each permit.
(C) The city shall issue an official permit to be displayed along with the state license or permit on the licensed orpermitted premises.
(Ord. O-14-16, passed 11-21-16)
Sec. 110.03. Hours of sale.
Under the authority granted to municipalities under the Alcoholic Beverage Code including but not limited to authoritygranted under section 109.32, an establishment that sells alcoholic beverages may do so at any time during a day that thosesales are allowed under the code as amended. (Ord. O-14-16, passed 11-21-16)
Sec. 110.04. Sales near churches, public schools and private schools.
Under the authority granted to municipalities under the Alcoholic Beverage Code, including but not limited to authoritygranted under section 109.33 and only to the extent allowed, stated and defined by the Alcoholic Beverage Code, there maybe no sale of alcoholic beverages in the city's corporate limits by a dealer whose place of business is within 300 feet of achurch, public or private school, or public hospital (as those terms are defined in the Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended).(Ord. O-14-16, passed 11-21-16)
Sec. 110.05. Other sales restricted.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 139/350
Under the authority granted to municipalities under the Alcoholic Beverage Code, including but not limited to authoritygranted under section 109.32, an establishment that sells beer may not be located within any residential zoning areas. (Ord.O-14-16, passed 11-21-16)
Sec. 110.06. Penalty.
Any violation of any of the terms of this chapter, whether denominated in this chapter as unlawful or not, shall be deemed aclass C misdemeanor. Any person, corporation or other type of business entity or organization convicted of any suchviolation shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $500.00 for each incidence of violation. Each violation is considered aseparate offense and will be punished separately. (Ord. O-14-16, passed 11-21-16)
CHAPTER 111: TAXICABS
Sec. 111.01. Permit required to conduct taxicab business.
(A)
Definitions
. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates orrequires a different meaning.
Conduct a taxicab business
. The use of one or more taxicabs within the corporate limits of the city by the owner thereof forthe purpose of carrying passengers for hire, either by driving the same or having the same driven by some other person;provided, that this definition shall not apply to any licensed chauffeur hired as a driver for any person, firm or corporationholding a permit to conduct a taxicab business in the city.
Taxicab
. Any and all vehicles carrying passengers for hire, except motor buses or coaches operated by bus lines overdesignated routes in and through the city.
(B)
Application for permit; contents
. Before any person, firm or corporation shall conduct a taxicab business in the city, heor she shall file with the City Clerk an application to the City Council for a permit to conduct such business in the city. Theapplication shall state the name and address of such applicant, whether the applicant is an individual, firm or corporation,and if a firm, the name and address of each member thereof and the number of vehicles proposed to be operated undersuch permit.
(‘84 Code, §§ 19-11, 19-12) (Ord. 86, passed 5-11-48)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
State Law reference–
Authority to regulate, Tex. Local Gov't Code § 215.004.
CHAPTER 112: RETAIL ELECTRIC PROVIDERS
Sec. 112.01. Registration; fees; annual renewal.
(A)
Registration
. No retail electric provider, without first registering with the municipality, may serve the residents as aretail electrical provider.
(B)
Form
. Registration under this chapter shall be submitted on a form provided by the municipality. The registration shallbe accompanied by any additional documents required therein or in rules issued by the City Manager. These forms shallinclude, but not be limited to, the following;
(1) The name and legal status of the registrant, including any affiliates who are required to register pursuant tothis section;
(2) The name, address and telephone number of an officer, agent or employee who will serve as the contactpoint for the registrant;
(3) The name(s), address(es), and telephone number(s) of the individual(s) designated to receive, process,and resolve customer complaints.
(C)
Registration fee
. Each retail electric provider required to register under this chapter shall pay to the municipality aninitial registration fee in the amount of $50.00. The subsequent annual registration fee shall be initially set at $50.00, butmay be changed from time to time by the City Manager based upon the City Manager's assessment of the amountnecessary to recover all of the municipality's costs incurred in processing the registration.
(D)
Registration fee requirements
.
(1) Each retail electric provider registered in the municipality shall pay an annual registration fee comprised ofadministrative costs as set forth in division (C) for maintenance of its registration.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 140/350
(2) Unless otherwise specified, the annual registration fee shall be paid to the municipality by January 31 ofeach year.
(3) For good cause, the municipality may extend for not to exceed one month, the time for making payment.
(4) No acceptance by the municipality of any payment hereunder shall be construed as an accord that theamount paid is in fact the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of such payment be construed as a releaseof any claim the municipality may have for additional sums payable.
(5) The payments hereunder are not a payment in lieu of any tax, fee or other assessment except asspecifically provided in this section, or as required by applicable law.
(6) Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event a registrant that is obligated to pay a fee ceases to provideservice for any reason, such registrant shall make a final payment of any amounts owed to the municipalitywithin 90 calendar days of the date its operations in the municipality cease.
(E)
Exemption
. The REP serving as electric provider for the City of Jacksboro's municipal electric needs is exempt fromthe filing requirement during the term of service unless that REP serves end users within municipal limits other than themunicipality. The REP serving municipal accounts is exempt from the registration fee.
(Ord. 1-1-02, passed 1-8-02)
Sec. 112.02. Monitoring.
(A) The municipality may, in its discretion, monitor the registration and certification status of a REP. Monitoring mayinclude:
(1) Confirming with the PUC every six months that certification is current; and
(2) Referring all customer complaints to both the REP and PUC.
(B) All registered REPs must file a quarterly report regarding each complaint from a resident of Jacksboro until resolutionis achieved. Such report shall include;
(1) The name and address of the complainant;
(2) The date the complaint originated;
(3) The nature of the complaint;
(4) Resolved matters; and
(5) Unresolved matters.
(Ord. 1-1-02, passed 1-8-02)
Sec. 112.03. Suspension and revocation.
(A)
Generally
. The municipality may suspend or revoke a retail electric provider's registration and operation in themunicipality for significant violations of PURA Chapter 39 or the rules of the Public Utility Commission of Texas adoptedunder that chapter, or for the retail electric provider's failure to comply with any provision of this chapter.
(B)
Violations
. Significant violations include, but are not limited to, the following;
(1) Providing false or misleading information to the PUCT or the City of Jacksboro;
(2) Engaging in fraudulent, unfair, misleading, deceptive, or anticompetitive business practices or unlawfuldiscrimination;
(3) Switching, or causing to be switched, the retail electric provider for a customer without first obtaining thecustomer's permission;
(4) Billing an unauthorized charge, or causing an unauthorized charge to be billed to a customer's retailelectric service bill;
(5) Failure to maintain continuous and reliable electric service to its customers pursuant to this chapter;
(6) Failure to maintain the minimum level of financial resources as required by the PUCT;
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 141/350
(7) Bankruptcy, insolvency, or the inability to meet financial obligations on a reasonable and timely basis;
(8) Failure to timely remit payment for in voiced charges to a transmission and distribution utility pursuant tothe terms of the statewide standardized tariff adopted by the PUCT;
(9) Failure to observe any scheduling, operating, planning, reliability, and settlement policies, rules,guidelines, and procedures established by the independent system operator of the transmission grid;
(10) A pattern of not responding to PUCT or City of Jacksboro inquiries or customer complaints in a timelyfashion;
(11) Suspension or revocation of a registration, certification, or license by any state or federal authority;
(12) Conviction of a felony by the registrant or principal employed by the registrant, of any crime involvingfraud, theft or deceit related to the registrant's service;
(13) Not providing retail electric service to customers within 24 months of the certificate being granted by thePUCT;
(14) Failure to serve as a provider of last resort if required to do so by the PUCT pursuant to PURA §39.106(f); and
(15) Failure, or a pattern of failures to meet the conditions of this ordinance or PUCT rules or orders.
(C)
Initiation of revocation process
.
(1) Upon information and belief, the City Manager or a designated representative may give notice to aregistrant that, based upon alleged or perceived violations of this chapter, registration is to be revoked in notless than 30 days from the date the notice is deposited in the U.S. Mail. The registrant will have not less than tendays from the date the notice is mailed to respond to the notice and show why revocation should not occur.
(2) The notice letter shall specifically identify the alleged or perceived violations and indicate the scheduleddate for revocation.
(3) Not less than seven days prior to the date scheduled for revocation, the City Manager or his or herdesignated representative will issue a written ruling that revokes the registration, dismisses the action or extendsthe process of review of registration according to an identified schedule.
(D)
Appeal
. If registration is to be revoked, a registrant may file an appeal to the City Council with the City Manager. If theappeal is filed prior to the date scheduled for revocation, the action will be stayed for 30 days to provide an opportunity forthe City council to consider the appeal. If the Council agrees to entertain the appeal, the registrant may submit writtenmaterials to the Council prior to the Council's consideration of the matter in a noticed public hearing. However, oralpresentations related to the appeal are a matter of Council discretion and not a matter of the REP's right.
(Ord. 1-1-02, passed 1-8-02)
Sec. 112.99. Penalty.
(A) Any registrant who has not been granted an extension of time for remittance of a fee due and who fails to remit anyfee imposed under division (D) of § 112.01 prior to January 31 shall pay a penalty of $100.00.
(B) Any registrant who has not been granted an extension of time for remittance of a fee due, and who fails to pay anydelinquent remittance on or before a period of 30 days following the date on which the remittance first becomes delinquentshall pay a second delinquency penalty of $15.00 plus the amount of the fee and the amount of the penalty first imposed.
(C) Any REP that remains delinquent in the payment of annual registration fees after March 31 shall be subject to havingregistration suspended.
(Ord. 1-1-02, passed 1-8-02)
CHAPTER 113: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Sec. 113.01. Purpose.
This chapter is and shall be deemed an exercise of the police powers of the state and of the city for the public safety,comfort, convenience and protection of the city and the citizens thereof, and all of the provisions of this chapter shall beconstructed for the accomplishment of that purpose. (Ord. O-04-03, passed 2-11-03; Ord. O-04-18, passed 3-12-18)
Sec. 113.02. Definitions.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 142/350
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires adifferent meaning:
Charitable purpose
. The solicitation of money or property for the benefit of a charity, philanthropy, or nonprofitorganization or for the poor, underprivileged, needy, crippled, or handicapped persons; the teaching of patriotism orassistance to veterans or veteran's organizations; or for existing educational institutions or for the establishment orendowment of educational institutions. Nonprofit organizations shall include yet not be limited to American Cancer Society,American Heart Association, Boy Scouts of America, Girl Scouts, Multiple Sclerosis and Muscular Dystrophy.
City
. The City of Jacksboro, Texas.
Consumer
. An individual who acquires real or personal property, services, money, or credit for personal, family orhousehold purposes.
Parkway
. The area between the edge of the designated street and the adjacent property owner's property line.
Peddler, solicitor or person
. Any individual, firm, company, partnership, corporation, association, trust, society, religioussect, organization, league, or other legal entity and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, agent, or similar representative.
Religious organization
. An organization that is dedicated to the support of a church, religious society, or any otherreligious sect, group or order.
Sidewalk
. Any surface provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians.
Solicitation
. Conduct whereby a person or its agent, member, or representative solicits property, financial aid and money, orany article representing monetary value; or sells or offers to sell a product, article, tag, service, publication, ticket,advertisement, or subscription. “Solicitation” shall include persons engaged in the delivery of handbills or circulars door-to-door for the solicitation of money, products, services or other items of pecuniary value. An offer of membership in anyorganization is expressly excluded.
Street
. The portion of the street that is paved, designated, or used for vehicular traffic, and all areas dedicated to public usefor public street purposes, which includes parkways, alleys and sidewalks.
Traffic island
. A barrier within a street or roadway to exclude vehicles, designated for the purpose of separating or directingstreams of vehicular traffic.
(Ord. O-04-03, passed 2-11-03; Ord. O-04-18, passed 3-12-18)
Sec. 113.03. Permits.
(A)
Permits required
.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to attempt or to peddle, sell, solicit, canvass, or take orders for anyservices, wares, merchandise, or goods, or any article of value, including plants, flowers, paintings, novelties,painting house numbers on streets, firewood, books, magazines, photographs, or any articles for future delivery,on a sidewalk, parking lot or parkway within the city or from door-to-door without having first obtained a permittherefor from the city.
(2) Each person engaged in peddling or soliciting or selling as defined in subsection (A)(1) above must have apermit issued under the terms of this section, and such permit shall be personal to the applicant and shall not bereproduced nor assigned nor transferred to any other person. Any such attempted transfer or reproduction shallrender the permit void.
(3) Each permit shall expire as of the date noted thereon, which date shall be in accordance with theprovisions of this chapter, and such permit shall indicate the hours when peddling, solicitation and selling withinthe city is permitted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(4) A permit shall not be issued to any person under 14 years of age.
(5) Solicitation shall be deemed completed when made, regardless of whether the person making thesolicitation receives any contribution or makes any sale.
(B)
Permit application
. Every person desiring to solicit in the city shall, unless otherwise excepted, shall apply for a permitas herein provided. Each application for a permit required by this section shall be in writing under oath, notarized and shall
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 143/350
set out the following:
(1) Name of the applicant, with his permanent residence;
(2) Whether the person represents a partnership, corporation or association; and:
(a) The business address and telephone number of the applicant;
(b) If a partnership, the names of all partners and the principal business address and telephone numberof each partner;
(c) If a corporation, the person applying shall state whether it is organized under the laws of the state oris a foreign corporation, and must show the mailing address, business location, telephone number, nameof the individual in charge of the Jacksboro office of such corporation, and the names and addresses of allofficers and directors or trustees of said corporation, and, if a foreign corporation, the place ofincorporation;
(d) If an association, the application shall show the association's principal address and telephonenumber, if any, and shall show names and principal business or residence addresses and telephonenumbers of all members of the association unless they exceed ten in number, in which case the applicationshall so state and the person registering may alternatively list the names and principal business orresidence addresses and telephone numbers of the officers and directors or trustees of the association. Ifthe association is part of a multistate organization or association, the mailing address and businesslocations of its local office;
(3) Name and address of each person to solicit under the permit. The applicant or any agent of the applicantmust meet the following criteria:
(a) Be currently authorized to work full-time in the United States;
(b) Hold a valid driver's license or identification card issued by the state or the state in which thedefendant resides;
(c) Be able to communicate in the English language;
(d) Not be afflicted with a physical or mental disease or disability that is likely to endanger the publichealth or safety;
(e) Not have been convicted or placed on probation or deferred adjudication for a crime involving:
1. Criminal homicide as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code chapter 19;
2. Kidnapping as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code chapter 20;
3. A sexual offense as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code chapter 21;
4. An assaultive offense as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code chapter 22, other than a class Cmisdemeanor;
5. Robbery as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code chapter 29;
6. Burglary as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code chapter 30;
7. Theft as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code, chapter 31, but only if the violation is punishable asa felony;
8. Fraud as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code chapter 32;
9. Tampering with a governmental record as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code chapter 37;
10. Public indecency (prostitution or obscenity) as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code chapter 43;
11. The transfer, carrying, or possession of a weapon in violation of V.T.C.A., Penal Code, chapter46, but only if the violation is punishable as a felony;
12. A violation of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code chapter 483, dangerous drugs, of the kind thatis punishable as a felony;
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 144/350
13. A violation of the Controlled Substances Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code chapter 481that is punishable as a felony; or
14. Criminal attempt to commit any of the offenses listed in subsection 1. through 13. of thissubsection;
(f) Not be addicted to the use of alcohol or narcotics;
(g) Be subject to no outstanding warrants of arrest;
(4) The names, mailing address and telephone number of all individuals who will be in direct charge or controlof the solicitation of funds;
(5) The kind, type and character of goods or services he proposes to offer for sale, including the name brand,manufacturer and distributor of goods and commodities and the name, publisher and distributor of all books,magazines or periodicals to be offered for sale;
(6) Names and addresses of five persons as references, excluding relatives and persons living with theapplicant;
(7) How often the applicant will solicit during the year;
(8) The time period within which the solicitation of funds is to be made, giving the date of the beginning ofsolicitation and its projected conclusion;
(9) A description of the methods and means by which the solicitation of funds is to be accomplished;
(10) The names of any cities where the applicant has worked within the previous six months;
(11) State driver's license number or a state approved identification card number of applicant and eachsolicitor.
(C)
Permit attachments
. In addition, there shall be attached to each application for a permit the following:
(1)
Photographs
. Two recent photographic likenesses of the applicant's face, and any solicitor soliciting undersaid permit, which photographs shall not exceed one inch square in size.
(2)
Employment verification
. A certificate or letter from the president, vice-president, general manager, salesmanager, assistant sales manager or district or area manager of the company for which the applicant works,sells or solicits stating that the applicant is an employee and/or agent of such company.
(3)
Letters of recommendation
. In the event the applicant is an individual who is not canvassing, selling orsoliciting for any firm or company, letters of recommendation from two citizens of the applicant's permanentresidence shall be submitted.
(4)
Sales tax
. Proof of a sales tax permit issued by the state or proof that the goods sold are not subject tosuch sales tax.
(5)
Property owner permission
. An itinerant merchant who makes application to offer his goods for sale uponprivate property shall provide written proof that he has permission to use such property from the owner or theowner's agent.
(6)
Application fee
. The application shall be accompanied by a $50.00 fee for the original solicitor or applicant,plus a $50.00 fee for each additional solicitor for the investigation and administration of the provisions of thischapter.
(7)
Investigation of applicant
. It shall be the duty of the city manager to designate a city employee toinvestigate each applicant, and all other persons listed on the application before issuance of a permit, whichinvestigation may include yet is not necessarily limited to personal interviews with named individuals, criminalhistory checks, verification of references and information contained within the application.
(8)
Issuance of permit
. It shall be the duty of the city manager to designate a city employee to issue or refuseto issue such permit not earlier than five days or later than two weeks from the time the application is receivedby him. All the permits shall expire within 90 days from the date of issuance. The city manager or his authorizeddesignee may refuse to grant a permit if he discovers, in the course of his investigation, that the applicant, orany solicitor, has committed fraud, misrepresentation, been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involvingmoral turpitude, or has failed to furnish items required by this chapter in the permit application. An expired permitmay be renewed under the same terms and conditions as the original application and subject to the same fees.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 145/350
(9)
Form of permit
. Each permit shall be printed in black except that the following shall be printed prominentlythereon in red: “The issuance of the permit is not an endorsement by the City of Jacksboro or any of its officersor employees.” Each permit shall bear a permit number which is the same as the file containing the applicationfiled by the applicant.
(10)
Permit to be displayed
. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or solicit in the city without displaying thepermit required by this section on his person, in plain view, while engaged in such soliciting or selling.
(11)
Exhibiting permit
. Every solicitor, peddler or seller shall identify himself as a salesperson uponapproaching a citizen in a public place or at a private dwelling and explain his purpose, whether it be directsales, solicitation or orders of the demonstration of goods or merchandise, or any combination of purposesthereof, and shall produce for inspection, upon request by any person, the solicitor's permit issued by this city.
(12)
Responsibility for acts of solicitors
. The recipient of a permit or named applicant shall be responsible forthe acts of his or her authorized representatives or solicitors listed in permit application in connection withsolicitation activities. In this regard, the recipient of the permit shall actively supervise all persons listed in thepermit application, which supervision shall include yet not be limited to remaining within the corporate city limitsduring all solicitation activity and responding promptly (within ten minutes) to calls by city representatives relativeto solicitation activity which may include responding to an on-site complaint from a citizen.
(13)
Revocation of permit
.
(a) If, after the permit required by this section has been issued, the city manager, or his authorizeddesignee, finds that the permit was obtained by false representation in the application, or the permit hasbeen reproduced or transferred or assigned to another person or the applicant has led someone to believethe permit is an endorsement of the applicant's product or service by the city, or in the event of fraud ormisrepresentation by the permit holder, or in the event of conviction of the permit holder of a felony or amisdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or in the event the permit holder has failed to furnish the itemsrequired by this chapter, such permit may be revoked by the city manager or his authorized designee.
(b) If a police officer has probable cause to believe that a solicitor has engaged in prohibited conduct asdefined by this chapter, the officer may revoke the permit of the permit holder.
(c) If more than one complaint of misconduct by a solicitor or group of solicitors working for the sameentity is received, the permit may be immediately revoked by the city.
(14)
Appeal from denial or revocation of permit
. Should an applicant be denied a permit, or have a permitrevoked, he may appeal that action to the city manager by submitting a letter within ten days to complain of thataction. A hearing of the denial will then be scheduled by the city manager within ten days of filing the appeal.The city manager will render a decision on the appeal within ten days of such hearing. A decision of the citymanager shall be final and binding. No new application for a permit will be considered for six months after denialor revocation, unless said denial revocation is without prejudice or is conditional and the conditions have beensatisfied as determined by the city manager.
(15)
Exemptions
.
(a) The following persons engaged in the activities set out in subsection (C)(15)(a)1. through 3. below inthe city shall first register with the city manager, or designee, in accordance with the provisions of thischapter and by furnishing proof that he is actually engaged in such activity in the city, and the citymanager, or designee, shall issue to such person a registration certificate exempting him from the termsand conditions of this section and from paying a fee therefore, namely:
1. Public utility companies or others operating under a franchise granted by the city;
2. Commercial agents dealing with local business establishments in the usual course of business;and
3. Insurance salesmen, real estate salesmen and others licensed by the state, and political groupsor organizations who are subject to financial disclosure under state or federal law.
(b) Before engaging in any solicitation, the persons listed above must obtain a registration certificatefrom the city manager, or designee, and exhibit the same to any person who requests such identification. Itshall be a violation of this chapter for any person to fail to obtain such a registration certificate prior toengaging in solicitation and to fail to bring and exhibit the same upon request.
(c) Solicitations related to children's activities, including yet not limited to Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts andBig Brothers and Sisters, may involve children under the age of 14. Children under the age of 14 mayparticipate in such activities to the extent they are actively supervised by a parent, guardian or other adult
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 146/350
person, at least 18 years of age, who is responsible for the well-being of the child. These organizationsneed not register with the city or pay a permit fee.
(d) Religious, political or nonprofit organizations and their representatives distributing handbills orpamphlets only for the purpose of communicating issues of general interest to the public need not registerwith the city or pay a permit fee. A donation received from the distribution of handbills or pamphlets doesnot affect this exemption.
(e) Ordinary commercial travelers who sell or exhibit for sale goods, wares or merchandise to personsselling or dealing in the same within the city.
(16)
Bond
. Each person engaging in solicitation activities requiring cash deposits or taking orders on deliverypurchases (COD) or who requires a contract of agreement to finance the sale of any goods, services ormerchandise for future delivery, or for services to be performed in the future, shall furnish to the city a cash bondin the amount of $5,000.00, naming the applicant for the permit as principal. The bond shall be in full force andeffect for one year from the date of issuance of the permit, unless otherwise extended by demand of the city dueto the revocation of the permit, or an anticipated delivery date beyond 12 months, in order to protect the citizensof the city from potential losses associated with such solicitations.
(Ord. O-04-03, passed 2-11-03; Ord. O-04-18, passed 3-12-18)
Sec. 113.04. Prohibited location, activities and conduct.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle, solicit, hawk, sell or take orders for or offer to take orders for any item orservice in the following places in the city:
(1) On any public street, alley, traffic island or right-of-way; or
(2) At any residence exhibiting in a conspicuous place upon or near the main entrance to the residence a signcontaining the words “no solicitors”. The letters shall be not less than two-thirds of an inch in height and shouldbe displayed on a weather proof card not less than three inches by four inches in size.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to block or obstruct or hinder the free flow of traffic in the lawful use of the street orfree passage of pedestrians in the lawful use of the sidewalk. No solicitations, sales, or distribution of merchandise,products, or service shall be offered or made to occupants of motor vehicles moving or stopping in traffic on a public streetor alley.
(C) It shall be unlawful for a person engaged in solicitation to:
(1) Misrepresent the purpose of the solicitation or solicit funds for a purpose other than that set out in theregistration statement or application upon which the permit was issued;
(2) Misrepresent the affiliation of those engaged in the solicitation;
(3) Continue efforts to solicit from an individual once that individual informs the solicitor that he does not wishto give anything to or buy anything from that solicitor;
(4) Represent the issuance of any permit or registration under this chapter as an endorsement orrecommendation of the solicitation by the city;
(5) Go on property upon which the owner of the property or the person controlling the property has postedsigns prohibiting solicitation; or
(6) Remain on property after the property owner, or the property owner's designee, representative or agent,has instructed the solicitor to leave.
(D) No solicitor, or person working on his or her behalf, shall shout, make an outcry, blow a horn or whistle, or use anysound device, including any sound amplifying system, upon any of the streets, avenues, alleys, parks or other public placesof the city, or otherwise be in violation of the city's noise ordinance.
(E) No person shall engage in solicitation through the delivery of handbills or circulars by placing handbills or circulars onmotor vehicles, public utility posts, or other location such that the same constitutes littering under Tex. Health and SafetyCode ch. 365.
(F) It shall be unlawful for any person to use children 14 years of age or younger for solicitation activities, unlessotherwise expressly permitted herein, unless such children are actively supervised by a parent, guardian or other adultperson at least 18 years of age who is registered as provided herein. For purposes of this section, actively supervised
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 147/350
means that the adult person shall be within 100 feet of all children 14 years of age or younger for whom the adult person isresponsible at all times when the children are engaged in solicitation activities.
(G) It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this chapter if the person is occupying the public right-of-wayfor the purpose of selling newspapers or publications or other printed material which deal with the dissemination ofinformation or opinion; however, this defense is not available if said act occurred upon the paved surface or shoulder of anypublic street, highway or road.
(Ord. O-04-03, passed 2-11-03; Ord. O-04-18, passed 3-12-18)
Cross reference–
Penalty, § 113.99.
Sec. 113.05. Times when soliciting prohibited.
No person shall peddle, solicit, hawk, sell or take orders for or offer to take orders for any item or service at a privateresidence in the city after sunset on any day until 9:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday, unless the transaction is the result ofa request made to such person by the occupant of such private residence. “Sunset” means the time of day identified by theNational Weather Service as the time for sunset for that day for the city. There shall be no solicitations on Sunday, NewYears Day, Memorial Day (observed), Fourth of July, Labor Day (observed), Thanksgiving or Christmas Day. (Ord. O-04-03, passed 2-11-03; Ord. O-04-18, passed 3-12-18)
Sec. 113.06. Consumers right to cancel.
(A) The merchant, peddler or seller shall provide to the consumer in writing the right to cancel a solicitation transactionmade in person or by telephone in which the consideration exceeds $5.00, until midnight of the third business day after theday on which the consumer signs an agreement or offer to purchase in a solicitation transaction. For purposes of atelephone solicitation, “date of transaction” means the day that the consumer receives the goods, services, or realtypurchased in a solicitation transaction.
(B) If the consumer chooses to cancel the solicitation transaction, notification by mail shall be considered given at thetime mailed as evidenced by the postmark; notification by telegram shall be considered given at the time filed fortransmission; and notification by any other writing shall be considered given at the time delivered to the merchant'sdesignated place of business.
(C) It shall be unlawful for a merchant, peddler, or seller to refuse to allow the customer to cancel the solicitationtransaction.
(D) Cancellations authorized, and the procedure and notice requirements set forth in Tex. Business and Commerce Codech. 39, as it may be amended, are applicable to this section, for transactions applicable thereunder.
(Ord. O-04-03, passed 2-11-03; Ord. O-04-18, passed 3-12-18)
Sec. 113.07. Public disclosure.
All applications, whether or not a permit has been issued, shall be a public record and shall be available for inspection bymembers of the public during regular business hours, and copies may be obtained at cost consistent with the PublicInformation Act. (Ord. O-04-03, passed 2-11-03; Ord. O-04-18, passed 3-12-18)
Sec. 113.99. Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions or terms of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, uponconviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of $500.00 for each offense, and each and every day such violationshall continue will be deemed to constitute a separate offense. Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state is notrequired for proof of any offense defined by this chapter. (Ord. O-04-03, passed 2-11-03; Ord. O-04-18, passed 3-12-18)
CHAPTER 114: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Sec. 114.01. Purpose; intent.
(A) It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals andgeneral welfare of the citizens of the city and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentrationof sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor the effect ofimposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials.Similarly, it is neither the intent nor the effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually orientedmaterials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually orientedentertainment to their intended market.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 148/350
(B) It is the intent of the Jacksboro City Council that the location regulations of this chapter are promulgated pursuant toChapter 243 of the Tex. Local Gov't Code.
(Ord. O-05-04, passed 5-11-04)
Sec. 114.02. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires adifferent meaning.
Adult arcade
. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically,electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices aremaintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed aredistinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult bookstore or adult video store
. A commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business purposes, offersfor sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following:
(1) Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or video reproductions, any material in digital format (including, yet not limited to, compact discs (CDs)or digital video discs (DVDs), slides or other visual representations that depict or describe specified sexualactivities or specified anatomical areas; or
(2) Instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with specified sexualactivities.
Adult cabaret
. A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial establishment that regularly features:
(1) Persons who appear in a state of nudity;
(2) Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specifiedsexual activities; or
(3) Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, any material in digital format (including, yet not limited to, compactdiscs (CDs), or digital video discs (DVDs), slides or other photographic reproductions that are distinguished orcharacterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult motel
. A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that:
(1) Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuittelevision transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, any material in digital format (including, yet notlimited to, compact discs (CDs) or digital video discs (DVDs), slides or other photographic reproductions that arecharacterized by the depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visiblefrom the public right-of-way that advertised the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or
(2) Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours;
(3) Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less thanten hours.
Adult motion picture theater
. A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, any material in digital format (including, yet not limited to, compact discs (CDs) or digital video discs (DVDs),slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown that are characterized by the depiction or description ofspecified sexual activities or by specified anatomical areas.
Adult theater
. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment that regularly features persons whoappear in a state of nudity or live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or byspecified sexual activities.
Chief of police
. The Chief of Police of the city or his designated agent.
Child-care facility
. A building used as a day nursery, children's boarding home, child-placement agency, religious orcharitable encampment for children, or any other place for the care or custody of children under 16 years of age.
Church
. A building in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship, intended primarily for purposes connectedwith such worship or faith, or for propagating a particular form of religious belief.
City
. The City of Jacksboro, Texas.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 149/350
Employee
. An individual who:
(1) Is listed as a part-time, full-time, temporary or permanent employee on the payroll of an applicant, licenseeor sexually oriented business; or
(2) Performs or provides entertainment in the sexually oriented business for any form of compensation orconsideration.
Escort
. A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide or date for another person, or whoagrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
Escort agency
. A person or business association that furnishes, offers to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one ofits primary business purposes, for a fee, tip or other consideration.
Establishment
. Any of the following:
(1) The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business;
(2) The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexuallyoriented business;
(3) The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or
(4) The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
Licensee
. A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as theindividual listed as an applicant on the application for a license.
Nude model studio
. Any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas isprovided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons whopay money in any form of consideration.
Nudity or state of nudity
. Any of the following:
(1) The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or female breast; or
(2) A state of dress that fails to completely and opaquely cover a human buttock, anus, male genitals, femalegenitals, or any part of the female breast or breasts that is situated below a point immediately above the top ofthe areola.
Operates or causes to be operated
. To cause to function or to put or keep in operation. A person may be found to beoperating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part-owner orlicensee of the business.
Person
. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity.
Semi-nude
. A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the femalebreast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
Sexual encounter center
. A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for anyform of consideration:
(1) Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or
(2) Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of thepersons is in a state of nudity or is semi-nude.
Sexually oriented business
. An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motionpicture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio or sexual encounter center.
Specified anatomical areas
. Human genitals in a state of sexual arousal.
Specified sexual activities
. Any of the following:
(1) The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breast;
(2) Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy;
(3) Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 150/350
(4) Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) through(3) above.
Substantial enlargement
. Pertaining to a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor area occupied by thebusiness by more than 20%, as the floor area exists on the effective date of this chapter.
Transfer of ownership or control
. Pertaining to a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following:
(1) The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
(2) The transfer of securities that constitutes a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchangeor similar means; or
(3) The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device that transfers the ownership or control of thebusiness, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing theownership or control.
(Ord. O-05-04, passed 5-11-04)
Sec. 114.03. Classification of sexually oriented businesses.
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
(A) Adult arcades;
(B) Adult bookstores or adult video stores;
(C) Adult cabarets;
(D) Adult motels;
(E) Adult motion picture theaters;
(F) Adult theaters;
(G) Escort agencies;
(H) Nude model studios; and
(I) Sexual encounter centers.
(Ord. O-05-04, passed 5-11-04)
Sec. 114.04. License requirements; application.
(A) A person commits an offense if that person operates a sexually oriented business without a valid license, issued bythe city for the particular type of business.
(B) An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the Chief of Police. The application shall be swornto and shall be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement oftotal floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawnto a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus sixinches.
(C) The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter and the premises must be inspected andfound to be in compliance with the law by the city's Building Official.
(D) If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, that person must sign the applicationfor a license as the applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual,each individual who has a 20% or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license as applicant. Eachapplicant must be qualified under
§ 114.05
herein and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted.
(E) The fact that a person possesses a valid theater license, dance hall license, public house of amusement license orany other valid license by law does not exempt that person from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented businesslicense. A person who operates a sexually oriented business and possesses another use license shall comply with therequirements and provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. O-05-04, passed 5-11-04)
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 151/350
Sec. 114.05. Issuance of license.
(A) The Chief of Police shall approve the issuance of a license by the City Secretary to an applicant within 30 days afterreceipt of an application, unless the Chief finds one or more of the following to be true:
(1) An applicant is under 18 years of age.
(2) An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in his payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines or penaltiesassessed against or imposed upon either of them in relation to a sexually oriented business.
(3) An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or hasfalsely answered a question or request for information on the application form.
(4) An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter, otherthan the offense of operating a sexually oriented business without a license, within two years immediatelypreceding the application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect.
(5) An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a license by the city to operate a sexuallyoriented business within the preceding 12 months, or residing with a person whose license to operate a sexuallyoriented business has been revoked within the preceding 12 months.
(6) The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not been approved by the city's BuildingOfficial as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.
(7) The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid.
(8) An applicant has been employed in a sexually oriented business in a managerial capacity within thepreceding 12 months and has demonstrated that such individual is unable to operate or manage a sexuallyoriented business premises in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcementofficers.
(9) An applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with any applicablesections of this chapter.
(10) An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a crime:
(a) Involving:
1. Any of the following offenses as described in Chapter 43 of the Tex. Penal Code:
a. Prostitution;
b. Promotion of prostitution;
c. Aggravated promotion of prostitution;
d. Compelling prostitution;
e. Obscenity;
f. Sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor;
g. Sexual performance by a child; or
h. Possession or promotion of child pornography;
2. Any of the following as described in Chapter 21 of the Tex. Penal Code:
a. Public lewdness;
b. Indecent exposure; or
c. Indecency with a child;
3. Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as described in Chapter 22 of the Tex. Penal Code;
4. Incest, solicitation of a child or harboring a runaway child as described in Chapter 25 of the Tex.Penal Code;
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 152/350
5. Criminal attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses;
(b) For which:
1. Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release fromconfinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is amisdemeanor offense;
2. Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release fromconfinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or
3. Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of releasefrom confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two ormore misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-hourperiod.
(B) The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or theapplicant's spouse.
(C) The Chief of Police, upon approving issuance of a sexually oriented business license, shall send to the applicant, bycertified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of that action and state where the applicant must pay the license feeand obtain the license. The Chief of Police's approval of the issuance of a license does not authorize the applicant tooperate a sexually oriented business until the applicant has paid all fees required by this chapter and obtained possessionof the license.
(D) The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expirationdate, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near theentrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time.
(Ord. O-05-04, passed 5-11-04)
Sec. 114.06. Annual license fee.
(A) The annual license fee for a sexually oriented business is $500.00.
(B) If an applicant is required by this chapter to also obtain a dance hall license or public house of amusement license forthe business at a single location, payment of the fee for the sexually oriented business license exempts the applicant frompayment of the fees for the dance hall or public house of amusement licenses.
(Ord. O-05-04, passed 5-11-04)
Sec. 114.07. Inspection of premises.
(A) An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the Jacksboro Police Department and the JacksboroVolunteer Fire Department, and the City's Building Official to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for thepurpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business.
(B) A person who operates a sexually oriented business or that person's agent or employee commits an offense if thatperson refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by a representative of the Police Department at any time it isoccupied or open for business.
(C) The provisions of this section shall not apply to areas of an adult motel that are currently being rented by a customeras a permanent or temporary habituation.
(Ord. O-05-04, passed 5-11-04)
Sec. 114.08. Identification records.
(A) A person commits an offense if that person operates a sexually oriented business without maintaining in the premisesa current registration card or file that clearly identifies all employees of the sexually oriented business.
(B) The registration card or file must contain the following information for each employee required to be registered underdivision (A), above:
(1) Full legal name;
(2) All aliases or stage names;
(3) Race and gender; and
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 153/350
(4) Proof of the employee's age.
(C) All records maintained on an employee in compliance with this section must be retained at the sexually orientedbusiness for at least 90 days following the date of any voluntary or involuntary termination of the employee's employment orcontract with the sexually oriented business.
(D) A person who operates a sexually oriented business or the person's agent or employee shall allow immediate accessto these records by authorized representatives of the Police Department.
(Ord. O-05-04, passed 5-11-04)
Sec. 114.09. Expiration of license.
(A) Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application asprovided in this chapter. Application for renewal should be made at least 30 days before the expiration date, and whenmade less than 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license shall not be affected.
(B) When the Chief of Police denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year fromthe date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the Chief of Police finds that the basis for denial of the renewal of the licensehas been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date denialbecame final.
(Ord. O-05-04, passed 5-11-04)
Sec. 114.10. Suspension.
The Chief of Police shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if he determines that a licensee or anemployee of a licensee has:
(A) Violated or is not in compliance with all sections of this chapter;
(B) Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the sexually oriented business premises;
(C) Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this chapter;
(D) Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises; or
(E) Demonstrated an inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers.
(Ord. O-05-04, passed 5-11-04)
Sec. 114.11. Revocation.
(A) The Chief of Police shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension under this chapter occurs and the license hasbeen suspended within the preceding 12 months.
(B) The Chief of Police shall revoke a license if he determines that:
(1) A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the Chief of Police during theapplication process;
(2) A licensee, an agent or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of a controlledsubstance on the premises;
(3) A licensee, an agent or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
(4) A licensee, an agent or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period oftime when the licensee's license was suspended;
(5) A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in
§ 114.05
(A)(10)(a) for which the time period requiredin
§ 114.05
(A)(10)(b) has not lapsed;
(6) On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, a person or persons committed an offense, occurringin or on the licensed premises, of a crime listed in
§ 114.05
(A)(10)(a) for which a conviction has been obtainedand the person or persons were employees of the sexually oriented business at the time the offenses werecommitted;
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 154/350
(7) A licensee, an agent or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oralcopulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in or on the licensed premises. The term “sexual contact”shall have the same meaning as it is defined in § 21.01 of the Tex. Penal Code; or
(8) A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for hotel occupancy taxes, ad valorem taxes, sales taxes orother taxes related to the sexually oriented business.
(C) The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license.
(D) Division (B)(7) of this section does not apply to adult motels as a ground for revoking the license unless the licenseeor employee knowingly allowed the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact tooccur in a public place or within public view.
(E) When the Chief of Police revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not beissued a sexually oriented business license for one year from the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent torevocation, the Chief of Police finds that the basis for revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may begranted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. If the license wasrevoked under division (B)(5) of this section, an applicant may not be granted another license until the appropriate numberof years under
§ 114.05
(A)(10)(b) has elapsed since the termination of any sentence, parole or probation period.
(Ord. O-05-04, passed 5-11-04)
Sec. 114.12. Appeal.
If the Chief of Police denies the issuance of a license, or suspends or revokes a license, he shall send to the applicant, orlicensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the action and the right to an appeal. Upon receipt ofwritten notice of the denial, suspension or revocation, the applicant or licensee whose application for a license has beendenied or whose license has been suspended or revoked shall have the right to appeal to the state district court in thiscounty. An appeal to the state district court must be filed within 30 days after the receipt of notice of the decision of theChief of Police. The applicant or licensee shall bear the burden of proof in court. Absent appeal, all decisions of the Chief ofPolice become final within 30 days. (Ord. O-05-04, passed 5-11-04)
Sec. 114.13. Transfer of license.
A licensee shall not transfer his license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under theauthority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application. (Ord. O-05-04, passed 5-11-04)
Sec. 114.14. Location of sexually oriented business; exemptions.
(A) A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feetof:
(1) A church;
(2) A public or private elementary or secondary school;
(3) A child-care facility;
(4) A boundary of any residential district as defined in the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Jacksboro, Texas(hereinafter referred to as the “city's Zoning Ordinance”);
(5) A public park adjacent to any residential district as defined in the city's Zoning Ordinance;
(6) The property line of a lot devoted to residential use; or
(7) Any building or structure in which alcoholic beverages are offered for sale.
(B) Sexually oriented businesses are uses permitted only in a Manufacturing-Industrial (MI) Zoning District.
(C) A person commits an offense if that person causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargementor transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of another sexually oriented business.
(D) A person commits an offense if that person causes or permits the operation, establishment or maintenance of morethan one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure or portion thereof, or the increase of floor area of anysexually oriented business in any building, structure or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business.
(E) For the purposes of division (A) of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard tointervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises wherea sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a church, public or private
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 155/350
elementary or secondary school, child-care facility or building or structure in which alcoholic beverages are offered for sale,or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park, residential district or residential lot.
(F) For purposes of division (B) of this section, the distance between any two sexually oriented businesses shall bemeasured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structurein which each business is located.
(G) Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of this chapter that is in violation of division(A), (B) or (C) of this section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continuefor a period not to exceed three years, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of30 days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use maybe changed to a conforming use. If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within 1,000 feet of one another andotherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business that was first established and continually operating at aparticular location is the conforming use and the later-established business(es) is nonconforming.
(H) A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by thelocation, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a church, public or privateelementary or secondary school, child-care facility, public park, residential district, or residential lot, or any building orstructure in which alcoholic beverages are offered for sale, within 1,000 feet of the sexually oriented business. Thisprovision applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when application for a license is submitted aftera license has expired or has been revoked.
(I) Exemption from location restrictions.
(1) If the Chief of Police denies the issuance of a license to an applicant because the location of the sexuallyoriented business establishment is in violation of any section of this chapter, then the applicant may, not laterthan ten calendar days after receiving notice of the denial, file with the City Secretary a written request for anexemption from the location restrictions of this chapter.
(2) If the written request is filed with the City Secretary within the ten day limit, the City Council shall considerthe request. The City Secretary shall set a date for the hearing within 60 days from the date the written requestis received.
(3) A hearing by the City Council may proceed if a quorum of the Council is present. The Council shall hearand consider evidence offered by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply.
(4) The Council may, in its discretion, grant an exemption from the location restrictions of this chapter if itmakes the following findings:
(a) That the location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not have a detrimental effect onnearby properties or be contrary to the public safety or welfare;
(b) That the granting of the exemption will not violate the spirit and intent of this chapter;
(c) That the location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not downgrade the property valuesor quality of life in the adjacent areas or encourage the development of urban blight;
(d) That the location of an additional sexually oriented business in the area will not be contrary to anyprogram of neighborhood conservation nor will it interfere with any efforts of urban renewal or restoration;and
(e) That all other applicable provisions of this chapter will be observed.
(5) The City Council shall grant or deny the exemption by a majority vote. Failure to reach a majority vote shallresult in denial of the exemption. Disputes of fact shall be decided on the basis of a preponderance of theevidence. The decision of the Council is final.
(6) If the City Council grants the exemption, the exemption is valid for one year from the date of the Council'saction. Upon the expiration of an exemption, the sexually oriented business is in violation of the locationrestrictions of this chapter until the applicant applies for and receives another exemption.
(7) If the City Council denies the exemption, the applicant may not re-apply for an exemption until at least 12months have elapsed since the date of the Council's action.
(8) The grant of an exemption does not exempt the applicant from any other provisions of this chapter otherthan the location restrictions of this section.
(Ord. O-05-04, passed 5-11-04)
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 156/350
Sec. 114.15. Amendment of chapter.
The location requirements of this chapter may be amended only after compliance with the procedure required to amend thecity's Zoning Ordinance. Other sections of this chapter may be amended by a vote of the City Council. (Ord. O-05-04,passed 5-11-04)
Sec. 114.16. Additional regulations for escort agencies.
(A) An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years.
(B) A person commits an offense if that person acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under theage of 18 years.
(Ord. O-05-04, passed 5-11-04)
Sec. 114.17. Additional regulations for nude model studios.
(A) A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years.
(B) A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if that person appears in a state of nudity or semi-nudity in oron the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this section if the person under 18 years wasin a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex.
(C) A person commits an offense if that person appears in a state of nudity or semi-nudity or knowingly allows another toappear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises that can be viewed from the publicright-of-way.
(D) A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa or mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofamay be placed in a reception room open to the public.
(Ord. O-05-04, passed 5-11-04)
Sec. 114.18. Additional regulations for adult theaters and adult motion picture theaters.
(A) A person commits an offense if that person knowingly allows a person under the age of 18 years to appear in a stateof nudity or semi-nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater.
(B) A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if that person knowingly appears in a state of nudity or semi-nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater.
(C) It is a defense to prosecution under divisions (A) and (B) of this section if the person under 18 years was in arestroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex.
(Ord. O-05-04, passed 5-11-04)
Sec. 114.19. Additional regulations for adult motels.
(A) Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacatedtwo or more times in a period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment isan adult motel as that term is defined in this chapter.
(B) A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercialestablishment that does not have a sexually oriented business license, that person rents or sub-rents a sleeping room to aperson and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, that person rents or sub-rents the same sleeping roomagain.
(C) For the purposes of division (B) of this section, the terms “rent” or “sub-rent” mean the act of permitting a room to beoccupied for any form of consideration.
(Ord. O-05-04, passed 5-11-04)
Sec. 114.20. Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually-explicit films or videos.
(A) A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, whichexhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, any materialin digital format (including, yet not limited to, compact discs (CDs) or digital video discs (DVDs), or other video reproductionthat depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements:
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 157/350
(1) Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by adiagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations andthe location of all overhead lighting fixtures, which lights are controlled by which switches and designating anyportion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. Only agents or employees shall have access tolight switches. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram also shalldesignate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepareddiagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required. However, each diagramshould be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designatedscale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior ofthe premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The Chief of Police may waive the foregoing diagramfor renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that theconfiguration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
(2) The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
(3) No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the priorapproval of the Chief of Police or his designee.
(4) It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is on dutyand situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
(5) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from amanager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purposeexcluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises have two ormore manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner thatthere is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for anypurpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be direct line ofsight from the manager's station.
(6) It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it also shall be the duty of any agents and employeespresent in the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in division (A)(5) of this section remainsunobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that a patron ispresent in the premises and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises that hasbeen designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to division (A)(1) of this section.
(7) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate everyplace to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle as measured atthe floor level.
(8) It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it also shall be the duty of any agents and employeespresent in the premises, to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that anypatron is present in the premises.
(B) A person having a duty under divisions (A)(1) through (8), above, commits an offense if that person knowingly fails tofulfill that duty.
(Ord. O-05-04, passed 5-11-04)
Sec. 114.21. Display of sexually-explicit material to minors.
(A) A person commits an offense if, in a business establishment open to persons under the age of 17 years, that persondisplays a book, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, film or video cassette, the cover of which depicts, in a manner calculatedto arouse sexual lust or passion for commercial gain or to exploit sexual lust or perversion for commercial gain, any of thefollowing:
(1) Human sexual intercourse, masturbation or sodomy;
(2) Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts;
(3) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, buttocks or that portion of the female breastbelow the top of the areola; or
(4) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, whether covered or uncovered;
(B) In this section, display means to locate an item in such a manner that, without obtaining assistance from an agent oremployee of the business establishment:
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 158/350
(1) It is available to the general public for handling and inspection; or
(2) The cover or outside packaging on the item is visible to members of the general public.
(Ord. O-05-04, passed 5-11-04)
Sec. 114.22. Hours of operation.
No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open at any time between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and10:00 a.m. on weekdays and Saturdays, and 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. (noon) on Sundays. (Ord. O-05-04, passed 5-11-04)
Sec. 114.23. Enforcement; penalty.
(A) Except as provided by division (B) of this section, any person violating the location requirement sections of thischapter, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00 for each offense, and a separate offense shall bedeemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs.
(B) If the sexually oriented business involved is a nude model studio or sexual encounter center, then violation of thischapter is punishable as a Class A misdemeanor.
(C) Except as provided by division (B) of this section, any person violating a provision of this chapter, other than locationrequirements, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00 for each offense, and a separate offenseshall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs.
(D) It is a defense to prosecution under this chapter that a person appearing in a state of nudity or semi-nudity did so in amodeling class operated:
(1) By a proprietary school licensed by the state, a college, a junior college or university supported entirely orpartly by taxation;
(2) By a private college or university that maintains and operates educational programs in which credits aretransferable to a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
(3) In a structure:
(a) That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates anude person is available for viewing;
(b) Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of theclass; and
(c) Where no more than one nude or semi-nude model is on the premises at any one time.
(E) It is a defense to prosecution under this chapter that each item of descriptive, printed, film or video material offeredfor sale or rental, taken as a whole, contains serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
(Ord. O-05-04, passed 5-11-04)
Sec. 114.24. Injunctive relief.
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid license or in violation of thelocation requirements of this chapter is subject to suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. (Ord. O-05-04, passed 5-11-04)
Sec. 114.25. Preemption.
This chapter, upon adoption by the Jacksboro City Council, shall preempt and govern all other city codes and ordinances,including the City's Zoning Ordinance, as they pertain to sexually oriented businesses. Consistent therewith, the definitionof Adult Entertainment Enterprise (contained in
Part Five - Definitions
of the City's Zoning Ordinance), and the AdultEntertainment Enterprise and Sexually Oriented Business uses and their designated classes of use districts (identified inthe Table of Permitted Uses in Article 9 - Commercial, Manufacturing and Industrial Use Chart, of the City's ZoningOrdinance), are hereby repealed and rescinded. (Ord. O-05-04, passed 5-11-04)
CHAPTER 115: OIL AND GAS WELLS
Sec. 115.01. Intent.
The city council finds that there has been and there is a likelihood of oil and gas development activities in and near thecorporate limits of the city, requiring that construction, operation and maintenance of drilling and production of oil and gas
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 159/350
be regulated because of the potential danger, from improper construction, operation and maintenance to the lives, property,health, safety and welfare of the public. (Ord. No. O-15-12, § 1, 12-11-12)
Sec. 115.02. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and terms wherever and whenever used or appearing in this chaptershall have the scope and meaning defined in this section and set out in connection with each. All technical or oil and gasindustry words or phrases used in this chapter and not specifically defined shall have that meaning customarily attributablethereto by prudent operators in the oil and gas industry; and when the title of any city official is used in this chapter, suchshall include any duly authorized representative.
Curbline
. The line established by the city for the particular street.
Lease
. Any tract of land subject to an oil, gas, and mineral lease or other oil and gas development contract, or any unitcomposed of several tracts and leases, but operated as one lease and any tract of land in which the minerals are owned byan operator or someone holding under it or him, but, which due to the royalty ownership, is developed and operated as aseparate tract.
Operator
. Each and every person who operates any well and each and every person who is an owner of a well, other thana well that has been plugged and abandoned in the city.
Permittee
. The person to whom a permit is issued for the drilling, completion and operation of a well, and his or its heirs,legal representatives, successors and assigns.
Person
. An individual, firm, company or corporation.
Rework
. Any operation in which a drilling or rework rig is brought onto land to service an existing rig or where a well isreperforated.
Right-of-way
. A phrase expressly limited to all public rights-of-way or streets or other public property within the city.
Street
. Any street, highway, sidewalk, alley, avenue, recessed parking area or other public right-of-way, including the entireright-of-way.
Well
. Any hole(s) or bore(s) to any sand, formation, strata, or depth for the purpose of producing any oil, gas or liquidhydrocarbon, or used as an injection well for secondary recovery for any of them. The term “oil and gas well” means thesame.
(Ord. No. O-15-12, § 1, 12-11-12)
Sec. 115.03. Landowner's rights.
Neither this chapter, nor any permit issued hereunder shall be interpreted to grant any right or license to the permittee toenter upon, use, or occupy for drilling or other purposes, any surface land except by contract with the owner, nor shall itlimit or prevent the free right of any owner to contract for the amount of damages, rights or privileges with respect to hisown land and property, nor to authorize drilling or other activities in violation of legally enforceable deed restrictions orsubdivision restrictions. (Ord. No. O-15-12, § 1, 12-11-12)
Sec. 115.04. Permit required; supplemental permits.
(a)
Required
. It shall be unlawful for any person, acting either for himself or as agent, employee, independent contractoror servant for any other person, to drill or commence to drill or to operate any well within the city limits without a permithaving first been issued by the city council in accordance with the terms of this chapter.
(b)
Authority; supplemental and separate permits
. When a permit has been issued for the drilling of a well, such permitshall constitute sufficient authority for drilling, operation, production, maintenance, repair, reworking, testing, plugging andabandonment of the well, and for the construction and use of all facilities reasonably necessary or convenient in connectiontherewith by the permittee and its employees, agents and contractors, provided any such activities so authorized shall be incompliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter, and provided that such activities are not in conflict with any of theconditions and provisions contained in such permit. However, a new or supplemental permit shall be obtained before suchwell may be deepened below the geological formation in which it was originally completed and before it may be used forrepressurizing or injection of water and/or gas. A separate permit shall be necessary for the drilling or operation of eachwell.
(c)
Preliminary notice
. No application for water flooding operations, nor gas or other repressurization operations shall begranted unless, at least 90 days prior to submission of the application, a preliminary notice of the intention of applicant shallhave been delivered to the city secretary. This provision is included for the reason that no such operations are now beingconducted in this area, and to permit the city to better study the matter if or when it does become appropriate or desirable.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 160/350
(d)
Previous violations
. No permit shall be granted to a person who has previously violated the provisions of this chapter,or other city ordinances dealing with wells, unless and until such person has fully corrected such violation, complied withthe ordinances, paid all fees and fines applicable to such violation, and has given assurance of future compliance with theapplicable ordinances and other laws.
(Ord. No. O-15-12, § 1, 12-11-12)
Sec. 115.05. Application.
Any person desiring to drill or operate a well within the city shall present an application to the city secretary, whichapplication shall set forth in writing the following facts:
(1) Name of applicant(s);
(2) Legal status of applicant(s), such as corporation, partnership, individual, etc.;
(3) Address of applicant(s);
(4) Detailed description of what is proposed to be constructed, drilled, or operated by applicant(s), includingdescription of equipment to be used, including a plat which shows the distances to property lines and toresidences, structures, commercial buildings, pipelines, and other underground utilities situated within 500 feetof the proposed location of the well; and, for each separate parcel or tract of land, the name and address of theprincipal landowner;
(5) The proposed depth of the well; proposed casing program; a detailed explanation of drilling procedure,including whether done by the use of drilling mud, air pressure, etc.; location and description of drillingequipment, air compressor, pressure control or safety devices, storage facilities for water, drilling mud; andexpected date of completion; and
(6) The application must be signed by the applicant, or, if signed by his agent, accompanied by writtenauthorization executed by applicant.
(Ord. No. O-15-12, § 1, 12-11-12)
Sec. 115.06. Fees.
(a) The fees for a permit for drilling or reworking any one well in the city shall be provided for in the fee schedule found inthe appendix to this Code. Such fee shall be deposited, in cash, with the city secretary at the time the application for thepermit is filed, and it shall be held in a special fund until the permit is issued and the work is commenced. When the permitis issued, such fee shall be nonrefundable. This fee shall not be deemed to include any fees otherwise imposed by the cityby any other ordinance. Nothing in this section shall, however, relieve the permittee from the obligation to properly repairthe streets, alleys, and public properties in case they are used in such drilling or production operations.
(b) If the application is refused and no permit is issued, the fee shall be refunded.
(c) As to all wells and water and/or gas repressurizing or injection facilities, and such other facilities as may be coveredby this chapter existing within areas annexed into the city after the adoption of this chapter which are in existence at thetime the land upon which wells or facilities are situated, is annexed to the city, no permit or filing fee will be required, but themayor or his designee shall inspect wells or shall inspect wells or facilities and, if satisfied that such facilities can beoperated in a manner that will ensure public safety, shall issue a certificate in writing that such facilities conform with theprovisions of such sections within a reasonable time, not to exceed six months. It is further provided that, in the event anysuch existing facilities coming within the provisions of this subsection are abandoned or relocated for any reason, orreworked, any reworking and any new facilities constructed or established to replace such facilities must comply with allprovisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. O-15-12, § 1, 12-11-12)
Sec. 115.07. Hearing-Notice.
(a) When the application described in
Section 115.05
is filed with the city secretary, the filing fee paid, and evidence ofappropriate bond or other security agreement and insurance as required in
Section 115.06
is filed, the city secretary shallcause to be placed on a regular or special meeting agenda of the city council appropriate notice of the application, and thecity council may then consider and approve the application at such meeting.
(b) If the city council at such meeting deems necessary, a further notice and hearing may be ordered prior to approval ofthe application. In such case, the city secretary shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the city a notice whichshall state as follows:
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 161/350
“This the ______ day of
____________
, 20___, notice is hereby given that
____________
has filed with thecity secretary of the City of Jacksboro an application for a permit to drill an oil or gas well, pursuant to theprovisions of the city's ordinances regulating the drilling of oil and gas wells within the city limits. A hearingwill be held upon such application before the mayor and city council at the City Hall on the ______ day of
____________
, 20___, at ______ o'clock ___.m.”
(Ord. No. O-15-12, § 1, 12-11-12)
Sec. 115.08. Decision on application; provisions of permit.
(a)
Postponement
. At the time fixed under the foregoing provisions, a hearing on such application for permit shall beheld. At the discretion of the members of the city council, such hearing may be continued or postponed from time to timeuntil final disposition of the application provided that in no event shall final decision on the application be postponed for aperiod longer than 30 days from the original date of application.
(b)
Issuance
. The city council shall determine whether or not the application complies in all respects with the provisionsof this chapter, and if it does, will authorize issuance of a permit for the drilling of the well applied for provided, however, thecity council may deny a permit for the drilling of the well whereby reason of such particular location and the character andvalue of the permanent improvements already erected on or adjacent to the particular location in question, for school,hospital, residential, park, civic purposes, health reasons, safety reasons, or any of them where the drilling of such well onsuch particular location might be injurious or be a disadvantage to the city or its inhabitants as a whole or to a substantialnumber of its inhabitants or would not promote orderly growth and development to the city.
(c)
Requirements
. Each permit shall:
(1) Incorporate by reference therein all the provisions of this chapter with the same force and effect as if thischapter were copied verbatim in such permit;
(2) Specify that all work shall be carried out according to law;
(3) Specify the location of the proposed well with particularity to lot number, block number, name of addition orsubdivision, survey section line or other correct legal description;
(4) Specify that the term of the permit shall be for a period of six months from the date of the permit and untilsuch time as the permittee has permanently abandoned the operation of such well or facility for which the permitwas issued;
(5) Contain and specify such other terms and provisions, as may be necessary in a particular case toaccomplish the purposes of this chapter, as approved and enacted by the city council;
(6) Specify the total depth to which the well may be drilled, not exceeding the proposed depth; and
(7) Contain and specify that no actual operation shall be commenced until the permittee shall file and haveapproved a bond or other security and insurance policy in the designated principal amount as so determined bythe city council.
Such permit, in duplicate originals, shall be signed by the permittee and, prior to delivery to the permittee, shall be signedby the city secretary, with one original to be retained by the city and one by the permittee; and when so signed, shallconstitute the permittee's permission to begin work, as well as the contractual obligation of the permittee to comply with theterms of such permit of this chapter.
(Ord. No. O-15-12, § 1, 12-11-12)
Sec. 115.09. Bond and insurance required.
If a permit is issued for well or other operations under this chapter, no actual operation shall commence until the permitteefiles with the city secretary bond or other security, along with a certificate of insurance as follows:
(1) No person shall begin the drilling, construction or operation of any well until he has filed with the citysecretary a duly executed bond executed by the applicant as principal and some good and reliable suretycompany authorized to do business in the state as surety, payable to the city, conditional that the applicant, hisheirs, assigns, and successors will do the following:
(A) Comply with the terms and conditions of the application and of this chapter in the drilling,construction, operation and maintenance of the well or other structure;
(B) Restore all streets and sidewalks and other public places which may be injured in the operation totheir former condition;
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 162/350
(C) Remove all litter, machinery, derricks, buildings, trash and waste used, accumulated or allowed insuch operation within a reasonable time; and
(D) Promptly upon the abandonment or cessation of production, or completion as a dry hole, plug it inthe manner required by law.
Such bond shall be in the sum of $75,000.00, and, before the permit shall be issued, the bond shallbe approved by the city attorney and filed with the city secretary. In lieu of bond, a person maydeposit cash or other assets in escrow under such terms and conditions that will enable the city toattach the assets for the purposes of satisfying the above conditions. One bond in the amount of$1,500,000.00 shall be sufficient for all permitted wells drilled within the corporate limits by apermittee provided that, should the bond be enforced or payment be demanded from the surety, andthe permittee have one or more other permits which are in force and effect, the permittee shall thenbe required to obtain a new bond in the amount of $1,500,000.00 to cover the obligations relating tosuch other well locations. Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, should a well becompleted as a producer and the obligations set forth in subsections (1)(A), (B), and (C) of thissection be satisfied, the bond or escrow deposit required hereunder may be terminated or released.
(2) Each person drilling an oil or gas well shall carry public liability insurance in the minimum amount of$250,000.00 for one person, $500,000.00 for one accident, and property damage insurance in the minimumamount of $1,000,000.00 for one accident, with a company authorized to do business in the state, which shall bein force and effect during the drilling of such well and until the completion thereof as a producing well or theabandonment and plugging as a dry hole. A certificate of insurance shall be delivered to and approved by thecity secretary before any permit for drilling shall be delivered. A certificate of insurance shall be furnishedannually by the permittee, or the subsequent owner and operator of such well, showing that such insurance isand continues to be in effect.
(Ord. No. O-15-12, § 1, 12-11-12)
Sec. 115.10. Annual reports; filing with city secretary.
(a) Each permittee and each operator shall annually, on or before January 15, file the following reports with the citysecretary:
(1) An annual report listing each oil or gas well owned or operated in the city, along with adequate informationto describe its status as producing, shut-in, plugged, etc. A permittee having no wells of any sort need not filethis report;
(2) An annual report, with attached map or plat, showing all pipelines owned or operated and their status asoperating or not. A permittee having no pipelines need not file this report; and
(3) An annual report giving either all changes in ownership of his wells and pipelines including correct names,legal status and addresses, or a report listing the names, legal status and addresses of all owners.
(b) If there has been no change since the prior annual report, it shall be sufficient to deliver to the city secretary a letterstating that fact.
(Ord. No. O-15-12, § 1, 12-11-12)
Sec. 115.11. Completion and potential report; filing with railroad commission and city secretary.
Each operator and each permittee shall file with the city secretary, within 60 days from the completion of each well, acompletion and potential report. So long as the railroad commission requires a similar report, it shall be sufficient to file withthe city secretary the same form as used by the railroad commission, provided such form is filed within 60 days fromcompletion of the well. If the railroad commission shall cease requiring such a report, the city secretary shall prepare andmake available a blank report form providing for the same information, which shall be completed and filed by the permitteesand operators. (Ord. No. O-15-12, § 1, 12-11-12)
Sec. 115.12. Single report filed on behalf of more than one person.
A single report form, of any reports required by this chapter, may be filed on behalf of more than one person in order tosatisfy the requirements applicable to all such persons. (Ord. No. O-15-12, § 1, 12-11-12)
Sec. 115.13. Failure to file report.
(a) Failure of any operator or permittee to file one or more of the above reports shall be a violation punishable under thepenal provisions of this chapter.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 163/350
(b) Upon the failure of a permittee or operator to file a report as provided for in this chapter, the city secretary or mayormay further, by written notice, require each owner of any well, including all mineral interests produced or capable of beingproduced by such well, to file a report reflecting and showing the correct name, legal status and address of the owner andthe fractional or percentage ownership of such person. Failure of any person to comply with this requirement within areasonable time shall be a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. O-15-12, § 1, 12-11-12)
Sec. 115.14. Attorneys fees.
The issuance of a permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter constitutes a contract between the city and the permitteethat the permittee shall be liable and shall pay all reasonable and necessary attorneys fees and costs incurred by the city inthe enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. No. O-15-12, § 1, 12-11-12)
Sec. 115.15. Damage to city property and streets.
In the event of damage to city property or streets, or failure to correct damage after initial permission was granted for someconstruction or operation, or damage to any property in violation of this chapter, or creation of a hazard to public safety andproperty in violation of this chapter, after notice to the permittee, the city may correct and repair such damage and removesuch hazard, charging for such correction, repair or removal a reasonable amount for labor and materials, and thepermittee shall promptly pay such charges. If not paid, the city may collect such sum from the bonding company under thebond required for the permit or enforce such debt in any lawful manner. As further security, the permittee does, byapplication for and acceptance of a permit, unless specially excepted and deleted by the city council in the terms of thepermit, grant to the city a security interest and lien on all of permittee's property within the city, and which shall be laterlocated within the city, to secure payment of all sums which shall be owed to the city. (Ord. No. O-15-12, § 1, 12-11-12)
Sec. 115.16. Drainage; culverts.
No private road accessing well sites shall be constructed in such a manner as to interfere with drainage or cause flooding topublic roads or private property. Culverts shall be installed where such private roads connect to public streets. (Ord. No. O-15-12, § 1, 12-11-12)
Sec. 115.17. Quality and safety.
(a)
General
. Each and every well shall be drilled, constructed, operated and maintained in a good and workman-likemanner with due regard for the safety of persons and property, prevention of fires, protection of freshwater sands, andmaintenance of the appearance of residential areas. Each and every well, the materials used in each and every well, andall related equipment shall, at a minimum, conform to the requirements of state and federal law and the requirements of therailroad commission of the state.
(b)
Noise abatement
. Upon completion of a well, measures must be taken to ensure that noise levels from pumps,compressors, and all other equipment installed for production must not exceed a noise level of 35 decibels at a distance of50 feet from the noise source.
(c)
Ground contamination
. Barriers required to prevent contamination from runoff, seepage, leaking or spills ofcontaminants from production, drilling, machinery, vehicles or any other source of contaminants shall be constructed andmaintained and all retained contaminants (oil, diesel, lubricants, chemicals, etc.) shall be removed immediately anddisposed of in accordance with regulations of the environmental protection administration, the state railroad commissionand any other federal or state law or regulation of a state or federal agency with jurisdiction over such issues.
(d)
Disposal wells
. No wells for the disposal of salt water or drilling fluid shall be located within the city.
(Ord. No. O-15-12, § 1, 12-11-12)
Sec. 115.18. Location.
(a)
Streets or alleys
. It shall be unlawful to drill or construct any well within any of the streets or alleys of the city. It shallbe unlawful to block, encumber or close up any street or alley in the drilling or producing operations, except by specialtemporary permission of the city council.
(b)
Residential or commercial buildings
. No well shall be drilled, constructed or operated, nor a permit issued to drill anysuch well, within 1,000 feet of any residence or commercial building without first obtaining the written consent of suchproperty owner.
(c)
Churches, schools, or public buildings
. No well shall be drilled, constructed or operated nor a permit issued to drill anysuch well within 1,000 feet of any school building, church or publicly owned building, except with the written consent of thegoverning body of such school, church or public property.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 164/350
(d)
Property lines
. No well shall be drilled within 200 feet of any property line of any property without the consent of theowner of such property.
(e)
Slanted wells
. This section shall not prohibit a permittee, from a properly located surface location, from drilling aslanted hole which would thereby locate the underground portion of the well beneath a street, school, church, etc. Thissubsection does not create any affirmative right or privilege to drill slanted wells; the drilling of slanted wells shall begoverned by the provisions of state and federal law.
(Ord. No. O-15-12, § 1, 12-11-12)
Sec. 115.19. Inspections and tests.
Those in control of the drilling or operation of any oil or gas well in the city shall permit the mayor or his designee to comeupon the premises and make inspection and tests at all reasonable hours. (Ord. No. O-15-12, § 1, 12-11-12)
Sec. 115.20. On-site requirements.
(a)
Abandoned wells
. All wells shall be abandoned in accordance with the rules of the railroad commission; however, allwell casings shall be cut and removed to a depth of at least ten feet below the surface unless the surface owner submits awritten agreement otherwise. Three feet shall be the minimum depth. No structures shall be built over an abandoned well.
(b)
Blowout prevention
. In all cases, blowout prevention equipment shall be used on all wells being drilled, worked-overor in which tubing is being changed. Protection shall be provided to prevent blowout during gas operations as required byand in conformance with the requirements of the commission and the recommendations of the American PetroleumInstitute. The operator must equip all drilling wells with adequate blowout preventors, flow lines and valves commensuratewith the working pressures involved as required by the commission.
(c)
Compliance
. The operator shall comply at all times with all applicable federal, state and city requirements.
(d)
Discharge
. No person shall place, deposit, discharge, or cause or permit to be placed, deposited or discharged, anyoil, naphtha, petroleum, asphalt, tar, hydrocarbon substances or any refuse including wastewater or brine from any gasoperation or the contents of any container used in connection with any gas operation in, into, or upon any public right-of-way, alleys, streets, lots, storm drain, ditch or sewer, sanitary drain or any body of water or any private property in the city.
(e)
Drill stem testing
. All open hole formation or drill stem testing shall be done during daylight hours. Drill stem tests maybe conducted only if the well effluent during the test is produced through an adequate gas separator to storage tanks andthe effluent remaining in the drill pipe at the time the tool is closed is flushed to the surface by circulating drilling fluid downthe annulus and up the drill pipe.
(f)
Dust, vibration, odors
. All drilling and production operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to minimize, sofar as practicable, dust, vibration, or noxious odors, and shall be in accordance with the best accepted practices incident todrilling for the production of gas and other hydrocarbon substances in urban areas. All equipment used shall be soconstructed and operated so that, vibrations, dust, odor or other harmful or annoying substances or effect will be minimizedby the operations carried on at any drilling or production site or from anything incident thereto, to the injury or annoyance ofpersons living in the vicinity; nor shall the site or structures thereon be permitted to become dilapidated, unsightly or unsafe.Proven technological improvements in industry standards of drilling and production in this area shall be adopted as theybecome available if capable of reducing factors of dust, vibration and odor.
(g)
Electric lines
. All electric lines to production facilities shall be located in a manner compatible to those alreadyinstalled in the surrounding area or subdivision.
(h)
Electric motors
. Only electric prime movers or motors shall be permitted for the purpose of pumping wells. No electricpower shall be generated on location. All electrical installations and equipment shall conform to the city ordinances and theappropriate national codes.
(i)
Emergency response plan
. Prior to the commencement of any gas or other hydrocarbons production activities,operator shall submit to the inspector an emergency response plan establishing written procedures to minimize any hazardresulting from drilling, completion or producing of gas wells. Said plan shall use existing guidelines established by the TexasCommission on Environmental Quality, Department of Transportation and/or the Environmental Protection Agency.
(j)
Equipment painted
. All production equipment on the site shall be painted and maintained at all times, includingpumping units, storage tanks, buildings and structures.
(k)
Fire prevention; sources of ignition
. Firefighting apparatus and supplies as approved by the fire department andrequired by any applicable federal, state, or local law shall be provided by the operator, at the operator's cost, and shall bemaintained on the drilling site at all times during drilling and production operations. The operator shall be responsible for themaintenance and upkeep of such equipment. Each well shall be equipped with an automated valve that closes the well in
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 165/350
the event of an abnormal change in operating pressure. All well heads shall contain an emergency shutoff valve to the welldistribution line.
(l)
Freshwater wells
.
(1) It shall be unlawful to drill any well, the center of which, at the surface of the ground, is located within 200feet to any freshwater well. The measurement shall be in a direct line from the closest well bore to thefreshwater well bore.
(2) The operator of a gas well shall provide the inspector with a “pre-drilling” and “post-drilling” water analysisfrom any freshwater well within 500 feet of the gas well.
(3) Within 180 days of its completion date, each gas well shall be equipped with a cathodic protection systemto protect the production casing from external corrosion. The inspector may approve an alternative method ofprotecting the production casing from external corrosion.
(m)
Gas emission or burning restricted
. No person shall allow, cause or permit gases to be vented into the atmosphere orto be burned by open flame except as provided by law or as permitted by the commission. If the venting of gases into theatmosphere or the burning of gases by open flame is authorized as provided by law or as permitted by the commission,then such vent or open flame shall not be located closer than 300 feet from any building not used in operations on thedrilling site and such vent or open flame shall be screened in such a way as to minimize detrimental effects to adjacentproperty owners.
(n)
Grass, weeds, trash
. All drill and operation sites shall be kept clear of grass or weeds over ten inches in height andcombustible trash within a radius of 100 feet around any gas tank or tanks or producing wells.
(o)
Hazardous plan
. A hazardous materials management plan shall be on file with the fire marshal and the inspector.
(p)
Lights
. No person shall permit any lights located on any drill or operation site to be directed in such a manner so thatthey shine directly on public roads, adjacent property or property in the general vicinity of the operation site. To the extentpracticable, and taking into account safety considerations, site lighting shall be directed downward and internally so as toavoid glare on public roads and adjacent dwellings and buildings within 300 feet.
(q)
Noise
. A gas well permit holder shall be subject to the following noise restrictions:
(1) No drilling, producing or other operations shall produce a sound level greater than 78 dB(a) whenmeasured at a distance of 300 feet from the production equipment in question. The noise level shall be theaverage of sound level meter readings taken consecutively at any given time from four or more diametricallyopposite positions, four feet above ground level, when measured at a distance of 300 feet from the productionequipment. A maximum sound level of 85 dB(a) shall apply to formation fracturing when measured at a distanceof 300 feet from the production equipment in question.
(2) No person shall operate or permit to be operated in connection with the operation of a producing well anyengine, compressor or motor-driven machinery of any type which creates a sound level greater than 65 dB(a)when measured at a distance of 300 feet from the well site. The noise level shall be the average of sound levelmeter readings taken consecutively at any given time from four or more diametrically opposite positionsmeasured at a distance of 300 feet from the well site.
(3) Sound level measurements shall be made with a sound level meter conforming, at a minimum, to therequirements of the American National Standards Institute.
(4) If sound levels exceed the dB(a) levels cited in subsections (1) and (2) of this section, the inspector mayrequire sound reducing mufflers.
(5) Exhaust from any internal combustion engine, stationary or mounted on wheels, used in connection withthe drilling of any well or for use on any production equipment shall not be discharged into the open air unless itis equipped with an exhaust muffler, or mufflers or an exhaust muffler box constructed of noncombustiblematerials sufficient to suppress noise and prevent the escape of obnoxious gases, fumes or ignited carbon orsoot.
(6) All formation fracturing operations shall be conducted during daylight hours unless the operator hasnotified the inspector that fracing will occur before or after daylight hours to meet safety requirements.
(r)
Pits
. Lined earthen mud or circulating pits are prohibited. Drilling mud, water and other liquid or semiliquid materialsshall be stored in steel tanks.
(s)
Private roads and drill sites
. Prior to the commencement of any drilling operations, all private roads used for access tothe drill site and the operation site itself shall be at least ten feet wide, have an overhead clearance of 14 feet and shall be
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 166/350
surfaced with crushed rock, gravel or ore and maintained to prevent dust and mud. In particular cases these requirementsgoverning surfacing of private roads may be altered at the discretion of the inspector after consideration of allcircumstances including, but not limited to, the following: distances from public streets and highways; distances fromadjoining and nearby property owners whose surface rights are not leased by the operation; the purpose for which theproperty of such owners is or may be used; topographical features; nature of the soil; and exposure to wind.
(t)
Vehicle routes
.
(1) Vehicles associated with drilling and/or production in excess of three tons shall be restricted to suchstreets designated as either truck routes or commercial delivery routes by the city wherever capable of beingused. The vehicles shall be operated on a truck route wherever capable of being used; they shall be operatedon a commercial delivery route only when it is not possible to use a truck route to fulfill the purpose for whichsuch vehicle is then being operated. Commercial delivery route means any street or highway so designated bythe city council for the use by any commercial motor vehicle, truck-tractor, trailer, semitrailer, or any combinationthereof.
(2) The operator shall keep thoroughfares throughout the city free from dirt, dust, mud or other debrisdeposited by vehicles involved in the well drilling or servicing or pipeline installation process. The operator shalleliminate dirt, dust, mud or other debris accumulations within two hours of notification by the city. If for safety orother reasons, the city elects to perform the removal, the cost of such removal shall be paid by the operator.
(u)
Salt water wells
. No salt water disposal wells shall be located within the city.
(v)
Storage of equipment
.
(1) On-site storage is prohibited on the operation site. No equipment shall be stored on the drilling orproduction operation site, unless it is necessary to the everyday operation of the well. Lumber, pipes, tubing andcasing shall not be left on the operation site except when drilling or well servicing operations are beingconducted on the site.
(2) No vehicle or item of machinery shall be parked or stored on any street, right-of-way or in any driveway,alley or upon any operation site which constitutes, in the opinion of the fire department chief or his designee, afire hazard or an obstruction to or interference with fighting or controlling fires except that equipment which isnecessary for drilling or production operations on the site.
(3) No refinery, processing, treating, dehydrating or absorption plant of any kind shall be constructed,established or maintained on the premises. This shall not be deemed to exclude a conventional gas separator ordehydrator.
(w)
Storage tanks
. Unless otherwise directed by the commission, all tanks used for storage shall conform to thefollowing:
(1) Operator must use portable, closed steel storage tanks for storing liquid hydrocarbons. Tanks must meetthe American Petroleum Institute standards. All tanks must have a vent line, flame arrester and pressure reliefvalve. All tanks must be enclosed within the fence required by
Section 115.23
of this chapter. No tank batteryshall be within 100 feet of any dwelling or other combustible structure.
(2) All tanks and permanent structures shall conform to the American Petroleum Institute (A.P.I.) specificationsunless other specifications are approved by the fire department chief. The top of the tanks shall be no higherthan eight feet above the terrain surrounding the tanks. All storage tanks shall be equipped with a secondarycontainment system including lining with an impervious material. The secondary containment system shall be aminimum of three feet in height and 1-1/2 times the contents of the largest tank in accordance with the fire code,and buried at least one foot below the surface. Drip pots shall be provided at the pump out connection to containthe liquids from the storage tank.
(3) All tanks shall be set back pursuant to the standards of the commission and the National Fire ProtectionAssociation, but in all cases, shall be at least 25 feet from any public right-of-way or property line. Each storagetank shall be equipped with a level control device that will automatically activate a valve to close the well in theevent of excess liquid accumulation in the tank.
(4) No meters, storage tanks, separation facilities, or other above ground facilities, other than the well headand flow lines, shall be placed in a floodway or the 100-year floodplain.
(5) Tanks must be at least 100 feet from any residence, religious institution, hospital building, school,cemetery, historical site or combustible structure.
(x)
Tank battery facilities
. Tank battery facilities shall be equipped with a remote foam line and a lightning arrestor system.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 167/350
(y)
Surface casing
. Surface casing shall be run and set in full compliance with the applicable rules and regulations of thecommission.
(z)
Valves
. Each well must have a shutoff valve to terminate the well's production. The fire department shall have accessto the well site to close the shutoff valve in an emergency.
(aa)
Waste disposal
.
(1) Drilling mud, cuttings, liquid hydrocarbons and all other field waste derived or resulting from or connectedwith the drilling, reworking or deepening of any well shall be discharged into a lined earthen pit. All disposalsmust be in accordance with the rules of the commission and any other appropriate local, state or federal agency.
(2) Unless otherwise directed by the commission, waste materials shall be removed from the site andtransported to an off-site disposal facility not less often than every 30 days. Water stored in on-site tanks shallbe removed as necessary.
(3) All waste shall be disposed of in such a manner as to comply with the air and water pollution controlregulations of the state, this chapter and any other applicable ordinance of the city.
(bb)
Watchman
. The operator must keep a watchman or security personnel on site during the drilling or reworking of awell when other workmen are not on the premises.
(cc)
Restroom facilities
. To meet the requirements as stated by OSHA and other appropriate regulatory agencies.
(dd)
Work hours
. Site development, other than drilling, shall be conducted only between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Truckdeliveries of equipment and materials associated with drilling and/or production, well servicing, site preparation and otherrelated work conducted on the well site shall be limited to between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. except in cases offires, blowouts, explosions and any other emergencies or where the delivery of equipment is necessary to prevent thecessation of drilling or production.
(Ord. No. O-15-12, § 1, 12-11-12)
Sec. 115.21. Well setbacks.
(a) It shall be unlawful to drill any well, the center of which, at the surface of the ground, is located:
(1) Within 25 feet from any outer boundary line;
(2) Within 25 feet from any storage tank, or source of ignition;
(3) Within 75 feet of any public street, road, highway or future street, right-of-way or property line;
(4) Within 100 feet of any building accessory to, but not necessary to the operation of the well;
(5) Within 200 feet to any freshwater well. The measurement shall be in a direct line from the closest well boreto the freshwater well bore; or
(6) Within 500 feet from any building used, or designed and intended to be used, for human occupancy.
(b) The distance shall be calculated from the well bore, in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures orobjects, to the closest exterior point of any object listed in subsection (a) above.
(c) The distances set out in subsection (a) above may be reduced at the discretion of the city council, but never less than300 feet from any dwelling or any other building used, or designed and intended to be used, for human occupancy withoutthe unanimous consent of the property owners within a 300-foot radius around said well and the affirmative vote of not lessthan three-fourths of all the members of the city council. For protection of the public health, safety and welfare, the citycouncil may impose additional requirements for a reduction of such distance. The reduction of the distance requirement forfreshwater wells is subject to the railroad commission regulations and any other state or federal requirements.
(Ord. No. O-15-12, § 1, 12-11-12)
Sec. 115.22. Installation of pipelines on, under or across public property.
(a) The operator shall apply to the city for a license agreement for the purpose of constructing, laying, maintaining,operating, repairing, replacing and removing pipelines on, over, under, along or across the city streets, sidewalks, alleysand other city property, so long as production or operations may be continued under any gas well permit issued pursuant tothis chapter.
(b) The operator shall:
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 168/350
(1) Not interfere with or damage existing water, sewer or gas lines or the facilities of public utilities located on,under or across the course of such rights-of way.
(2) Furnish to the inspector of the city a plat showing the location of such pipelines.
(3) Construct such lines out of pipe in accordance with the city codes and regulations properly cased andvented if under a street.
(4) Grade, level and restore such property to the same surface condition, as nearly as practicable, as existedwhen operations for the drilling of the well were first commenced.
(c) No gas well permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled within any of the streets or alleys of the city and/orprojected streets or alleys shown by the current comprehensive plan of the city, and no street or alley shall be blocked orencumbered or closed due to any exploration, drilling or production operations unless prior consent is obtained from theinspector or the city council, where required by ordinance. Where permitted, any consent from the inspector shall betemporary in nature and state the number of hours and/or days that any street or alley may be blocked, encumbered orclosed.
(Ord. No. O-15-12, § 1, 12-11-12)
Sec. 115.23. Screening, signage and landscaping.
(a)
Fences
. Fences shall not be required on drill sites during initial drilling, completion or reworking operations as long as24-hour on-site supervision is provided. Within 30 days after production has been established, all operation sites shall becompletely enclosed by a fence meeting the specifications set forth in subsection (b) of this section, being a minimum ofeight feet, but not to exceed ten feet in height. In addition to fences, a secured entrance gate shall be required. All gatesare to be kept locked when the operator or his employees are not within the enclosure.
(b)
Fence specifications
. Unless alternate fence material is approved by the city council, all fences shall consist of atleast 50 percent masonry material (no prefabricated material) with the remainder consisting of wrought iron or other likematerial approved by the city council. All fences used to enclose in whole or in part any drilling or production site shall beconstructed in accordance with standard engineering practices and be of a design compatible with the facilities, buildingsand structures on and adjacent to the site.
(c)
Gate specifications
. All fences shall be equipped with at least one gate. The gate shall meet the followingspecifications:
(1) Each gate shall be not less than 12 feet wide and be composed of two gate doors, each of which is notless than six feet wide, or one sliding gate door not less than 12 feet wide. If two gate doors are used, gatesshall latch and lock in the center of the span;
(2) The gates shall be of wrought iron construction that meets the applicable specifications, or of otherapproved material that, for safety reasons, shall be at least as secure as a chainlink fence;
(3) The gates shall be provided with a combination catch and locking attachment device for a padlock, andshall be kept locked except when being used for access to the site; and
(4) Operator must provide the city fire chief with a “Knox padlock” or “Knox box with a key” to access the wellsite to be used only in case of an emergency.
(d)
Signs
.
(1) A sign shall be immediately and prominently displayed at the gate on the temporary and permanent sitefencing erected. Such sign shall be durable material, maintained in good condition and, unless otherwiserequired by the commission, shall have a surface area of not less than two square feet, nor more than foursquare feet and shall be lettered with the following:
(A) Well name and number;
(B) Name of operator;
(C) The emergency 911 number; and
(D) Telephone numbers of two persons responsible for the well who may be contacted in case ofemergency.
(2) Permanent weatherproof signs reading “Danger No Smoking Allowed” shall be posted immediately uponcompletion of the well site fencing at the entrance of each well site and tank battery or in any other locationapproved or designated by the fire chief of the city. Sign lettering shall be four inches in height and shall be red
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 169/350
on a white background or white on a red background. Each sign shall include the emergency notificationnumbers of the fire department and the operator, well and lease designations required by the commission.
(e)
Landscaping
.
(1) Landscaping and irrigation shall be required along all street frontages of the well site with suitablescreening shrubs that complement the architectural character of the surrounding neighborhood. Screeningshrubs shall be installed completely around the well site and all required fences and be sufficient to screen fromview the structures sought to be screened. Screening shrubs shall be a minimum of three feet in height atplanting, have the potential to grow to a mature height of a minimum of six feet and must have an installedirrigation system that provides total water coverage to all plant materials. The vegetation shall be kept in anattractive state and in good condition at all times by the applicant or operator.
(2) All landscape and irrigation plans shall be submitted concurrently with the gas well permit application, tothe city council for approval.
(3) Notwithstanding the requirements of this section, the operator may petition the city council to toll therequired landscaping installation until such time as the council, in its sole discretion, after written notice to theoperator and a public meeting, may determine that the required landscaping installation is necessary due todevelopment around the drill site, change in circumstances, or other factors which the council deemsappropriate. The failure of the operator to install the required landscaping in compliance with this section mayresult in the revocation of the gas well permit in accordance with
section 115.09
hereof; or in the alternative, thecity may elect to draw from the required bond or letter of credit to install or direct the installation of the requiredlandscaping.
(Ord. No. O-15-12, § 1, 12-11-12)
Sec. 115.24. Cleanup and maintenance, plugged and abandoned wells.
(a)
Cleanup after well servicing
. After the well has been completed or plugged and abandoned, the operator shall cleanthe drill site or operation site, complete restoration activities and repair all damage to public property caused by suchoperations within 60 days.
(b)
Cleanup after spills, leaks and malfunctions
. After any spill, leak or malfunction, the operator shall remove or cause tobe removed to the satisfaction of the fire department chief and the inspector all waste materials from any public or privateproperty affected by such spill, leak or malfunction. Cleanup operations must begin immediately. If the owner fails to beginsite cleanup within 24 hours, the city shall have the right to contact the commission in order to facilitate the removal of allwaste materials from the property affected by such spill, leak or malfunction.
(c)
Free from debris
. The property on which a well site is located shall at all times be kept free of debris, pools of water orother liquids, contaminated soil, weeds, brush, trash or other waste material within a radius of 100 feet around anyseparators, tanks and producing wells. Burial of debris will not be allowed.
(d)
Painting
. All production equipment shall be painted and maintained at all times, including wellheads, pumping units,tanks, and buildings or structures. When requiring painting of such facilities, the inspector shall consider the deterioration ofthe quality of the material of which such facility or structure is constructed, the degree of rust, and its appearance. Paintshall be of a neutral color, compatible with surrounding uses. Neutral colors shall include sand, gray and unobtrusiveshades of green, blue and brown, or other neutral colors approved by the inspector.
(e)
Blowouts
. In the event of the loss of control of any well, the operator shall immediately take all reasonable steps toregain control regardless of any other provision of this chapter and shall notify the inspector as soon as practicable. Theinspector shall certify in writing, briefly describing the same, to the city manager. If the inspector, in his opinion, believes thatdanger to persons and property exists because of such loss of well control and that the operator is not taking or is unable totake all reasonable and necessary steps to regain control of such well, the inspector may then employ any well controlexpert or experts or other contractors or suppliers of special services, or may incur any other expenses for labor andmaterial which the inspector deems necessary to regain control of such well. The city shall then have a valid lien againstthe interest in the well of all working interest owners to secure payment of any expenditure made by the city pursuant tosuch action of the inspector in gaining control of said well.
(f)
Surface requirements for plugged and abandoned well
. Whenever abandonment occurs pursuant to the requirementsof the commission, the operator so abandoning shall be responsible for the restoration of the well site to its originalcondition as nearly as practicable, in conformity with the regulations of this chapter.
(g)
Approval after abandonment
. Abandonment shall be approved by the inspector after restoration of the drill site hasbeen accomplished in conformity with the following requirements at the discretion of the inspector:
(1) The derrick and all appurtenant equipment thereto shall be removed from drill site;
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 170/350
(2) All tanks, towers, and other surface installations shall be removed from the drill site;
(3) All concrete foundations, piping, wood, guy anchors and other foreign materials regardless of depth,except surface casing, shall be removed from the site, unless otherwise directed by the commission;
(4) All holes and depressions shall be filled with clean, compactable soil;
(5) All waste, refuse or waste material shall be removed from the drill site; and
(6) During abandonment, operator shall comply with all applicable sections in this chapter.
(h)
Abandoned well requirement
. The operator shall furnish the following at the discretion of the inspector:
(1) A copy of the approval of the commission confirming compliance with all abandonment proceedings underthe state law; and
(2) A notice of intention to abandon under the provisions of this section and stating the date such work will becommenced. Abandonment may then be commenced on or subsequent to the date so stated.
(i)
Abandonment requirements prior to new construction
. All abandoned or deserted wells or drill sites shall meet themost current abandonment requirements of the commission prior to the issuance of any building permit for development ofthe property. No structure shall be built over an abandoned well.
(Ord. No. O-15-12, § 1, 12-11-12)
Sec. 115.25. Appeal; procedure.
(a) Any person who may be aggrieved or injured by any ruling, order, or decision of the mayor or city secretary, or theirdesignees, shall have a right to appeal to the city council from such ruling, order or decision, in the following manner:
(1) The appellant shall first deliver to the city secretary, in writing, a statement of the complaint, setting out indetail the nature of the action complained of, the reason for dissatisfaction with such action, and the actionwhich is desired to be taken. A copy of the complaint shall be furnished to the city attorney. The mayor shallhave five business days following the delivery of such statement in which to respond or take appropriatecorrective action.
(2) Thereafter, such person(s) may appeal to the city council by delivering to the city secretary a letter ofappeal stating that a desire to appeal to the city council, the nature of the action complained of, the reason(s) fordissatisfaction with such action, and the action which is desired to be taken. The city council may, at itsdiscretion, consider such appeal at a regular session or at a special session, subject always to the noticerequirements of the Open Meetings Act.
(3) A person who has exhausted all administrative remedies available before the city council, and who isaggrieved by a final decision under this chapter, may thereafter seek review and judicial relief through a court ofcompetent jurisdiction of the state.
(b) A person wishing to appeal or protest a ruling, order, or decision of the mayor or his representatives under theprovisions of this chapter shall do so in the manner set out in this section within 60 days after the ruling, order, or decisioncomplained of, unless the time for such appeal shall be extended by authority of the governing body of the city.
(Ord. No. O-15-12, § 1, 12-11-12)
Sec. 115.26. Conflicting legislation.
If ever in this chapter restrictions, prohibitions, or provisions conflict with laws of the state or with regulations of the railroadcommission of the state, the more restrictive restriction, prohibition, or provision shall apply. In case of inconsistencybetween this chapter and any other ordinance of the city, including but not limited to the zoning ordinance, the terms andconditions of this chapter shall control. (Ord. No. O-15-12, § 1, 12-11-12)
Sec. 115.27. Violation of federal and state laws.
Any violation of the law of the state or the United States, or any rules, regulations or requirements of any state or federalregulatory body having jurisdiction with reference to drilling, construction, operation or maintenance of oil or gas wells orpipelines shall also be a violation of this chapter, and shall be punishable in accordance with the provisions hereof. (Ord.No. O-15-12, § 1, 12-11-12)
Sec. 115.28. Penalties.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 171/350
(a)
General
. It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provision of thischapter. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or any of the provisions of a permit issuedpursuant to this chapter or who shall fail to comply with the terms hereof shall, on conviction thereof, be fined in an amountnot exceeding $500.00; provided, however, the violation of any provision hereof which governs fire safety, public health andsanitation shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000.00. Each and every day a violation continues shall constitute aseparate offense punishable hereunder.
(b)
Civil enforcement
. Upon the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, the city, through its attorney, may bringan action in the name of the city, against the person(s) engaged in or permitting the violation or reasonably believed aboutto engage in the violation of this chapter, to restrain by temporary or permanent injunction such act or practice in violation ofthe article. The city may likewise, by civil suit, seek civil penalties of $500.00 per day, plus attorneys' fees, and such othercivil relief to which it may be entitled at law or by the terms of this chapter and its contractual provisions.
(Ord. No. O-15-12, § 1, 12-11-12)
Sec. 115.29. Severability.
Should any word, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase, or section of this chapter, or of the Code ofOrdinances, as amended hereby, be adjudged or held to be void or unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity ofthe remaining portions of said chapter or the Code of Ordinances, as amended hereby, which shall remain in full force andeffect. (Ord. No. O-15-12, § 1, 12-11-12)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
*
1
Sec. 130.01. Unlawful to interfere with city employees.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere, hinder, impede or otherwise cause hardship to any city employeeoperating within the scope of his or her duties or while discharging any of the responsibilities placed upon such employeeby ordinance or state law.
(B) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the interference alleged consisted of constitutionally protectedspeech only.
(‘84 Code, § 14-2)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 130.02. Discharge of firearms prohibited; exceptions.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot or discharge any rifle, pistol or other firearm which discharges and propelsa single bullet, slug or other single missile within the city limits. It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot or discharge anyshotgun or other firearm which discharges and propels multiple pellets, shots or other similar missiles within the city limitswithin 2,000 feet of any structure, whether that structure is within or without the limits of the city, or from or across anypublic street, road or highway within the limits of the city.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot or discharge any air gun, air rifle, air pistol or like device within the citylimits or within 2,000 feet of any structure, whether that structure is within or without the limits of the city, or from or acrossany public street, road or highway within the limits of the city.
(C) The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit any peace officer, animal control officer, or official ofthe law from discharging a firearm while in the performance of his or her official duties.
(‘84 Code, § 14-4)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
State Law reference–
Authority to regulate the discharge of firearms, Tex. Local Gov't Code § 215.001.
Sec. 130.03. Sale and use of fireworks and explosives within city prohibited; penalty.
(A)
Definitions
. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates orrequires a different meaning:
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 172/350
City
. The City of Jacksboro, Texas, with administrative offices at 112 West Belknap Street, Jacksboro, Texas 76458.
Fireworks
. Any combustible or explosive composition, or any substances or combination of substances, or article preparedfor the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, and shallinclude blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, or toy guns in which any such explosives are used, the type ofunmanned balloons which require fire underneath to propel the same, firecrackers, lady fingers, torpedoes, skyrockets,Roman candles, Day-Glo bombs, sparklers, or other devices containing any such explosive substance. The term “fireworks”shall not include toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices in which paper plastic caps manufactured in accordancewith the United States Department of Transportation regulations for packing and shipping of toy paper or plastic caps areused and such toy paper or plastic caps are manufactured as provided therein except that no toy paper or plastic cap shallcontain more than twenty-five hundredths of a grain of explosive composition per cap. Each package containing toy paperor plastic offered for retail sale shall be labeled to indicate the maximum explosive content per cap. The sale and use ofthese toy paper or plastic caps shall be permitted at all times. Nothing in this definition shall be construed as applying to themanufacture, storage, sale, or use of signals necessary for the safe operation of railroads or other classes of public orprivate transportation, nor applying to the military or naval forces of the United States or of this state, or to peace officers.Nothing in this definition shall be construed as forbidding the sale and use of blank cartridges for ceremonial, theatrical orathletic events.
Person
. Any individual, firm, organization, partnership, unincorporated association or corporation.
Sell or Display
. The selling, offering to sell, exhibiting, or possessing with intent to give away, sell, or offer to sell within thecity or within 1,000 feet of the city limits of the City of Jacksboro, Texas.
Use
. Purchasing, possessing, setting off or otherwise causing the explode or discharge or burn, and firecrackers, torpedo,rocket, or other fireworks or explosives of inflammable material, or to discharge them or throw them from land, air, orhighway into any area of the city. This prohibition includes any substance, compound, mixture, or article that in conjunctionwith any other substance or compound would be dangerous from any of the foregoing standpoints. This provision shall alsomean and include casting, throwing, lighting, or firing any squib, rocket, cracker, torpedo, cap or cartridge, or other fireworksor combustible firecrackers of any kind.
(B)
Storage
.
(1) No person, firm or corporation shall store fireworks within the city limits of Jacksboro, Texas, or within1,000 feet of the city limits, except if necessary for the performance of a public exhibition to be held pursuant toa permit issued as hereinafter provided or by special provisions so directed by the City Manager at activitiesapproved by and under the supervision of the Fire Chief.
(2) Storage of fireworks for a public exhibition shall be in a safe place, securely locked or guarded so that nochild or unauthorized person shall have access thereto and shall be protected from fire hazards. The Fire Chiefof the city shall inspect the storage to determine whether it complies with the terms of this section.
(C)
Sale
. No person, firm or corporation shall sell fireworks within the city limits of Jacksboro, Texas or within 1,000 feetof the city limits.
(D)
Discharge
. No person, firm or corporation shall discharge or use fireworks within the city limits of Jacksboro, Texas,except at a public exhibition held pursuant to a permit issued as provided hereinafter.
(E)
Permits
. A permit for a public display of fireworks shall be issued by the City Manager, after examination of theproposal by the Fire Chief. No such permit shall be issued if it appears from the information available to the Fire Chief andto the City Manager that there are substantial dangers to people or property due to the location, the type of fireworksproposed or the proposed procedures to be used.
(F)
Nuisance and injunctive relief
. Any violation of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance. In addition to anyother relief provided by this section, the City Attorney may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction toprohibit the continuation of any violation of this section. The application for relief may include seeking a temporaryrestraining order, temporary injunction and permanent injunctions.
(G)
Agricultural use of fireworks
. Notwithstanding anything stated in this section to the contrary, any person possessing,setting off or otherwise causing the explosion or discharge of firecrackers for agricultural purposes is hereby exempted fromthis section, if the explosion or discharge is under the following conditions:
(1) The explosion or discharge is solely for agricultural purposes;
(2) The explosion or discharge is on property having an agricultural exemption for ad valorem taxes grantedby the Jack County Appraisal District at the time of the explosion or discharge;
(3) The amount of property on which the explosion or discharge occurs is no less than 13 acres.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 173/350
(H)
Incorporated by reference
. All of the facts recited in the preamble of Ordinance 5-4-02 are hereby found by the CityCouncil to be true and correct and are incorporated by reference herein and expressly made a part hereof, as if copiedherein verbatim.
(I)
Penalty
. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of amisdemeanor and, upon conviction in the Municipal Court of the City of Jacksboro, Texas, or any other court of properjurisdiction, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the sum of $500.00 for each offense, except however, where a differentpenalty has been established by state law for such offense the penalty shall be that fixed by state law, and for any offensewhich is a violation of any provision of law that governs fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, includingdumping of refuse, the penalty shall be a fine not to exceed the sum of $2,000.00 for each offense; and each and every daysaid violation is continued shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 5-4-02, passed 5-14-02)
CHAPTER 131: NOISE
Sec. 131.01. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to make it unlawful for any person or entity to make, cause to be made or allow any loud orunreasonably loud and disturbing noise of such character, intensity and duration as to be detrimental or offensive to theordinary sensibilities of the inhabitants of the city, and/or which renders the enjoyment of life, health or propertyuncomfortable or interferes with public peace and comfort. (Ord. O-03-03, passed 2-11-03; Ord. O-05-18, passed 3-12-18)
Sec. 131.02. Definitions.
(A) For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires adifferent meaning:
City
. The City of Jacksboro, Texas, employees or any authorized representative of the city.
Construction
. Any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, or similar action (excludingdemolition) of public or private right-of-way surfaces, structures, utilities or similar property.
Demolition
. Any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of public or private right-of-way surfaces, structures,utilities or similar property.
Device
. Any mechanism which is intended to produce, or which actually produces, noise when operated or handled.
Emergency vehicle
. A motor vehicle used in response to a public calamity or to protect persons or property from animminent exposure to danger.
Garbage
. All animal and vegetable matter, food containers, ashes, paper, small hedges and lawn trimmings, rubbish, trash,waste material, refuse including solid, liquid, semisolid or containing gaseous material, resulting from residential, municipal,commercial, community and institutional activities.
Motor vehicle
. Any vehicle propelled by mechanical powers, such as, yet not limited to, any passenger car, truck, truck-trailer, semi-trailer, camper, motorcycle, mini-bike, go-cart, all-terrain vehicle (atv), dune buggy or racing vehicle.
Noise disturbance
. Any sound which annoys or disturbs, or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological orphysiological effect upon, the sensibilities of a reasonable, prudent, adult person; and unreasonably loud or disturbing noisewhich renders the enjoyment of life or property uncomfortable or interferes with public peace and comfort.
Noise disturbance per se
. Not requiring extraneous evidence or support to establish the existence of a noise disturbance.Unless otherwise set forth herein, any activity prohibited by
§131.03
, shall create a noise disturbance per se if conductedbetween the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
Nonresidential district
. Any district not classified by the zoning ordinance as containing residential homes, apartments orcondominiums.
Owner
. Any person having supervision or control of any property.
Power equipment
. Any motorized electric or fuel powered equipment, including yet not limited to tractors, lawnmowersand other similar device or equipment.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 174/350
Power model vehicle
. Any self-propelled airborne, waterborne or land borne plane, vessel, or vehicle, which is notdesignated to carry persons, including yet not limited to any model airplane, boat, car or rocket.
Property
. Any lot, tract, parcel of land or a portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, public orprivate within the corporate limits of the city.
Property boundary
. An imaginary line exterior to any enclosed structure, at the ground surface and its vertical extension,which separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by another person.
Quiet zone
. Property on which a school, hospital, clinic, library or other noise sensitive facility is operated.
Residential district
. Any district classified by the zoning ordinance as containing residential homes, apartments orcondominiums.
Roadway
. Any street, alley, parkway, sidewalk or gutter.
Rubbish
. Any refuse, garbage, litter or worthless material.
(B) All terminology used in this chapter and not specifically defined above, shall retain its meaning in conformance withapplicable publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body and/or the latest volumeof Webster's Collegiate Dictionary.
(Ord. O-03-03, passed 2-11-03; Ord. O-05-18, passed 3-12-18)
Sec. 131.03. Specific noise disturbance prohibited.
(A) No person shall allow, make or cause to be made any unreasonably loud or disturbing noise which is offensive to thesensibilities of a reasonable, prudent adult person, renders the enjoyment of life or property uncomfortable, interferes withpublic peace and comfort, or causes a noise disturbance as defined.
(B) The following includes, yet is not limited to, activities which can create unreasonably loud or disturbing noises inviolation of this chapter, including activities which are noise disturbances per se, unless an exemption exists or a permit ofvariance was first obtained as provided in
§ 131.05
.
(1)
Animals
. Owning, keeping, possessing or harboring any animal or fowl which, by frequent or habitualnoise making, unreasonably disturbs or interferes with the peace, comfort or repose of citizens, or causes anoise disturbance as defined herein. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all private or public facilities,including any animal shelter or commercial kennel, which hold or treat animals.
(2)
Radios, television sets, musical instruments, loud speaking amplifiers and similar devices
.
(a) The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any sound production orreproduction device, radio, receiving set, musical instrument, drums, phonograph, television set,loudspeakers and sound amplifiers or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of soundwithin a residential district or quiet zone, or within 500 feet of any residence or quiet zone, in such amanner as to cause a noise disturbance.
(b) The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any sound production orreproduction device, radio, receiving set, musical instrument, drums, phonograph, television set,loudspeaker or sound amplifiers or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of soundwithin nonresidential area in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance.
(c) The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any sound production orreproduction device, radio, receiving set, musical instrument, drums, phonograph, television set,loudspeakers and sound amplifiers or other machine or device that produces or reproduces sound for thepurpose of attracting attention to any cause or demonstration, or to any performance, show, sale or displayof merchandise so as to attract attention to such cause, demonstration or premises when such use is donein a manner which causes a noise disturbance.
(d) The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any sound production reproductiondevice, radio, receiving set, musical instrument, drums, phonograph, television set, loudspeakers andsound amplifiers or other machine or device on trucks or other moving vehicles for the purpose ofattracting attention to any cause or demonstration, or for advertising any show, sale or display ofmerchandise when such use is done in a manner which causes a noise disturbance.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 175/350
(3)
Vehicular sound amplification systems
. Operating or controlling a motor vehicle in either a public or privateplace within the city and operating any sound device which is part of, or connected to, any radio, stereo receiver,compact disc player, cassette tape player, or other similar device in the motor vehicle in such a manner that,when operated, it is audible at a distance of 30 feet or, when operated, causes a person to be aware of thevibration accompanying the sound at a distance of 30 feet from the source when such operation is done in amanner which causes a noise disturbance.
(4)
Yelling, shouting, etc
. The yelling, shouting, crying, hooting, whistling or singing of peddlers, hawkers orany other person in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance.
(5)
Loading operations
. The loading or unloading of any vehicle in such a manner as to cause a noisedisturbance. To the extent applicable, the provisions and standards of the zoning ordinance, as it may beamended, shall apply.
(6)
Construction/maintenance work
.
(a) Operating or permitting to be operated any equipment used in construction, maintenance, repair,alteration or demolition work on buildings, structures, streets, alleys, lawns, golf courses or appurtenancesthereto and/or the erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building within aresidential district or quiet zone, or within 500 feet of any residence or quiet zone, in such a manner as tocause a noise disturbance, except as provided by the zoning ordinance, as it may be amended.Furthermore, any such activity shall create a noise disturbance per se if conducted between the hours of9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(b) Operating or permitting to be operated any gravel pit, rock crusher, or other machinery for theseparation, gathering, grading, loading or unloading of sand, rock or gravel within a residential district orquiet zone, or within 500 feet of any residence or quiet zone, in such a manner as to cause a noisedisturbance, except as provided by the zoning ordinance, as it may be amended. Furthermore, any suchactivity shall create a noise disturbance per se if conducted between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(c) Operating or permitting to be operated any equipment used in construction, maintenance, repair,alteration or demolition work on buildings, structures, streets, alleys, lawns, golf courses or appurtenancesthereto within a nonresidential district in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance, except asotherwise provided by the zoning ordinance as it may be amended.
(d) Operating or permitting to be operated any gravel pit, rock crusher or other machinery for theseparation, gathering, grading, loading or unloading of sand, rock or gravel within a nonresidential districtin such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance, except as otherwise provided by the zoning ordinance,as it may be amended.
(7)
Power equipment
.
(a) Operating or permitting to be operated any power equipment (as defined herein and excludingconstruction equipment which is specifically regulated above) within a residential district or quiet zone, orwithin 500 feet of any residence or quiet zone, in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance.Furthermore, any such activity shall create a noise disturbance per se if conducted between the hours of10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(b) Operating or permitting to be operated any power equipment (as defined herein and excludingconstruction equipment which is specifically regulated above) within a nonresidential district in such amanner as to cause a noise disturbance in violation of the zoning ordinance, as it may be amended.
(8)
Motor vehicle - repairs or testing
.
(a) The repairing, rebuilding, modifying or testing of any motor vehicle (including off-road vehicles) orwatercraft within a residential district or quiet zone, or within 500 feet of any residence or quiet zone, insuch a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. Furthermore, any such activity shall create a noisedisturbance per se if conducted between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(b) The repairing, rebuilding, modifying or testing any motor vehicle (including off-road vehicles) orwatercraft within a nonresidential district in a manner as to cause a noise disturbance, in violation of thezoning ordinance, as it may be amended.
(9)
Motor vehicles - running loud or out of repair
.
(a) The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle so out of repair, so modified, or so loaded,which emits or creates loud or unnecessary grading, grinding or rasping noise, the excessive spinning of
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 176/350
the tires, or the racing of a motor vehicle engine unnecessarily within a residence or quiet zone, in such amanner as to cause a noise disturbance.
(b) The use of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so out of repair, so modified, or so loaded,which emits or creates loud or unnecessary grading, grinding or rasping noise, the excessive spinning oftires, or racing of a motor vehicle engine unnecessarily within a nonresidential district in such a manner asto cause a noise disturbance.
(10)
Motor vehicle - exhaust
. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any motor vehicle in such amanner as to cause a noise disturbance, except as discharged through a muffler or other device whicheffectively and efficiently prevents loud and unusual noises and annoying smoke.
(11)
Explosive devices
. Explosive sound sources including, yet not limited to, the use of fireworks, explosives,the firing of guns or other explosive devices in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. Providedhowever, no such noise disturbance shall be deemed to exist when the activity is allowed or sanctioned byordinance or other authority and the activity is conducted in strict accordance with said ordinance or authority.
(12)
Powered model mechanical devices
.
(a) The flying of model aircraft powered by internal combustion engines, whether tethered or not, or thefiring or operating of model rocket vehicles or other similar noise producing devices, within a residentialdistrict or quiet zone, or within 500 feet of any residence or quiet zone, in such a manner as to cause anoise disturbance.
(b) The flying of model aircraft powered by internal combustion engines whether tethered or not, or thefiring or operating of model rocket vehicles or other similar noise producing devices within a nonresidentialdistrict in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance.
(13)
Refuse compacting vehicles
. Operating or permitting to be operated any refuse compacting, processingor collection vehicles in any residential district or quiet zone, or within 500 feet of any residence or quiet zone insuch a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. Furthermore, any such activity shall create a noise disturbanceper se if conducted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. No noise disturbance shall be deemed tooccur when the noise is created in the regular course of activity for which the equipment is designed and thenoise occurs for no longer than reasonably necessary to conduct the activity and the hours of operation arebetween 6:01 a.m. and 9:59 p.m.
(14)
Quiet zone
. Creating a noise disturbance on any street adjacent to any school, hospital, clinic, library orother noise sensitive facility.
(15)
Stationary nonemergency signaling devices
. Sounding or permitting the sounding of an electronicallyactivated or amplified signal from any stationary bell, chime, siren, whistle, or similar device, intended primarilyfor nonemergency purposes, from any place for more than five minutes during any consecutive 60-minute periodwhich causes a noise disturbance. Such signaling device is allowed if used as a danger signal, residential alarm,and/or as required by law if a vehicle is backing, starting or turning in such a way as to likely cause a collision.
(16)
Auxiliary or compression engine brake a/k/a Jacobs Brake or Jake Brake
.
(a) The use or operation of an auxiliary or compression engine brake, commonly referred to as a“Jacobs” or “Jake Brake,” produces, emits or creates a loud or unnecessary noise in addition to the normaloperating engine noise, within the city, in such a manner as to cause or create a noise disturbance.Provided however, no such noise disturbance shall be deemed to exist when such use or operation isrequired, allowed or sanctioned by other law and is conducted in strict accordance with said law orauthority.
(b) This provision shall not be construed to prohibit the use of such braking mechanism by emergencyvehicles while in the performance of their official duties.
(c) This provision is not intended to prohibit the passage of vehicles equipped with auxiliary orcompression engine brakes in posted areas; rather the use or operation of such equipment in posted areasis expressly prohibited unless allowed, required or sanctioned by other law or authority and the use oroperation is conducted in strict accordance with said law or authority.
(Ord. O-03-03, passed 2-11-03; Am. Ord. O-01-05, passed 1-11-05; Ord. O-05-18, passed 3-12-18)
Cross reference–
Penalty, § 131.99.
Sec. 131.04. Exemptions.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 177/350
The following sources of potential noise disturbance shall be exempt from the regulations of this chapter:
(A) Safety signals, storm warning sirens or horns and the testing of such equipment, emergency vehiclesirens or horns used when responding to an emergency, and emergency pressure relief valves.
(B) Sound caused in the performance of emergency or public service work, including police, fire and publicutility operations, acting in the performance of lawful duties to protect the health, safety or welfare of thecommunity.
(C) Sounds caused by natural phenomena.
(D) Activities conducted on public parks and playgrounds which are approved, sponsored or sanctioned bythe city. Activities conducted on public or private school grounds including, yet not limited to, school athletic andschool entertainment events which are approved, sponsored or sanctioned by the school.
(E) Any activity, noise or sound exempted by the zoning ordinance, as it may be amended.
(Ord. O-03-03, passed 2-11-03; Ord. O-05-18, passed 3-12-18)
Sec. 131.05. Permits of variance.
(A) The city manager, or his or her designated representative, is authorized to grant permits for relief of any provision inthis chapter on the basis of undue hardship in cases where:
(1) The sound source will be of short duration and the activity cannot be conducted in a manner as to complywith this chapter;
(2) Additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify their activity or operation to comply with thischapter; or
(3) No reasonable alternative is available to the applicant.
(B) An automatic variance will be granted without the payment of permit fees for the purpose of conducting parades orother public events provided that any noise disturbance created by such activity shall be abated when such request ismade by the City Manager, or his or her designated representative.
(C) The city manager, or his or her designated representative, may prescribe any reasonable conditions or requirementsdeemed necessary to minimize adverse effects and may suspend any permit issued for violating any provisions prescribedin the permit of variance.
(D) A fee of $25.00 shall be charged to each applicant for processing permit applications.
(Ord. O-03-03, passed 2-11-03; Ord. O-05-18, passed 3-12-18)
Sec. 131.06. Appeals.
(A) Any applicant who has been denied a permit of variance or any permittee whose permit has been suspended, shallhave the right to a hearing before the city manager.
(B) Request for a hearing shall be made in writing and received by the city manager, or his or her designatedrepresentative, within ten days of the date of the denial or the date of the notice of the suspension. The city manager mayreview the appeal at a staff level and has the authority to reject the action of his or her designated representative and orderthat a permit be granted or to reinstate a suspended permit. However, should the city manager uphold the denial orsuspension of a permit, he or she shall, or his or her designated representative shall, schedule a hearing within 30 days ofreceipt of the request.
(C) The city manager shall have the authority to review all pertinent files and information regarding theapplicant/permittee which are in the custody of the city manager, or his or her designated representative. Additionally, thecity manager shall have the authority to accept written and verbal testimony from the city manager, his or her designatedrepresentative, any appropriate city staff member, applicant/permittee and interested citizens. The city manager shall alsohave the authority to place time restrictions on the testimony to be given at the hearing.
(D) No person whose permit has been denied or suspended shall create or allow the creation of the noise disturbance indispute prior to a determination by the city manager.
(Ord. O-03-03, passed 2-11-03; Ord. O-05-18, passed 3-12-18)
Sec. 131.07. Injunctive relief.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 178/350
In addition to and accumulative of all other penalties, the city shall have the right to seek injunctive relief for any and allviolations of this chapter. (Ord. O-03-03, passed 2-11-03; Ord. O-05-18, passed 3-12-18)
Sec. 131.99. Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon convictionthereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each dayduring or on which a violation or failure to comply occurs or continues to occur. Allegation and evidence of a culpablemental state is not required for the proof of an offense defined by this chapter. (Ord. O-03-03, passed 2-11-03; Ord. O-05-18, passed 3-12-18)
CHAPTER 132: SEXUAL OFFENDERS' RESIDENCY AND LOITERING RESTRICTIONS
Sec. 132.01. Findings and intent.
(A) Repeat sexual offenders, sexual offenders that use physical violence and sexual offenders who prey on childrenpresent an extreme threat to the public safety. Sexual offenders are likely to use physical violence and to repeat theiroffenses and most sexual offenders commit many offenses, have many more victims than are ever reported, and areprosecuted for only a fraction of their crimes. This makes the cost of sexual offender victimization to society at-large, whileincalculable, clearly exorbitant.
(B) It is the intent of this chapter to serve the city's compelling interest to promote, protect and improve the health, safetyand welfare of the citizens, particularly children, by prohibiting certain sexual offenders from establishing temporary orpermanent residence in certain areas where children are known to regularly congregate and to restrict certain sexualoffenders access to parks, public swimming pools, child-care facilities, public or private youth centers, and video arcadefacilities.
(Ord. O-08-18, passed 4-9-18)
Sec. 132.02. Definitions.
The following terms and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, exceptwhere the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
Child or children
. Any person(s) less than seventeen (17) years of age.
Child-care facility
. As defined by Texas Human Resources Code § 42.002, and shall include a foster home, a foster grouphome, a day-care center, a group day-care home, an agency foster group home, and an agency foster home, also defined byHuman Resources Code § 42.002.
Child safety zone
. Private and public preschool, primary and secondary schools, public library, amusement arcades, videoarcades, indoor and outdoor amusement centers, park, amusement parks, public or commercial and semi-private swimmingpools, child-care facility, public youth soccer, or baseball field, skate park or rink, public or private youth center, movietheater, bowling alley, or offices for child protective services.
Convicted or conviction
. A judicial determination of guilt or a judicial finding of sufficient evidence of guilt, which is theresult of a trial or the entry of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, regardless of whether adjudication is withheld. Aconviction of a similar offense includes, but is not limited to, a conviction by a federal or military tribunal, including a court-marshal conducted by the Armed Forces of the United States, and includes a conviction or entry of a plea of guilty or nolocontendere resulting in any sanction in any state of the United States or other jurisdiction. A sanction includes, but is notlimited to, a fine, probation, community control, parole, conditional release, control release, or incarceration in a stateprison, federal prison, private correctional facility, or local detention facility.
Legal guardian or guardian
. Biological or adoptive parent of a child, or a person who is responsible for the care andmaintenance of said child pursuant to state statutes or similar laws of another jurisdiction.
Loiter
. Standing or sitting idly, whether in a vehicle or not, in and around an area.
Minor
. A minor is a person younger than seventeen (17) years of age.
Park
. Any land, including improvements to the land, that is administered, operated, or managed by the City of Jacksboro,County of Jack, or Jacksboro Independent School District, State of Texas, or U.S. Government for the use of the public as arecreational area, as well as any land, including improvements to the land, which are privately owned and used frequently bychildren.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 179/350
Permanent residence
. A place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for fourteen (14) or more consecutive days.
Reside or residence
. To have a place of permanent or temporary residence.
School
. A public or private kindergarten, elementary, middle or secondary (high) school.
Sexual offender
. Any person required to register on the state department of public safety's sex offender database because ofa violation involving a victim who was less than seventeen (17) years of age as required by chapter 62, Texas Code ofCriminal Procedure.
Sexual offense
. A conviction under article 21.08, article 21.11, article 22.011, article 22.021, article 25.02, article 43.05,article 43.25 or article 43.26, Texas Penal Code, or similar law of another jurisdiction in which the victim of the sexualoffense was less than seventeen (17) years of age.
Temporary residence
. A place where the person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of fourteen (14) or more days in theaggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address, or place where the person routinelyabides, lodges, or resides for a period of four (4) or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is notthe person's permanent residence.
(Ord. O-08-18, passed 4-9-18)
Sec. 132.03. Residence prohibition; exceptions.
(A) It is unlawful for any person who has been convicted of a violation of article 21.08, article 21.11, article 22.011, article22.021, article 25.02, article 43.05, article 43.25 or article 43.26, Penal Code, Texas Statutes, regardless of whether theadjudication was deferred, in which the victim of the offense was less than seventeen (17) years of age, to establish apermanent or temporary residence within 1,000 feet of any premises where children are known to regularly congregate,including but not limited to, a school or school athletic facility, day-care facility, park, public or private youth center, publicswimming pool, or video arcade facility, as those terms are defined in article 481.134, Health and Safety Code, TexasStatutes.
(B) The 1,000-foot distance shall be measured in a straight line from the outer boundary of the real property thatcomprises a sexual offender's residence to the nearest boundary line of any premises where children are known toregularly congregate, including but not limited to, a school, day-care facility, playground, public or private youth center,public swimming pool, or video arcade facility. The distance may not be measured by a pedestrian route or automobileroute, but instead by the shortest distance between the two points.
(C) The planning and zoning department shall develop and update as needed a map of known locations where childrenregularly congregate, including but not limited to, a school, day-care facility, playground, public or private youth center,public swimming pool, or video arcade facility. This map shall be used by the police department and made available tosexual offenders during the registration process. The revision date of the map used during the registration process of eachsexual offender shall be maintained by the police department, ensuring the exception in subsection (E)(4) below, aslocations are updated on the map.
(D) Neither allegation nor evidence of a culpable mental state is required for the proof of an offense defined by thissection.
(E)
Exceptions
. A person residing within 1,000 feet of those places where children are known to regularly congregate, asspecified herein does not commit a violation of this chapter if any of the following apply:
(1) The person established the permanent or temporary residence prior to the dated adoption of this chapterand has complied with all the sex offender registration laws of the state.
(2) The person was a minor when he/she committed the offense and was not convicted as an adult.
(3) The person is a minor.
(4) The premises where children are known to regularly congregate, as specified herein, within 1,000 feet ofthe person's residence was opened after the person established the permanent or temporary residence, and theperson has complied with all the sex offender registration laws of the state.
(5) Is required to serve a sentence at a jail, prison, juvenile facility, or other correctional institution locatedwithin 1,000 feet of those places where children are known to regularly congregate.
(6) Has been exempted by a court order from registration as a sex offender under chapter 62, Texas Code ofCriminal Procedure.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 180/350
(7) Has had the offense for which the sex offender registration was required, reversed on appeal, orpardoned.
(F) Subsections (E)(1) and (E)(4) above shall not apply to a sexual offender who is convicted of a subsequent offense asan adult after residing at an established permanent or temporary residence within 1,000 feet of where children are known toregularly congregate, as specified herein.
(Ord. O-08-18, passed 4-9-18)
Sec. 132.04. Access to parks, public swimming pools, child-care facilities, public or private youth centers andvideo arcade facilities.
(A) It is unlawful for a sexual offender convicted of a sexual offense, as defined in
§132.03
(A), to knowingly be present ina public park or swimming pool, when a child under the age of seventeen (17) years is present, unless the sexual offenderis the parent or legal guardian of a child present in the park or swimming pool.
(B) It is unlawful for a sexual offender convicted of a sexual offense, as defined in
§132.03
(A), to knowingly enter orremain at a child-care facility or on its premises unless the sexual offender:
(1) Is dropping off or picking up a child registered at the facility and is the parent or legal guardian of saidchild.
(2) Remains under the supervision of a facility supervisor or his/her designee while on the facility premises.
(C) It is unlawful for a sexual offender convicted of a sexual offense, as defined in
§132.03
(A), to knowingly be present ina public or private youth center or video arcade facility when a child under the age of seventeen (17) years is present,unless the sexual offender is the parent or legal guardian of a child present in the center or facility.
(Ord. O-08-18, passed 4-9-18)
Sec. 132.05. Penalties.
(A) A person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction,shall be fined a sum not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and each day such violation shallcontinue or exist, shall be deemed a separate offense.
(B) The penal provisions imposed under this section shall not preclude the city from filing suit to enjoin a violation of thissection. The city shall retain all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law.
(Ord. O-08-18, passed 4-9-18)
Sec. 132.06. Civil enforcement.
Pursuant to section 54.016 of the Texas Local Government Code, the city may obtain against any person in violation of
§132.03
(residence prohibition; exceptions) a temporary or permanent injunction together with attorney's fees and courtcosts, as appropriate, that:
(1) Prohibits any conduct that violates any provision of this chapter that relates to any matter specified above;or
(2) Compels the specific performance of any action that is necessary for compliance with any provision of thischapter that relates to any matter specified above.
(Ord. O-08-18, passed 4-9-18)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150: AIRPORT ZONING
AIRPORT ZONING BOARD
Sec. 150.01. Joint airport zoning board established.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 181/350
Subject to like provisions being made by the Commissioners Court of Jack County, Texas, by proper order, dulypromulgated and entered on its minutes, and as authorized by the provisions of state law, there is hereby created a JointAirport Zoning Board, to be known as the Jacksboro-Jack County Joint Airport Zoning Board, which shall have the powersand exercise the duties set forth in Tex. Local Gov't Code §§ 241.011 and 241.012. (‘84 Code, § 1-81) (Ord. passed 9-8-81)
Sec. 150.02. Membership.
The Jacksboro-Jack County Joint Airport Zoning Board shall be composed of five members, two to be appointed by the CityCouncil and two members to be appointed by the Commissioners Court of Jack County, Texas. The fifth member shall beelected by a majority of the members so appointed and the fifth member shall serve as Chairperson of the Jacksboro-JackCounty Joint Airport Zoning Board. (‘84 Code, § 1-82) (Ord. passed 9-8-81)
AIRPORT ZONING
Sec. 150.15. Definitions.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires adifferent meaning.
Airport
. The Jacksboro Municipal Airport.
Airport elevation
. The established elevation of the highest point on the usable landing area measured in feet from mean sealevel.
Airport hazard
. Any structure or tree or use of land which obstructs the air space required for the flights of aircraft or whichobstructs or interferes with the control or tracking or data acquisition in the landing, taking off or flight at an airport, or at anyinstallation or facility relating to flight, and tracking or data acquisition of the flight craft; hazardous, interfering with orobstructing such landing, taking off or flight of aircraft or which is hazardous to or interferes with tracking or data acquisitionpertaining to flight and flight vehicles.
Airport hazard area
. Any area of land or water upon which an airport hazard might be established if not prevented asprovided in this subchapter.
Airport reference point
. The point established as the approximate geographic center of the airport landing area and sodesignated.
Approach surface
. A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline, extending outward and upwardfrom the end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth in
§150.17
. In plan the perimeter of the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone.
Approach, transitional, horizontal, and conical zones
. These zones are set forth in
§ 150.16
.
Board of adjustment
. A Board consisting of five members appointed by the City Council as provided by Tex. Local Gov'tCode §§ 241.032 and 241.033.
Conical surface
. A surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to 1for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
Hazard to air navigation
. An obstruction determined to have a substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilizationof the navigable airspace.
Height
. For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this subchapter and shown on the zoningmap, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
Horizontal surface
. A horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plancoincides with the perimeter of the horizontal zone.
Joint airport zoning board
. A board consisting of five members, two members appointed by the City Council and twomembers appointed by the Commissioners Court, Jack County, Texas; the four members so appointed shall elect a fifthmember, the Chairperson.
Landing area
. The surface area of the airport used for the landing, take-off or taxiing of aircraft.
Nonconforming use
. Any pre-existing structure, object of natural growth, or use of land which is inconsistent with theprovisions of this subchapter or an amendment thereto.
Obstruction
. Any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in
§150.17
.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 182/350
Person
. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association, or body politic, andincludes a trustee, receiver, assignee, administrator, executor, guardian, or other representative.
Primary surface
. A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface,the primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway; but when the runway has no specially prepared hardsurface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface of a runway will be thatwidth prescribed in 14 CFR Part 77 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) for the most precise approach existing orplanned for either end of that runway. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of thenearest point on the runway centerline. The width of a primary surface is 250 feet for utility runways having only visualapproaches.
Runway
. A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and take-off of aircraft along its length.
Structure
. An object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by humans, including but not limited to buildings,towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formations, and overhead transmission lines.
Transitional surfaces
. These surfaces extend outward at 90 degree angles to the runway centerline and the runwaycenterline extended at a slope of seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approachsurfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces.
Tree
. Any object of natural growth.
Visual runway
. A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures.
Utility runway
. A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft 12,500 poundsmaximum gross weight and less.
(‘84 Code, § 1-92) (Ord. passed 4-19-82)
Sec. 150.16. Zones created; map adopted.
(A) In order to carry out the provisions of this subchapter, there are hereby created and established certain zones whichinclude all of the land lying beneath the approach surfaces, transition surfaces, horizontal surface and conical surface asthey apply to Jacksboro Municipal Airport.
(B) Such zones are shown on the Zoning Map consisting of one sheet, prepared by the Texas Aeronautics Commission,Austin, Texas, and dated May 7, 1979, which is on file with the City Clerk and incorporated herein as if set out in full.
(C) An area located in more than one of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictiveheight limitation. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows:
(1)
Approach Zones - Runway 17/35
. An approach zone is established beneath the approach surface at theend of runway 17/35 on Jacksboro Municipal Airport for visual landings and take-offs. The inner edge of theapproach zone shall have a width of 250 feet which coincides with the width of the primary surface at a distanceof 200 feet beyond each end of the runway, widening thereafter uniformly to a width of 1,250 feet at a horizontaldistance of 5,000 feet beyond each end of the primary surface, its centerline being the continuation of thecenterline of the runway.
(2)
Transition Zones
. Transition zones are hereby established beneath the transition surface adjacent to eachrunway and approach surface as indicated on the zoning map. Transition surfaces, symmetrically located oneither side of runways, have variable widths as shown on the zoning map. Transitional surfaces extend outwardand upward at right angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven toone from the sides of the primary surface and from the sides of approach surfaces.
(3)
Horizontal Zone
. The area beneath a horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation, theperimeter of which is constructed by swinging arcs of 5,000 feet radii from the center of each end of the primarysurface of runway 17/35 and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs.
(4)
Conical Zone
. The area beneath the conical surface extending outward and upward from the periphery ofthe horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to 1 for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
(‘84 Code, § 1-93) (Ord. passed 4-19-82)
Sec. 150.17. Height limitations.
(A) Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, no structure shall be erected, altered, or maintained, and no treeshall be allowed to grow in any zone created by this subchapter to a height in excess of the applicable height limit hereinestablished for such zone.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 183/350
(B) Such applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows:
(1)
Approach Zones - Runway 17/35
. One foot in height for each 20 feet in horizontal distance beginning atthe end of and at the elevation of the primary surface and extending to a point 5,000 feet from the end of theprimary surface.
(2)
Transition Zones
. Slope seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at thesame elevation as the primary surface and the approach surface, and extending to a height of 150 feet abovethe airport elevation which is 1,062.57 feet above mean sea level.
(3)
Horizontal Zone
. Established at 150 feet above the airport elevation, or a height of 1,212.57 feet abovemean sea level.
(4)
Conical Zone
. Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the periphery of the horizontalzone and at 150 feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet above the airportelevation.
(C)
Excepted height limitations
. Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as prohibiting the growth, construction ormaintenance of any tree or structure to a height up to 35 feet above the surface of the land.
(‘84 Code, § 1-94) (Ord. passed 4-19-82)
Sec. 150.18. Use restrictions.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this subchapter, no use may be made of land or water within any zone establishedby this subchapter in such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communicationbetween the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare inthe eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards, or otherwise in anyway endanger or interfere with the landing, taking off, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport. (‘84 Code, § 1-95) (Ord. passed 4-19-82)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 150.19. Nonconforming uses.
(A)
Regulations not retroactive
. The regulations prescribed by this subchapter shall not be construed to require theremoval, lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effectivedate of this subchapter, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use. Nothing contained hereinshall require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration ofwhich was begun prior to the effective date of this subchapter, and is diligently prosecuted.
(B)
Marking and lighting
. Notwithstanding division (A) of this section, the owner of any nonconforming structure or tree ishereby required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall bedeemed necessary by the City Manager to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the Airport the presence ofsuch airport hazards. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the city.
(‘84 Code, § 1-96) (Ord. passed 4-19-82)
Sec. 150.20. Permits.
(A)
Future uses
. Except as specifically provided in divisions (A)(1), (2), and (3), no material change shall be made in theuse of land, no structure shall be erected or otherwise established, and no tree shall be planted in any zone hereby createdunless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purposefor which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether the resulting use, structure,or tree would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall begranted. No permit for a use inconsistent with the provisions of this subchapter shall be granted unless a variance has beenapproved in accordance with division (D) of this section.
(1) In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and conical zone, no permit shall be required forany tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when, because of terrain, landcontour, or topographic features, such tree or structure would extend above the height limits prescribed for suchzones.
(2) In areas lying within the limits of the approach zones, but at a horizontal distance of not less than 4,200feet from each end of the runway, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet ofvertical height above the ground, except when such tree or structure would extend above the height limitprescribed for such approach zones.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 184/350
(3) In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zone, nopermit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground exceptwhen such tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, would extend above theheight limit prescribed for such transition zones.
(4) Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be construed as permitting or intending topermit any construction, or alteration of any structure, or growth of any tree in excess of any of the height limitsestablished by this subchapter except as set forth in
§ 150.17
(C).
(B)
Existing uses
. No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of any airport hazard orpermit a nonconforming use, structure, or tree to be made or become higher, or become a greater hazard to air navigation,than it was on the effective date of this subchapter or any amendments thereto, or than it is when the application for apermit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for such a permit shall be granted.
(C)
Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed
. Whenever the City Manager determines that a nonconformingstructure or tree has been abandoned or more than 80% torn down, physically deteriorated, or decayed, no permit shall begranted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoningregulations.
(D)
Variances
. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any tree, oruse his or her property in violation of the regulations prescribed in this subchapter, may apply to the Board of Adjustmentfor a variance from such regulations in question. The application for variance shall be accompanied by a determination fromthe Federal Aviation Administration as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe,efficient use of navigable airspace. Such variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal application orenforcement of the regulations would result in unnecessary hardship and the relief granted would not be contrary to thepublic interest, but do substantial justice, and be in accordance with the spirit of this subchapter. Additionally, no applicationfor variance to the requirements of this subchapter may be considered by the Board of Adjustment unless a copy of theapplication has been furnished to the Joint Airport Zoning Board for advice as to the aeronautical effects of the variance. Ifthe Joint Airport Zoning Board does not respond to the application within 15 days after receipt, the Board of Adjustmentmay act on its own to grant or deny such application.
(E)
Obstruction marking and lighting
. Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed advisable by the CityManager or the Board of Adjustment to effectuate the purpose of this subchapter and be reasonable in the circumstances,be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to allow the city to install, operate andmaintain, at the expense of the city, such markings and lights as may be necessary.
(‘84 Code, § 1-97) (Ord. passed 4-19-82)
Sec. 150.21. Enforcement and remedies.
(A) It shall be the duty of the City Manager to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein. Applications forpermits shall be made to the City Manager upon a form published for that purpose. Applications required by this subchapterto be submitted to the City Manager shall be promptly considered and granted or denied. Applications for variances shall bemade to the Board of Adjustment by first filing such applications for variance with the City Manager who shall forthwithtransmit the application to the Board of Adjustment for determination.
(B) The City Manager may institute in any court of competent jurisdiction an action to prevent, restrain, correct, or abateany violation of this subchapter or of any order or ruling made in connection with its administration or enforcementincluding, but not limited to, an action for injunctive relief as provided by Tex. Local Gov't Code § 241.044, as amended.
(‘84 Code, §§ 1-98, 1-102) (Ord. passed 4-19-82)
Sec. 150.22. Board of adjustment created; powers.
(A) There is hereby created a Board of Adjustment to have and exercise the following powers:
(1) To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the CityManager in the enforcement of this subchapter.
(2) To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this subchapter upon which such Board ofAdjustment under such regulations may be required to pass.
(3) To hear and decide specific variances.
(B) The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five members appointed by the City Council, and each shall serve for a termof two years and be removable for cause by the appointment authority upon written charges, after a public hearing.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 185/350
(C) The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules for its governance and procedure in harmony with the provisions of thissubchapter. Meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at such times as theBoard of Adjustment may determine. The Chairperson, or in his or her absence the acting chairperson, may administeroaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All hearings of the Board of Adjustment shall be public. The Board ofAdjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent orfailing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shallimmediately be filed in the office of the City Clerk and shall be a public record.
(D) The Board of Adjustment shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law stating the facts upon which itrelied when making its legal conclusions in reversing, affirming, or modifying any order, requirement, decision, ordetermination which comes before it under the provisions of this subchapter.
(E) The concurring vote of four members of the Board of Adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order,requirement, decision, or determination of the City Manager or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon whichit is required to pass under this subchapter, or to effect any variation in this subchapter.
(‘84 Code, § 1-99) (Ord. passed 4-19-82)
Sec. 150.23. Appeals.
(A) Any person aggrieved or any taxpayer affected by any decision of the City Manager made in the administration of thischapter, if of the opinion that a decision of the City Manager is an improper application of these regulations, may appeal tothe Board of Adjustment.
(B) All appeals hereunder must be taken within a reasonable time as provided by the rules of the Board of Adjustment,by filing with the City Manager a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The City Manager shall forthwith transmitto the Board of Adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
(C) An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the City Manager certifies tothe Board of Adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate,a stay would, in the opinion of the City Manager, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall notbe stayed except by order of the Board of Adjustment on notice to the City Manager and on due cause shown.
(D) The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, give public notice and due notice to theparties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any party may appear in person or byagent or by attorney.
(E) The Board of Adjustment may in conformity with the provisions of this subchapter reverse or affirm, in whole or inpart, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement,decision or determination as may be appropriate under the circumstances.
(‘84 Code, § 1-100) (Ord. passed 4-19-82)
Sec. 150.24. Judicial review.
Any person aggrieved or any taxpayer affected by any decision of the Board of Adjustment may appeal to a court ofcompetent jurisdiction, as provided by the Tex. Local Gov't Code §§ 241.041 et seq., as amended. (‘84 Code, § 1-101)(Ord. passed 4-19-82)
Sec. 150.25. Conflicting regulations.
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this subchapter and any otherregulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict is with respect to the height of structures or trees, the use ofland, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail. (‘84 Code, § 1-103) (Ord.passed 4-19-82)
AIRPORT OPERATIONS
Sec. 150.40. Definition.
As used in this chapter, the word “airport” shall mean the Jacksboro Municipal Airport, including all land belonging to thecity and used for airport purposes and all land which is used or necessary to be used in connection with the operation of theairport. (‘84 Code, § 1-111) (Ord. 5A-84, passed 5-22-84)
Sec. 150.41. Disturbing airport surface.
Any person who shall dig up the surface of the airport land, or cause it to be plowed up or disfigured by ruts or tracks, orotherwise disturb the surface shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (‘84 Code, § 1-112) (Ord. 5A-84, passed 5-22-84)
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 186/350
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 150.42. Livestock prohibited at airport.
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any livestock owned by him or her or under his or her control to go upon anyairport property. (‘84 Code, § 1-113) (Ord. 5A-84, passed 5-22-84)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 150.43. Airport manager's regulations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any regulations prescribed by the Airport Manager with reference to the use ofthe airport, if such regulations have been approved by the City Council. (‘84 Code, § 1-114) (Ord. 5A-84, passed 5-22-84)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 150.44. Use of airport restricted.
No person, firm, association, corporation or entity, incorporated or otherwise, shall use the airport for carrying on ofcommercial activities, for the carrying for hire of passengers, freight, express or mail, for instruction in aviation in any of itsbranches, for the sale of fuels, refreshments or any commodity, or for any other commercial purpose, unless approved by awritten permit from the City Manager after approval by the Airport Board. (‘84 Code, § 1-115) (Ord. 5A-84, passed 5-22-84)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 150.45. Rules and regulations.
The following rules and regulations shall apply and be observed in the use, operation and conduct of the JacksboroMunicipal Airport:
(A)
General rules and regulations
.
(1) The federal air traffic rules promulgated by the Federal Aviation Administration for observance byaircraft operated anywhere in the United States, and presently or hereafter effective, are hereby referredto, adopted and made a part hereof as though fully set forth and incorporated herein.
(2)
Safeguard of persons and property
. The Airport Manager shall at all times have authority to takesuch action as may be necessary to safeguard any person, aircraft, equipment or property at the airport.
(3)
Unauthorized structures
. No structure may be erected beyond the building reference line or inconflict with the approved airport layout plan.
(4) All construction must be authorized and must be of compatible standard and approved by the AirportBoard and the City Manager.
(5)
Unauthorized signs
. No signs or equipment or portable buildings and house trailers may be erected,moved in or installed except as may be specifically authorized by the Airport Board and the City Manager.
(6)
Suspicious activities
. All suspicious and unauthorized activities shall be reported immediately to theAirport Manager, the police or Department of Public Safety (DPS).
(7)
Lien for charges
. To enforce the payment of any charge made for repairs, improvements, storage orcare of any personal property made or furnished by the city or its agents in connection with the operationof the Jacksboro Municipal Airport, the city shall have a lien upon such personal property, which shall beenforceable as provided by law.
(8)
Lien possessory right
. To enforce the payment of any such charge, the Airport Manager may retainpossession of such personal property until all reasonable, customary and usual compensation shall havebeen paid in full.
(9)
Wrecked aircraft
. Every aircraft owner, his or her pilot and agents shall be responsible for the promptremoval, under the direction of the Airport Manager, of wrecked aircraft.
(10)
Repairs to aircraft
. No aircraft shall be repaired on any part of the landing or take-off area, and allrepairs shall be made at the places designated by the Airport Manager for such purpose.
(11)
Agricultural operations
. Agricultural spraying operations, if authorized, will be conducted inaccordance with procedures approved by the Airport Manager and only from the areas designated on the
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 187/350
airport. Reckless flying, careless handling of chemicals and indifference toward policing the area orintimidation of other aircraft users will not be tolerated.
(12)
Damage to airport
. Any person, corporate or individual, and the owner of any aircraft causingdamage of any kind to the airport, whether through violation of any of these rules or through any act ofnegligence, shall be liable therefor in and to the city.
(13)
Injury to person
. Any person going upon the grounds of the Jacksboro Municipal Airport, or using itfor any purpose, shall do so at his or her own risk to person and property, and shall hold the city harmlessfor and on account of any injury or damage to person or property suffered thereby. Such parson shall bebound by and obey all the rules and regulations concerning and pertaining to the airport.
(14)
Licensed pilots
. Only aircraft and airport or flight personnel licensed by the Federal AviationAdministration shall operate upon or over the Jacksboro Municipal Airport; provided, that this limitationshall not apply to students in training under licensed instructors nor to public aircraft of the federalgovernment or of a state, territory or political subdivision thereof, or to aircraft licensed by a foreigngovernment with which the United States has a reciprocal agreement covering the operation of suchlicensed aircraft.
(15)
Glass
. No bottles or glass shall be left or broken upon the floor of any building or upon any part ofthe surface area of the airport.
(16)
Air and ground traffic; vehicular traffic
. All vehicular traffic shall be confined to the roads, streets,and alleys provided on the grounds for that purpose, and shall not be operated at a speed in excess of 15miles per hour. Only authorized vehicles and equipment will be allowed on runway, taxiways or apron.
(B)
Ground operations
.
(1)
Fueling of aircraft
. All aircraft will be positively grounded when being serviced with fuel from a fueltruck.
(2) All aircraft shall be gassed at the gas pump, or if by truck, on the ramp clear of hangars.
(3)
Tie-down of aircraft
. All aircraft not hangared shall be tied down or secured at night and duringinclement weather.
(4)
Running aircraft engines
. If not equipped with adequate brakes, the engine shall not be started in anaircraft until and unless the wheels have been set with blocks attached to ropes or other suitable means forremoving them.
(5) No engine shall be started or run unless a competent operator is at the controls of the aircraft, andno engine shall be started or run inside any building in which more than one aircraft is parked.
(6) No engine shall be started, run or warmed up until and unless the aircraft is in such position that thepropeller stream will clear all buildings and groups of people in the observation areas and path of theaircraft.
(7)
Damage to runway lights
. Any person damaging any field light or fixture, by operation of an aircraft orotherwise, shall immediately report such damage to the airport manager.
(8)
Taxiing aircraft
.
(a) No person shall taxi an aircraft until he or she has ascertained that there will be no danger ofcollision with any person or object in the immediate area.
(b) Aircraft will be taxied at a safe and prudent speed, and in such manner as to be at all timesunder the control of the pilot.
(c) Aircraft not equipped with adequate brakes will not be taxied near buildings or parked aircraftunless an attendant is at a wing of the aircraft to assist the pilot.
(d) Aircraft shall not taxi onto the runway from the ramp and taxiway area if there is an aircraftapproaching to land, or on the ground in take-off position.
(9)
Parking aircraft
.
(a) Aircraft shall not be parked on or within 100 feet of any part of the landing or take-off area ofthe airport, and all unhoused aircraft shall be parked in the areas designated by the Airport Managerfor that purpose.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 188/350
(b) Aircraft will not be parked in such a manner as to hinder the normal movement of other trafficunless specifically authorized by the Airport Manager as an emergency measure.
(c) It is the responsibility of the pilot when leaving a parked aircraft unattended to see that thebrakes are set or that the plane is properly chocked or tied down.
(10) Pilots shall not load or unload aircraft with the engine running.
(11) No airplane will be propped or left running without qualified personnel at the controls.
(12) The aircraft owner or his or her agent is responsible for the tie-down or security of his or her aircraftat all times and particularly during inclement weather.
(C)
Landing and take-off rules
.
(1)
Authority to suspend operations
. The Airport Manager may suspend or restrict any or all operationswithout regard to weather conditions, whenever such action is deemed necessary in the interest of safety.
(2) All pilots are encouraged to call Unicom 122.8 to determine the active runway and to announce theirposition and intentions for take-off and landing. Pilots of radio-equipped aircraft should report their trafficintentions on 122.8 if airport Unicom is inoperative.
(3)
Take-offs on apron and the like
. No take-offs or landings shall be made on the apron or parkingramp.
(4)
Take-offs allowed
. Touch and go landings may be made at the discretion of the pilot. All aircraft shall“clear” for incoming and take-off traffic before taxiing into take-off position.
(5)
Take-off climb
. On take-off all aircraft shall climb straight out to a level of 400 feet and clear airportboundary.
(6)
Traffic altitude
. Traffic pattern elevation is 800 feet above ground level.
(7)
Common courtesy
. Aircraft entering the traffic pattern shall exercise caution and practice courtesy soas not to cause aircraft already in the pattern to deviate from their course.
(8)
Aircraft turn
. Any aircraft within three miles of the airport at an altitude of less than 1,500 feet abovethe ground shall conform to the counterclockwise flow of traffic. All aircraft shall establish their patternaltitude before entering the traffic pattern and shall not deviate from this altitude (except in an emergency)until descent for landing is necessary.
(9)
Traffic flow
. All aircraft landing at the municipal airport shall fly a standard left-hand traffic pattern atan altitude of 800 feet above the ground. Pattern entry shall be made at an angle of 45 degrees to theactive runway with the runway to the pilot's left at all times. Entry shall be made at the midpoint of eitherthe upwind or downwind leg.
(10)
Altitude and noise of engines
. No aircraft shall be operated over the city at an altitude of less than1,000 feet above the ground unless in traffic pattern. Aircraft engines shall not be accelerated nordecelerated while over Jacksboro in such a manner as to distract, excite or disturb persons on the ground,regardless of altitude.
(11)
Special procedures
. The airport manager may, in the interest of safety, designate special trafficprocedures for certain operations, such as air shows, agricultural operations, and the like.
(D)
Fire regulations
.
(1) Every person going upon or using the airport or its facilities in any manner shall exercise the greatestcare and caution to avoid and prevent fire.
(2) Aircraft shall not be fueled while the engine is running.
(3) Smoking or an open flame within 50 feet of any aircraft or fuel truck is prohibited.
(4) Compressed inflammable gas shall not be kept or stored upon the aircraft, except at such place asmay be designated by the Airport Manager.
(5) No inflammable substance shall be used in cleaning motors or other parts of an aircraft inside ahangar or other building. Flammable liquids may be used only for the purpose stated outside of and clearof any building.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 189/350
(6) No boxes, crates, cans, bottles, paper or other litter shall be permitted to accumulate in or about ahangar.
(7) All wrecked or junked aircraft, aircraft parts or building materials not housed within a hangar orbuilding must be removed from the airport premises within 30 days except during hangar construction.
(8) Vehicles shall be parked in designated vehicular parking areas in a hangar clear of aircraft operation.Vehicles in violation of the above or vehicles inoperative or unattended for 30 days shall be removed at theowner's expense.
(‘84 Code, § 1-116) (Ord. 5A-84, passed 5-22-84)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 10.99
.
Sec. 150.46. Knowledge of rules implied.
By publication of this chapter as required by law, all persons will be deemed to have knowledge of its contents; however,the Airport Manager is direct to have copies of this chapter printed and at all times available in his or her office, and tofurnish such copies to owners and operators of aircraft using the airport. (‘84 Code, § 1-117) (Ord. 5A-84, passed 5-22-84)
Sec. 150.47. Conflict in rules.
If and where there is conflict in these and the federal air traffic rules, the latter shall prevail. (‘84 Code, § 1-118) (Ord. 5A-84,passed 5-22-84)
CHAPTER 151: BUILDING REGULATIONS
*
1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 151.01. International codes adopted; local amendments adopted.
(A) The City Council hereby adopts the following codes as stated, including all amendments and annual supplementspublished thereto, including appendix chapters, inclusive; are on file in the office of the Code Compliance Officer forpermanent record and inspection:
(1)
International Building Code, 2015 edition
.
a.
Adopted
. The city council adopts International Building Code, 2015 edition, as published by theInternational Code Council and its appendices.
b.
Amendments
. The city council adopts Option B of the NCTCOG regional amendments to theInternational Building Code.
(2)
International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition
.
a.
Adopted
. The city council adopts International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition, as published by theInternational Code Council and its appendices.
b.
Amendments
. The city council adopts the NCTCOG regional amendments to the International FuelGas Code.
(3)
International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition
.
a.
Adopted
. The city council adopts International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, as published by theInternational Code Council and its appendices.
b.
Amendments
. The city council adopts the NCTCOG regional amendments to the InternationalPlumbing Code.
(4)
International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition
.
a.
Adopted
. The city council adopts International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, as published by theInternational Code Council and its appendices.
b.
Amendments
. The city council adopts the NCTCOG regional amendments to the internationalMechanical Code.
(5)
International Electrical Code, 2015 edition
.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 190/350
a.
Adopted
. The city council adopts International Electrical Code, 2015 edition, as published by theInternational Code Council and its appendices.
b.
Amendments
. The city council adopts the NCTCOG regional amendments to the InternationalElectrical Code.
(6)
International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 edition
.
a.
Adopted
. The city council adopts International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 edition, as publishedby the International Code Council and its appendices.
b.
Amendments
. The city council adopts the NCTCOG regional amendments to the International EnergyConservation Code.
(7)
International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 edition
.
a.
Adopted
. The city council adopts International Property Maintenance Code. 2015 edition, aspublished by the International Code Council and its appendices.
b.
Amendments
. The city council adopts the NCTCOG regional amendments to the internationalProperty Maintenance Code.
(8)
International Residential Code, 2015 edition
.
a.
Adopted
. The city council adopts International Residential Code, 2015 edition, as published by theInternational Code Council and its appendices.
b.
Amendments
. The city council adopts the NCTCOG regional amendments to the InternationalResidential Code.
(B) The Chief Building Official, or his authorized representative, is hereby authorized and directed to enforce allprovisions of the International Codes, as adopted and as amended, unless the Code designates another official of the city,or by virtue of designated duties and responsibilities another city official is deemed responsible for enforcement, the sameshall be deemed the responsible official for enforcement of the Code.
(C) Any person, firm or corporation who knowingly or intentionally violates the provision of this Ordinance shall bedeemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined any sum not to exceed $2,000.00, andassessed court costs as provided by law. The person, firm or corporation may also be subject to forfeiture of any and allpermits and licenses.
(‘84 Code, §§ 4-11, 4-12, 4-31, 4-32, 4-51, 4-52, 9-3, 9-4) (Ord. 7A-84, passed - -84; Am. Ord. passed 8-28-84; Am. Ord. 7-5-86, passed - -86; Am. Ord. 6-7-96, passed 6-11-96; Am. Ord. 1-2-02, passed 1-8-02; Am. Ord. O-21-05, passed 12-13-05; Am. Ord. O-11-11, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. O-17-10, passed 9-28-10; Am. Ord. O-15-13, passed 10-22-13; Ord. O-10-17, passed 9-25-17)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 151.99
.
Sec. 151.02. Building, electrical, plumbing and zoning fees.
(A)
Building permits
.
(1) Pursuant to
§ 151.01
and in accordance with the International Building Code, which has been previouslyadopted in its entirety in
§ 151.01
, a building permit is required when any owner, authorized agent or contractordesires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish or change the occupancy of a building or structure, orto erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbingsystem which is regulated by the technical codes. The fee for the issuance of a building permit shall be as setforth in the
Fee Appendix
to this Code.
(2) Pursuant to
§ 151.01
and in accordance with the International Building Code, which has been previouslyadopted in its entirety in
§ 151.01
, a reinspection fee is hereby fixed as set forth in the
Fee Appendix
to thisCode. A reinspection occurs when an inspected item fails to pass the second or subsequent inspections.
(B)
Electrical permits and inspections
.
(1) Pursuant
§ 151.01
and in accordance with the National Electric Code, which has been previously adoptedin
§ 151.01
, an electrical permit and inspection fee shall be hereby fixed as set forth in the
Fee Appendix
to thisCode.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 191/350
(2) Pursuant to
§ 151.01
and in accordance with the National Electric Code, which has been previouslyadopted in
§ 151.01
, all reinspection fees are hereby fixed at two times the standard inspection fee. Areinspection occurs when an inspected item fails to pass the second or subsequent inspections.
(3) All persons performing electrical services within the jurisdictional limits of the city must be licensed by thestate and must comply with all requirements set forth in
§§ 151.46
through
151.49
.
(C)
Gas permits and inspections
.
(1) Pursuant to
§ 151.01
and in accordance with the International Fuel Gas Code, which has been previouslyadopted in
§ 151.01
, gas permit and inspection fees shall be hereby fixed as set forth in the
Fee Appendix
tothis Code.
(2) Pursuant to
§ 151.01
and in accordance with the International Mechanical Code, which has beenpreviously adopted in
§ 151.01
, a reinspection fee is hereby fixed as set forth in the
Fee Appendix
to this Code.A reinspection occurs when an inspected item fails to pass the second or subsequent inspections.
(D)
Mechanical permits and inspections
.
(1) Pursuant to
§ 151.01
and in accordance with the International Mechanical Code, which has beenpreviously adopted in
§ 151.01
, mechanical permit and inspection fees shall be hereby fixed as set forth in the
Fee Appendix
to this Code.
(2) In additional to the mechanical permit, a charge as set forth in the
Fee Appendix
to this Code for each grill,register and vent will be assessed.
(3) Pursuant to
§ 151.01
and in accordance with the International Mechanical Code, which has beenpreviously adopted in
§ 151.01
, a reinspection fee is hereby fixed as set forth in the
Fee Appendix
to this Code.A reinspection occurs when an inspected item fails to pass the second or subsequent inspections.
(4) All persons performing mechanical services within the jurisdictional limits of the city must be licensed bythe state as a Journeyman or higher and be registered with the city. A registration fee is hereby fixed as set forthin the
Fee Appendix
to this Code.
(E)
Plumbing permits and inspections
.
(1) Pursuant to
§ 151.01
and in accordance with the International Plumbing Code, which has been previouslyadopted in
§ 151.01
, plumbing permit and inspection fees shall be hereby fixed as set forth in the
Fee Appendix
to this Code.
(2) In additional to the plumbing permit, a charge for each plumbing fixture, floor drain, trap, water heater andvent will be assessed as set forth in the
Fee Appendix
to this Code.
(3) Pursuant to
§ 151.01
and in accordance with the International Plumbing Code, which has been previouslyadopted in
§ 151.01
, a reinspection fee is hereby fixed as set forth in the
Fee Appendix
to this Code. Areinspection occurs when an inspected item fails to pass the second or subsequent inspections.
(4) All persons performing plumbing services within the jurisdictional limits of the city must be licensed by thestate as a Journeyman or higher and be registered with the city. A registration fee is hereby fixed as set forth inthe
Fee Appendix
to this Code.
(F)
Planning and zoning fees
. Pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance of the city, adopted by reference in
§ 154.01
, certainplanning and zoning fees shall be hereby fixed as set forth in the
Fee Appendix
to this Code.
(G) A violation of this section is a misdemeanor and punishable as provided in
§ 151.99
.
(Ord. 9-12-96, passed 9-24-96; Am. Ord. O-21-05, passed 12-13-05)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 151.99
.
SUBSTANDARD BUILDING CODE
Sec. 151.15. Title and scope.
(A)
Title
. These regulations, together with other codes cited within this subchapter, shall be known as the City“Substandard Building Code”, may be cited as such and will be referred to herein as “this Code”. This Code is beingadopted pursuant to the authority granted by Tex. Local Gov't Code Ch. 214, as it may be amended.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 192/350
(B)
Purpose
.
(1) The purpose of this Code is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city byestablishing minimum standards applicable to residential and specific nonresidential structures. Minimumstandards are established with respect to utilities, facilities, and other physical components essential to makestructures safe, sanitary, and fit for human use and habitation. Demolition of structures is provided for as a lastresort when compliance with standards cannot reasonably be achieved.
(2) This Code is found to be remedial and essential to the public interest, and it is intended that this Code beliberally construed to effect its purpose.
(C)
Scope
. The provisions of this Code shall apply to all buildings and structures or portions thereof intended or used forhuman habitation and occupation, unless otherwise specified, which exist on the effective date of this Code or constructedthereafter.
(D)
Application to existing buildings and structures
.
(1)
Additions, alterations, or repairs
. Additions, alterations or repairs required by this Code will be done inaccordance with, and meet, the requirements of the current Building, Plumbing, Mechanical, or Electrical Code,as amended, whichever is applicable, unless a variance is granted as provided herein.
(2)
Relocation
. Buildings or structures moved into, or existing within, the city shall comply with therequirements of the current Building, Plumbing, Mechanical or Electrical Code for new buildings and structures,as amended, whichever is applicable, unless a variance is granted as provided herein.
(E)
Application of Zoning Ordinance
. Nothing in this Code shall be construed to cancel, modify, or set aside any provisionof the city's Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance of the city's code of ordinances, as amended.
(Ord. O-15-02, passed 12-10-02)
Sec. 151.16. Enforcement.
(A)
General
.
(1)
Authority
. The Chief Building Official and/or Code Official, or his or her designee, is hereby authorized anddirected to enforce all provisions of this Code. For such purposes, he or she is empowered to makeinterpretations and rulings of this Code.
(2)
Inspections
. For the purpose of ascertaining whether violations of this Code exist, the Chief BuildingOfficial, or his or her designee, is authorized to inspect:
(a) The exterior of a structure and premises which contain no structure; and
(b) The interior of a structure, if permission of the owner, occupant, or person in control is given. If suchentry is refused, the Chief Building Official shall have every recourse provided by law, including but notlimited to an administrative search warrant or an injunction to secure entry.
(c) If the structure is unoccupied and open for authorized entry or use, and/or the owner, occupant, orperson in control cannot be identified or located, the Chief Building Official may enter the property to theextent allowed by law.
(B)
Substandard buildings
. All buildings or portions thereof which are determined to be substandard as outlined in thisCode are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal.
(C)
Hearings
. The City Council shall provide reasonable interpretations of the provisions of this Code, mitigate specificprovisions of this Code which create practical difficulties in their enforcement and to hear cases and make determinations,as provided in
§§ 151.15
et seq. of the city code of ordinances, as amended.
(D)
Violations
.
(1)
Criminal
.
(a) A person who knowingly or intentionally violates a provision of this Code, or who knowingly orintentionally fails to perform an act required of him or her by this Code, commits a misdemeanor offense. Aperson commits a separate offense each day a portion of a day during which a violation is committed,permitted, or continued.
(b) An offense under this Code is punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 193/350
(2)
Civil
.
(a) The city may, in accordance with Tex. Local Gov't Code Ch. 54, Subtitle B, as amended, bring a civilaction against a person violating a provision of this Code relating to dangerously damaged or deterioratedstructures or improvements.
(b) The civil action may include, but is not limited to, a suit to recover a civil penalty not to exceed$1,000.00 for each day or portion of a day during which the violation is committed, continued, or permittedby the owner or occupant of the property, as provided below.
(c) The city, by order of the City Council, may assess and recover a civil penalty against a propertyowner, if the owner fails to take the requisite action as ordered by the City Council, after an administrativehearing on the matter. The civil penalty may not exceed $1,000.00 a day for each violation or, if the ownershows that the property is the owner's lawful homestead, in an amount not to exceed $10.00 a day foreach violation, if the city proves:
1. The property owner was notified of the requirements of this Code and the owner's need tocomply with the requirements; and
2. After notification, the property owner committed an act in violation of this Code or failed to takean action necessary for compliance with this Code.
(d) A determination by the City Council which involves the establishment of an amount and duration ofcivil penalty shall be final and binding and constitute prima facie evidence of the penalty in any court ofcompetent jurisdiction in a civil suit brought by the city for final judgment in accordance with theestablished penalty.
(e) To enforce any civil penalty under this section, the City Secretary must file in the County DistrictClerk's Office a certified copy of the order of the City Council establishing the amount and duration of thepenalty. No other proof is required for a district court to enter final judgment on the penalty.
(3)
Other available remedies
. The city shall have all other available remedies at law and in equity to enforcethe provisions of this subchapter.
(4)
Municipal Court proceedings not affected
. Action taken by the city under this subchapter shall not affectthe ability of the city to proceed under the jurisdiction of the city's Municipal Court.
(Ord. O-15-02, passed 12-10-02; Am. Ord. O-17-09, passed 6-9-09)
Sec. 151.17. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Code, certain terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in thisCode or as specified in the Building Code, as adopted and as amended. Where a conflict exists, the Building Codecontrols. Where terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context with which theyare used. Merriam-Webster Dictionary, Unabridged, Copyright 1998, shall be considered as providing ordinary acceptedmeanings. Words in the singular include the plural and the plural the singular. Words used in the masculine gender includethe feminine and the feminine the masculine. Whenever the words “dwelling”, “dwelling unit”, “premises” and “structure” areused herein, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words “or any part thereof”.
Accessory building or structure
. A building or structure devoted to uses incidental and accessory to the main use and canbe either attached or detached, such as an attached garage, storage area, carport, detached garage, shed, or outbuilding.An accessory building may only exist in conjunction with a primary structure except as otherwise provided herein.
Appropriate authority
. That person within the governmental structure of the city who is charged with the administration ofthe appropriate code.
Ashes
. The residue from the burning of combustible materials.
Building
. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
Building code
. The current building code officially adopted by the City Council, or other such codes officially designated bythe City Council for the regulation of construction, alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition, use, location, occupancyand maintenance of buildings or structures. Such codes shall include but not be limited to the International Building Codeadopted by the City Council, and as amended.
City council
. The City Council of the City of Jacksboro, Texas.
Code official
. The official who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this Code or duly authorizedrepresentative, including but not limited to the Chief Building Official.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 194/350
Dilapidated
. No longer adequate for the purpose or use for which it was originally intended, or as otherwise defined in thisCode.
Dwelling
. Any enclosed space wholly or partly used or intended to be used for human habitation, living, sleeping, cooking,and eating and shall include any outhouse or appurtenance belonging thereto. Industrialized housing and modularconstruction which conform to nationally accepted industry standards, as defined by H.U.D. and used or intended for usefor living, sleeping, cooking, and eating purposes shall be classified as dwellings.
Dwelling unit
. A room or group of rooms located within a dwelling forming a single habitable unit with facilities used orintended to be used by a single family for human occupancy such as living, sleeping, cooking, and eating purposes.
Egress
. An arrangement of exit facilities to assure a safe means of exit from buildings.
Garbage
. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, serving, and nonconsumptionof foods.
Grade
. The natural surface of the ground, or ground surface after completion of any change in contour.
Habitable room
. A room or enclosed floor space within a dwelling used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cookingor eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundry room, pantry, foyer, closets, storage spacesor communicating corridors.
Heating devices
. All furnaces, unit heaters, domestic incinerators, cooking and heating stoves and ranges, and other similardevices capable of converting fuel to heat energy or of transferring heat from one ambient to another and approved byUnderwriters' Laboratories, Inc., the American Gas Association or other nationally recognized testing laboratory.
Household
. One or more individuals living together in a single dwelling unit and sharing common living, sleeping, cooking,and eating facilities.
H.U.D.
The Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Let for occupancy
. To permit possession or occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, building or structure by a person whoshall be legal owner or not be legal owner of record thereof, pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license,or pursuant to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land.
Maintenance
. Repair and other acts to prevent a decline in the condition of ground, structures, and equipment such that thecondition does not fall below the standards established by this Code and other applicable statutes, codes and ordinances.
Multiple dwelling
. Any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units.
Occupant
. Any person living and/or sleeping in a dwelling unit or having possession of a space within a building.
Operating condition
. Free of leaks, safe, sanitary, and in good working order, in the manner intended.
Operator
. Any person who has charge, care, custody, control, or management of a building, or part thereof, in whichdwelling units are let for occupancy.
Owner
. Any person who, alone, or jointly or severally with others:
(1) Has legal title to any premise, dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without actual possession thereof; or
(2) Has charge, care, custody or control of any premise, dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of theowner, or an executor, administrator, trustee, or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thusrepresenting the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provision of this subchapter and the rules andregulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he were the owner. Where owners are siblings,relatives or family members, not individually identified on any legal document of record, after a due diligencesearch as provided herein, notice to one owner shall be deemed notice to all owners.
Person
. Any individual, corporation, organization, partnership, association, or any other legal entity.
Plumbing fixtures
. A receptacle or device which is either permanently or temporarily connected to the water distributionsystem of the premises, and demands a supply of water therefrom; or discharges used water, liquid-borne waste materials,or sewage either directly or indirectly to the drainage system of the premises; or which requires both a water supplyconnection and a drainage system of the premises.
Premises
. A platted lot or part thereof or unplatted lot or tract of land or plot of land, either occupied or unoccupied by adwelling or nondwelling structure, and includes any such building, accessory structure or other structure thereon.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 195/350
Properly connected
. Connected in accordance with all applicable codes and ordinances of the city; the alteration orreplacement of any connection in good working order and not constituting a hazard to life and health.
Public nuisance
. Means the following:
(1) The physical condition, or use of any premises regarded as a public nuisance at common law or asdefined elsewhere in the city code of ordinances; or
(2) Any physical condition, use or occupancy of any premises or its appurtenances considered an attractivenuisance to children, including but not limited to abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations and unsafefences or structures; or
(3) Any premise which is manifestly capable of being a fire hazard, or is manifestly unsafe or unsecure as toendanger life, limb or property; or
(4) Any premise from which the plumbing, heating and/or facilities required by this Code have been removed,or from which utilities have been disconnected, destroyed, removed, or rendered ineffective, or the requiredprecautions against unauthorized use or entry have not been provided; or
(5) Any structure or building that is in a state of dilapidation, deterioration or decay, faulty construction,overcrowded, open, vacant or abandoned, damaged by fire to the extent as not to provide shelter, in danger ofcollapse or failure and dangerous to anyone on or near the premises; or
(6) Is dangerous to the physical health or safety of an occupant or other person; or
(7) Because of violations of
§ 151.18
of this Code, the state of disrepair is such that it could reasonably causeinjury, damage, or harm to a considerable portion of the community in the use and enjoyment of property,materially interfering with the proper use or comfort and enjoyment of surrounding property, taking intoconsideration the nature and use of the properties in the area and the character of the community in which theyare situated, which condition would be substantially offensive and annoying to persons of ordinary sensibilitiesliving in the community.
Public sewer
. A sewer operated by a public authority or public utility and available for public use.
Rat harborage
. Any conditions or place where rats can live, nest, or seek shelter.
Refuse
. A heterogeneous accumulation of worn out, used, broken, rejected or worthless materials, including but not limitedto garbage, rubbish, paper or litter and other decayable or nondecayable matter.
Rubbish
. Non-putrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes) consisting of either:
(1) Combustible wastes such as paper, cardboard, plastic containers, yard clippings, and wood; or
(2) Noncombustible wastes such as tin cans or glass crockery.
Safety
. The condition of being reasonably free from danger and hazards which may cause accidents or disease.
Sanitary
. Any condition of good order and cleanliness that precludes the probability of disease transmission.
Structure
. That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up orcomposed of parts joined together in some definite manner.
Uninhabitable, dangerous or substandard structure
. Any dwelling, dwelling unit, building or structure which has any or all ofthe defects and deficiencies defined herein.
Variance
. A difference between that which is required or specified and that which is permitted.
(Ord. O-15-02, passed 12-10-02)
Sec. 151.18. Minimum standards.
Buildings, structures or dwellings that do not meet one or more of the minimum standards, set forth in the InternationalBuilding Code, Mechanical, Plumbing Codes, and National Electric Code as adopted by City Council and as amended,such that conditions or defects exist that endanger the life, health, property or safety of its occupants or the general public;constitute uninhabitable, dangerous and substandard buildings, structures or dwellings. Such structures or buildings maybe declared as unfit for human occupation, in violation of this subchapter and subject to the procedures set forth herein.
(A)
Deemed substandard
. A structure may be deemed substandard whenever any building or structure hasbeen constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 196/350
building or structure provided by the city's building regulations or as specified in the Building Code or otherapplicable Codes, or of any law or ordinance of the State of Texas or the City of Jacksboro relating to thecondition, location or structure of buildings, such that the structure meets the definition of dangerous buildingsas defined under the adopted International Building Code.
(B)
Minimum standards
. A structure deemed substandard must be repaired to the minimum standardsenumerated in the current Building Code, or other code applicable to the substandard condition, as adopted andas amended.
(C)
Accessory structures
. If the primary structure is substandard such that it requires demolition, andaccessory structures are not in substandard condition, the City Council may allow the accessory structures toremain in the absence of a primary use, for a fixed period of time, provided that plans to construct a primarystructure are submitted and an attendant building permit application is issued within 90 days of the demolition.
(D)
Variance
.
(1) If the owner, lienholder or mortgagee requests a variance from the current code requirements, theCity Council may grant such a variance, if:
(a) Evidence or information is submitted by the owner, lienholder or mortgagee generated by acertified inspector or registered structural engineer that such a variance will have no adverse impacton the integrity of the structure or facilities, to the satisfaction of the Code Official.
(b) This evidence must be presented at the public hearing and falls within the owner's burden ofproof that the structure can be repaired.
(c) In no event shall the variance permitted be less than the minimum standard required at the timeof original construction.
(2) The City Council shall make specific findings of hardship and financial hardship, in and of itself, is notsufficient basis for granting a variance.
(Ord. O-15-02, passed 12-10-02)
Sec. 151.19. Permits and inspections.
(A)
General
. No building or structure regulated by this Code shall be erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired,moved, improved, removed, converted, or demolished unless a separate permit of each building or structure has first beenobtained from the Code Official or his or her designee in the manner and according to the applicable conditions prescribedin the current Building Code.
(B)
Fees
. Whenever a building permit or demolition permit is required by
§ 151.19
(A) above, of this Code, theappropriate fees shall be paid to the city as specified in the city's fee schedule for building permits.
(C)
Inspections
. All buildings or structures within the scope of this Code and all construction or work for which a permit isrequired shall be subject to inspection by the Chief Building Official, Code Official, or his or her designee, in accordancewith, and in the manner provided by, this Code and the current Building Code.
(D)
Demolition permits
.
(1) Any structure requested or ordered to be demolished must be issued a demolition permit. Demolitionpermits shall be valid for a period of 90 days. The applicant may request an additional 90-day extension from theBuilding Official, which may be granted and issued, provided the property is secured against unauthorized entryand the extension is to permit the continued safe and orderly demolition of a structure and is not due to lack ofdiligence in the demolition on the part of the applicant.
(2) Failure to fully demolish a structure, including but not limited to cleaning and grading the property, within90 days of the issuance of the demolition permit, or any extension period, shall constitute a violation of thischapter, shall constitute a substandard structure and a public nuisance that may subject the structure toproceedings associated with the repair or demolition of substandard structures and to permit a lien to be placedupon the property.
(Ord. O-15-02, passed 12-10-02; Am. Ord. O-17-09, passed 6-9-09)
Sec. 151.20. Notices and administrative orders.
(A)
General
. Whenever the Code Official has inspected or caused to be inspected any structure or lot and has found anddetermined that such structure or lot is substandard, he or she may commence proceedings to cause repair, rehabilitation,vacation, or demolition of the structure or lot.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 197/350
(B)
Notice and administrative order to abate
. The Code Official shall issue a notice and administrative order to abate asubstandard structure or lot. The notice and administrative order shall contain:
(1) The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the premise upon which thestructure is located.
(2) A statement that the Code Official has found the structure or lot to be substandard with a brief and concisedescription of the conditions found to render the structure or lot substandard under the provisions of
§ 151.18
ofthis Code.
(3) A statement of the action recommended to be taken, as determined by the Code Official, as follows:
(a) If the Code Official has determined that the structure or lot must be repaired, the administrative ordershall require that all required permits be secured and work physically commenced within 30 days from thedate of the administrative order.
(b) If the Code Official has determined that the structure or lot must be vacated, the administrative ordershall require that the structure or lot must be vacated within 30 days of the date of the administrative order.
(c) If the Code Official has determined that the structure or lot must be demolished, the administrativeorder shall require that all required permits be secured and work physically commenced within 30 daysfrom the date of the administrative order.
(4) A statement advising that a notice of hearing is forthcoming and a description of the hearing. The hearingshall provide the City Council the means to consider or determine whether a structure or lot complies with thestandards set forth herein and to consider or determine whether a structure or lot must be repaired ordemolished, as recommended by the Code Official, in the notice and administrative order.
(5) Statements advising that if the owner or owners of record are in full agreement with a demolition order,and that if the owner or owners of record are financially unable to abate such nuisance, then the owner orowners of record may grant the city written permission to abate said nuisance, and, in doing so shall grant thecity a lien against the real property as described in
§ 151.23
of this Code.
(C)
Notice of hearing
. The Code Official shall give notice of a public hearing to all known owners, lienholders, ormortgagees for the City Council to consider or determine whether a structure or lot complies with this Code and to consideror determine whether a structure or lot must be repaired, secured or demolished. The notice shall be mailed and posted asprovided herein, and published in the official newspaper of the city on one occasion, on or before the tenth day before thedate of the hearing. The notice of hearing shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the owner of the affected property, if known;
(2) A legal description of the property, as well as the physical address;
(3) A description of the hearing;
(4) The date, time, and place of the public hearing. This date shall be established not less than ten days fromthe date of the administrative order;
(5) A statement advising that securing the required permits and physically commencing the required actionshall be considered as intent to comply with the administrative order to abate, and that the hearing shall betemporarily postponed. Should abatement halt, or not progress at a rate determined to be reasonable by theCode Official, the hearing shall be recalled;
(6) A statement that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee will be required to submit at the hearing proof of thescope of any work that may be required to comply with the ordinance and the time it will take to reasonablyperform the work.
(D)
Service of notice and administrative order to abate and notice of hearing
. The notice of the administrative order toabate, the notice of hearing and any supplemental notices or orders shall be served upon the owner, lessor, lienholder, andmortgagees of record and occupant, if different than the owner of the structure or lot. Service of these notices and ordersshall be made upon all persons entitled thereto either personally or by mailing a copy of such notice by certified mail, returnreceipt requested, and an optional second copy by regular mail, to each such person at his or her address as it appears onthe county tax rolls, or as discovered by due diligence, as defined by this division (D)(1)-(6) herein, and the notice shall beposted on the front door of each improvement situated on the affected property or as close to the front door as practical.The following of these procedures shall be prima facie evidence of notification. If a certified notice is returned as “refused”or “unclaimed”, the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice shall be deemed delivered. The city has satisfied therequirements of this section to make a diligent effort to determine the identity and address of an owner, a lienholder, or amortgagee if the city searches the following records:
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 198/350
(1) County real property records of the county in which the building is located;
(2) Appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the building is located;
(3) Records of the Secretary of State;
(4) Assumed name records of the county in which the building is located;
(5) City tax records; and
(6) City utility records.
(E)
Filing of notice and administrative order at the county
. A copy of the notice and any administrative orders, or such asmay be issued pursuant to these provisions, shall be filed with Jack County deed. The notice must contain the name andaddress of the owner of the affected property if that information can be determined from a reasonable search of theinstruments on file in the office of the County Clerk, or upon a due diligence search as set forth herein, a legal description ofthe affected property, and a description of the proceeding. The filing of said notice and any said orders is binding onsubsequent grantees, lienholders, or other transferees of an interest in the property who acquire such interest after thefiling of said notice or any said orders, and constitutes notice of said hearing and notice of orders, on any subsequentrecipient of any interest in the property who acquires such interest after the filing of said notice or filing of any said orders.
(F)
Meeting/public hearing
. During an officially convened meeting, the City Council shall hold a public hearing on eachcase and shall hear such testimony as may be presented by any department of the city, the housing inspector, or the owner,occupant, mortgagee or any other person having an interest in such building to determine whether a building complies withthe standards of this Code. The owner, lienholder, or mortgagee has the burden of proof to demonstrate the scope of anywork that may be required to comply with this Code and the time it will take to perform the work. After all testimony hasbeen received, the public hearing shall be closed and the City Council shall deliberate on the case in open session. TheCity Council shall make written findings of fact from testimony offered as to whether the building complies with thestandards of this Code.
(1) After the meeting, if a building is found in violation of standards set forth herein, the City Council may orderthat the building be vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished by the owner within a reasonable timeas provided herein. The City Council also may order that the occupants be relocated within a reasonable time, atthe cost of the owner, lienholders or mortgagees. The City Council reserves the right to determine what is areasonable amount of time to perform the ordered work or what is a reasonable amount of time to relocateoccupants.
(2) The City Council shall require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of the building to, within 30 days:
(a) Secure the building from unauthorized entry or use; or
(b) Repair, remove, or demolish the building, unless the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee establishes atthe hearing that the work cannot reasonably be performed within 30 days.
(3) If the City Council allows the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than 90 days to repair, remove, ordemolish the building, the City Council shall establish specific schedules for the commencement andperformance of the work and shall require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to secure the property in anapproved manner from unauthorized entry while the work is being performed, as determined by the City Council.
(4) The City Council may not allow the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than 90 days to repair, remove,or demolish the building or fully perform all work required to comply with the order unless the owner, lienholder,or mortgagee:
(a) Submits a detailed plan and time schedule for the work at the hearing; and
(b) Establishes at the hearing that the work cannot justifiably be completed within 90 days because ofthe scope and complexity of the work.
(5) If the City Council allows the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than 90 days to complete any part ofthe work required to repair, remove, or demolish the building, the City Council shall require the owner, lienholder,or mortgagee to regularly submit progress reports to the Code Official and to the City Council to demonstratethat the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee has complied with the time schedules established for commencementand performance of work. The order may require that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee appear before the CityCouncil to demonstrate compliance with the time schedule.
(G)
After the meeting
. After the meeting, the City Secretary shall, within ten days after the date the order is issued:
(1) File a copy of the order in the office of the City Secretary;
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 199/350
(2) Publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the city a notice containing:
(a) The street address or legal description of the property;
(b) The date of the hearing;
(c) A brief statement indicating the results of the order; and
(d) Instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be obtained; and
(3) Shall promptly mail by certified mail, return receipt requested, and an optional second copy by regularmail, a copy of the order to the owner, any lienholder(s), and any mortgagee(s) of the building, as determined bydue diligence, as defined herein.
(Ord. O-15-02, passed 12-10-02)
Sec. 151.21. Authority to secure unoccupied, unsecured, substandard, open buildings and structures.
(A)
Purpose
. The owner or person in control of an unoccupied structure shall ensure that the building is in such conditionthat an unauthorized person cannot enter the structure through missing or unlocked doors or windows, or through otheropenings into the building. The city may secure unoccupied, unsecured structures, or structures occupied by persons whodo not have the right of possession to the building. A lien may be filed on real property to assure the cost of securing thestructure as set forth in
§ 151.23
herein.
(B)
Definitions
.
(1) An “unsecured structure” is hereby defined to be any structure or building which has missing or unlockeddoors or windows, or other unsecured openings into the building through which unauthorized persons can enter.
(2) An “unoccupied structure” is hereby defined to be any structure or building that currently has no occupantwith the right of possession of the building and/or appears vacant or abandoned as evidenced by: no activeutility accounts, absence of personalty, general conditions of neglect and any other substantiated evidence ofvacancy or abandonment that may be presented by the Code Official.
(3) Any unoccupied, unsecured structure or building is hereby declared to be a danger to public health andsafety and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
(C)
City may secure
. The Code Official may secure a building that:
(1) Violates the minimum standards of this Code and
(2) Is an unsecured, unoccupied structure.
(3) This authority is in addition to that regarding substandard buildings.
(D)
Notice
.
(1) Before the eleventh day after the date the building is secured, the Code Official shall give notice to theowner of record by:
(a) Personally serving the owner with written notice;
(b) Sending a copy of the notice certified mail, return receipt requested, and an optional copy by regularmail, at the owner's post office or physical address;
(c) Publishing the notice at least twice within a ten-day period in the city's official newspaper if personalservice cannot be obtained and the owner's post office or physical address is unknown; or
(d) Posting the notice on or near the front door of the building if personal service cannot be obtained orthe owner's post office or physical address is unknown.
(2) The notice must contain the following:
(a) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the building and the property onwhich it is located;
(b) A description of the violation of this Code that is present at the building;
(c) A statement that the city will secure or has secured, as the case may be, the building; and
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 200/350
(d) An explanation of the owner's entitlement to request a hearing about any matter relating to the city'ssecuring the building.
(3) The city shall conduct a hearing before the City Council at which the owner may testify or presentwitnesses or written information about any matter relating to the city's securing of the building if, within 30 daysafter the date the city secures the building, the owner files with the City Secretary a written request for thehearing. The city shall conduct the hearing within 20 days after the date the request is filed.
(E)
Method of securing
. The securing of windows, doors, or any other opening allowing access to an unsecured,unoccupied structure shall be done with such material and in such a fashion as to effectively bar entrance to the structureincluding but not limited to plywood, lumber, steel, replacement glass, nails, screws, and bolts. The use of cardboard, tarpaper, window or door screens or any other material that will not effectively prevent entrance shall not be deemed sufficientin securing a structure.
(Ord. O-15-02, passed 12-10-02)
Sec. 151.22. City remedies, failure to comply with notice or order.
If, after the expiration of the time allotted under
§§ 151.20
or
151.21
, above, the owner fails to satisfy any requirement ormandate set forth therein, the city may:
(A) Proceed with the hearing, in the absence of the owner if the city sent the proper notices and performedthe requisite due diligence to ascertain the owners, lienholders and mortgagees of the property;
(B) Vacate, remove, secure or demolish the building, or cause the building to be vacated, removed, securedor demolished, and/or relocate the occupants at its own expense, should the owner fail to do so within theallotted time. The expense may be assessed as a lien against the property as allowed by law;
(C) Repair the building, or cause the building to be repaired, only to the extent necessary to bring thestructure into compliance with the minimum standards and only if the building is a residential building with ten orfewer dwelling units. The repairs may not improve the building to the extent that the building exceeds theminimum standards, as defined by this Code, and expenses may be assessed, as provided in
§ 151.23
below;or
(D) Assess a civil penalty against the property owner for failure to repair, remove, demolish, or secure thebuilding, as provided herein.
(Ord. O-15-02, passed 12-10-02)
Sec. 151.23. Collections and liens.
(A)
General
. If the city does or causes to be done any work pursuant to a City Council Order, including but not limited to,the abatement, repair, demolition, or securing of a structure or lot, the city may proceed to secure payments for actual costsplus the administrative fee, as described in
§ 151.23
(B) below, and as otherwise allowed by law. The Code Official shallkeep an itemized account of any expenses incurred in abating, repairing, demolishing, or securing of a structure or lot or inabating any other condition on the property.
(B)
Administrative fee
. In addition to the actual costs incurred in abating, repairing, demolishing, or securing a structureor lot, there shall be an administrative fee assessed on each lot, tract, or parcel of property to cover the actual cost ofclerical work, title searches, publications, and filing fees estimated to be 20% of the value of the property.
(C)
Fee and due date
. The actual cost of abating, repairing, demolishing, or securing a structure or lot, or abating anyother condition on the property, plus the attendant administrative fee, shall become due and payable upon the completion ofthe repairing, demolishing, or securing of the structure or other abatement procedure. The Code Official shall send bycertified mail, return receipt requested, and an optional second copy by regular mail, an itemized billing to the owner orowners of record, describing the work done. Any money recovered by payment of the charge or assessment or from thesale of the property at foreclosure sale, to the extent allowed by law, shall be paid to the City Director of Finance or his orher designee, who shall credit the same to the repair and demolition fund. If after 30 days from the billing date, payment infull has not been made; then the city may proceed to collect all monies and fees due by filing a lien upon real property. Allsuch charges shall bear interest at the rate of 10% per annum from the date the owner of the real property receives theaforementioned notice of demand for payment of such charges. The city may bring suit in a court of competent jurisdictionto foreclose its liens and collect all monies and fees due. The written statement of such charges, or a certified copy thereof,shall be prima facie evidence of the city's claim for charges or right to foreclose the lien.
(D)
Filing
. The city shall file its notice of lien in the Office of the County Clerk. The notice shall contain the name andaddress of the owner if that information can be determined with a reasonable effort, a legal description of the property onwhich the building was located, the amount of expenses incurred by the city and the balance due.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 201/350
(E)
Extinguish lien
. The lien is extinguished if the property owner or other person having an interest in the legal title to theproperty reimburses the city for the expenses.
(F)
Homestead exemption
. Real property protected by the Texas Constitution as a homestead shall not be subject toassessment of liens resulting in expenses involved in the abatement, repair, demolition, or in securing the structure or lot asdescribed in the process of this Code.
(Ord. O-15-02, passed 12-10-02)
Sec. 151.24. Review.
(A)
Judicial review
. Any owner, lienholder, or mortgagee or record jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of theCity Council may present a petition to a district court, duly verified, setting forth that the decision is illegal, in whole or inpart, and specifying the grounds of the illegality. The petition must be presented to the court within 30 calendar days afterthe date a copy of the final decision of the City Council is mailed by first class mail, certified, return receipt requested, to allpersons to whom notice is required to be sent, as set forth herein. The decision of the City Council shall become final as toeach such owner, lienholder or mortgagee upon the expiration of each such 30 calendar day period unless otherwiseallowed by law.
(B)
Final decision; reconsideration
. If no appeals are taken from the decision of the City Council within the requiredperiod, the decision of the City Council shall, in all things, be final and binding. The City Council shall not entertain areconsideration of the final order except on motion of the city.
(C)
Continuances
.
(1) The City Council, at its discretion, may continue or table a matter for consideration if the City Council finds:
(a) The owner of the property, lienholder or mortgagee has made reasonable efforts to obtaininformation and evidence for the hearing but requires additional time to secure said information; and
(b) The property is secured from unlawful entry; and
(c) A delay in the proceedings will not pose a threat or danger to the general health, safety and welfareof the citizens.
(2) City staff may request a continuance or a tabling of a matter, and the City Council may continue to table amatter, when deemed to be necessary and when delay in the proceedings will not pose a threat or danger to thegeneral health, safety and welfare of the citizens.
(Ord. O-15-02, passed 12-10-02)
Sec. 151.25. Disclaimer of liability.
No officer, agent or employee of the city shall render himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to personsor property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this subchapter. Any suit broughtagainst any officer, agent or employee of the city, as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his dutiesunder this subchapter, shall be defended by the City Attorney until such final determination of the proceedings herein. (Ord.O-15-02, passed 12-10-02)
ELECTRICAL REGULATIONS
Sec. 151.35. Building Official to enforce regulations.
The Building Official shall be the enforcement agent for the electrical regulations.
Sec. 151.36. National Electric Code as standard authority; aluminum conductor material.
(A) The rules and requirements of the National Board of Fire Underwriters for the installation of electrical wiring andapparatus, known as the “National Electric Code” currently in force and as may be amended from time to time, as adoptedin
§ 151.01
, is hereby recognized as standard authority on the subject of electric wiring, and the installation of electricapparatus, as interpreted by the Building Official in inspecting all electrical installations, shall be governed thereby.
(B) Solid aluminum conductors 8, 10, and 12 AWG shall be made of AA-800 series electrical grade aluminum alloyconductor material. Stranded aluminum conductors 8 AWG through 1000 kcmil marked as Type RHH, RHW, XHHW, THW,THHW, THHN, service-entrance Type SE Style U and SE Style R shall be made of an AA-8000 series electrical gradealuminum alloy conductor material.
(1) Minimum size wire shall be 1/0.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 202/350
(2) For commercial buildings only.
(C) Two grounding electrode systems are required by the city for all new construction.
(‘84 Code, § 4-122) (Ord. 75, passed 11-6-45; Am. Ord. 298, passed 12-27-77; Am. Ord. O-21-05, passed 12-13-05; Am.Ord. O-19-07, passed 9-25-07)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 151.99
.
Sec. 151.37. Definition of electric wiring and wiring.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires adifferent meaning.
Electric wiring or wiring
. Means the installation of wires for transmission of electric current on or in any building, for anypurpose whatsoever, or installation of electric devices, fixtures and apparatus of any description.
(‘84 Code, § 4-123) (Ord. 75, passed 11-6-45; Am. Ord. 298, passed 12-27-77)
Sec. 151.38. Application of subchapter.
The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to any and all electric wiring hereafter installed in the city, including any and alladditions and alterations to new or old wiring installed therein. (‘84 Code, § 4-124) (Ord. 75, passed 11-6-45; Am. Ord. 298,passed 12-27-77)
Sec. 151.39. Erection of electric signs supervised by city.
All electrical signs erected within the city limits shall be erected under the supervision of the Building Official or his or herdesignee. (‘84 Code, § 4-125) (Ord. 75, passed 11-6-45; Am. Ord. 298, passed 12-27-77)
Sec. 151.40. Wiring in fire zone placed in approved conduits.
All electrical wiring in any commercial structure shall be placed in approved conduits or other metallic coverings asapproved by the National Electric Code. Fire zones will be designated by the City Council. (‘84 Code, § 4-126) (Ord. 75,passed 11-6-45; Am. Ord. 298, passed 12-27-77; Am. Ord. O-21-05, passed 12-13-05)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 151.99
.
Sec. 151.41. Wiring specifications for certain structures.
All buildings used or to be used for mercantile purposes, all churches, schools, rooming houses, garages for three or morecars, hotels, rent houses of more than two apartments, all buildings (other than private residences) of two or more stories,and all buildings to be used for public entertainments within the city limits shall be wired in accordance with specificationsfor fire zones, and shall be so kept and maintained in a safe condition. (‘84 Code, § 4-127) (Ord. 75, passed 11-6-45; Am.Ord. 298, passed 12-27-77)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 151.99
.
Sec. 151.42. Some motors to meet fire zone restrictions.
All motors above one-half horse power within the city limits shall be connected in accordance with specifications for firezones. (‘84 Code, § 4-128) (Ord. 75, passed 11-6-45; Am. Ord. 298, passed 12-27-77)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 151.99
.
Sec. 151.43. Building Official right of entry; power of arrest.
The Building Official shall have the power and authority to enter any building, structure, lot or premises within the city duringreasonable hours and while in the performance of his or her regular duties. He or she shall have the power and authority toarrest or cause the arrest of any person violating any of the provisions of this subchapter. (‘84 Code, § 4-129) (Ord. 75,passed 11-6-45; Am. Ord. 298, passed 12-27-77)
Sec. 151.44. Building Official to decide questions not defined.
The Building Official shall decide all questions not provided for in this subchapter pertaining to the installation, operation, ormaintenance of electrical wiring and apparatus. (‘84 Code, § 4-130) (Ord. 75, passed 11-6-45; Am. Ord. 298, passed 12-27-77)
Sec. 151.45. Powers of Building Official; violations.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 203/350
(A) The Building Official shall have the authority to make a thorough inspection of all electric wires, wiring and apparatuswithin the city, and where wires or apparatus are in a dangerous or unsafe condition, or are deemed to be an interferencewith the work of the Fire Department, he or she shall notify the person, firm or corporation owning, using or operating thesame to place them in a safe, secure and noninterfering condition, within a reasonable time to be specified in such noticenot to exceed ten days from date thereof, provided for good cause shown, the Building Official may grant extensionstherefor not to exceed ten days each.
(B) Any person, firm, co-partnership, association, or corporation or agent thereof failing, neglecting or refusing to makethe necessary repairs or changes and have the work completed within the time specified in such notice, or extension orextensions thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this subchapter. Every day that elapses after the expiration ofsuch time until such wires and apparatus are repaired, removed or changed as required by the Building Official shall beconsidered a separate offense within the intent and meaning of this subchapter.
(‘84 Code, § 4-131) (Ord. 75, passed 11-6-45; Am. Ord. 298, passed 12-27-77)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 151.99
.
Sec. 151.46. State license required; local license required; contents; fee.
(A) A person may not perform electrical work within the city unless the person holds the appropriate license and is nototherwise exempted under state law. In order to obtain a permit in the city, a person must hold a State Master ElectricalLicense. Such license shall be a condition precedent to obtaining a local license.
(B) All persons, firms or corporations desiring to engage in electrical work in the city shall obtain from the City Manager,Building Official or their designee or other person authorized by the City Council to issue the same a license, which shallrun for a period of one year from the date of its issuance unless sooner revoked by the City Council, and such license shallnot be transferable. The names of each and every member of any firm or co-partnership obtaining such license shall begiven to the Building Official, or other person authorized to issue such a license, and each of the names shall be inserted insuch license the sum as provided in
§ 151.02
, and subject to the other licensing provisions stated herein.
(‘84 Code, § 4-132) (Ord. 75, passed 11-6-45; Am. Ord. 298, passed 12-27-77; Am. Ord. 301, passed 5-9-78; Am. Ord. O-05-05, passed 5-24-05)
Sec. 151.47. Fee for license issuance.
All persons, firms or corporations obtaining a local license as required by
§ 151.46
, herein, shall pay to the Building Officialor other person authorized by the City Council to issue such a license, the sum as provided in
§ 151.02
and give the bondhereinafter provided, before such license shall be issued. (‘84 Code, § 4-133) (Ord. 75, passed 11-6-45; Am. Ord. 298,passed 12-27-77; Am. Ord. 301, passed 5-9-78; Am. Ord. O-05-05, passed 5-24-05)
Sec. 151.48. Bond required.
As a condition of the local license requirement and before engaging in electrical work in the city, every person, firm orcorporation shall make and execute to the city a bond in the sum of $10,000.00 to be approved by the City Manager,Building Official or their designee, conditioned that such party will faithfully comply with the terms and provisions of thissubchapter and all the rules and regulations made in pursuance thereof, and will indemnify and hold harmless the cityagainst any and all costs, expense, damages and injuries sustained by the city or any person or property, by reason of orthat may be occasioned by the acts and operations of such licensee under such license. Such bond shall be executed tocover a period of one year from the date of its approval, and shall cover and remain in full force and effect as to each andevery piece of work done during such period. Failure to maintain said bond shall in full force and effect render the locallicense void without further action by the city and prohibit further work being performed in the city until such time as a newbond is made and executed. (‘84 Code, § 4-134) (Ord. 75, passed 11-6-45; Am. Ord. 298, passed 12-27-77; Am. Ord. 301,passed 5-9-78; Am. Ord. O-05-05, passed 5-24-05)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 151.99
.
Cross reference–
Licensing, § 151.03(B)(3).
Sec. 151.49. Offense.
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in electrical work within the city without firsthaving obtained a license as required by state law or this chapter and/or to have, make or execute the bond as required bythis subchapter (‘84 Code, § 4-135) (Ord. 75, passed 11-6-45; Am. Ord. 298, passed 12-27-77; Am. Ord. O-05-05, passed5-24-05)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 151.99
.
Sec. 151.50. Electricians to notify city when ready for inspection.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 204/350
(A) It shall be the duty of every person, firm or corporation doing any electrical wiring within the city to notify the BuildingOfficial when such work is ready for inspection, and before any of such work is concealed and while the same is stillaccessible, that such work is ready for inspection.
(B) It shall be the duty of the Building Official as soon as possible after receiving such notice and not later than 24 hoursafter such notice is received to inspect such work and ascertain whether or not same is in compliance with the rules laiddown by the National Electric Code, and if same is in compliance therewith, he or she shall approve the same and issue tothe person, firm or corporation doing such work a certificate of inspection stating that such work has been approved by theCity Building Official. The certificate of inspection shall be delivered forthwith to the person for whom such work is done, bythe person, firm or corporation doing such electrical wiring.
(C) The inspection shall be paid for by the person doing the electrical wiring and the Building Official shall not issue anycertificate of inspection until such fee shall be paid. No electric current shall be turned on to any wiring hereafter installeduntil such wiring shall have been inspected and a certificate of inspection issued therefor, as herein provided.
(‘84 Code, § 4-136) (Ord. 75, passed 11-6-45; Am. Ord. 298, passed 12-27-77)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 151.99
.
Sec. 151.51. Violations; forfeiture of license.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this subchapter shall be subject, upon conviction, to thepenalty prescribed in
§ 151.99
, and in addition thereto, the Municipal Court shall have the power, if it is deemed best, todeclare forfeited the license theretofore granted under the provisions of this subchapter to such person, firm or corporationunless expressly authorized by the City Council. (‘84 Code, § 4-137) (Ord. 75, passed 11-6-45; Am. Ord. 298, passed 12-27-77)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 151.99
.
Sec. 151.52. Phone, telegraph companies excepted.
Telephone and telegraph companies installing wires for their own service are exempt from the terms of this subchapter. (‘84Code, § 4-138) (Ord. 75, passed 11-6-45; Am. Ord. 298, passed 12-27-77)
Sec. 151.53. Inspection fees.
(A) The city shall be entitled to permit fees for inspection work. Inspection fees for electrical work are established in
§151.02
and shall also be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk.
(B) For residential and commercial renovation, rough-in inspections shall be deemed necessary if the renovation workdone is of an extensive and comprehensive nature. If the project requires more than one inspection, there will be aseparate fee for each inspection, unless the inspection results from the need for a reinspection.
(‘84 Code, § 4-139) (Ord. 298, passed 12-27-77; Am. Ord. 300, passed 3-28-78; Am. Ord. 307, passed 3-27-79)
Sec. 151.54. Inspections; rough-in and final; notice; time allowed.
There shall be a rough-in inspection where desirable, and final inspection on each installation. For the rough-in inspection,the permit holder whose installation is ready for inspection shall allow the Building Official's office 24 hours, Saturdays,Sundays and holidays recognized by the city excepted, before proceeding with the work or installations. The same noticeshall be allowed for a final inspection. (‘84 Code, § 4-140) (Ord. 298, passed 12-27-77)
Sec. 151.55. Additional charges.
If for reason of faulty work, negligence, or anything not the fault of the Inspection Department, a subsequent inspectionmust be made in excess of the rough-in and final inspections provided for herein, a fee will be charged for eachreinspection. The amount of these fees is established in
§ 151.02
and shall also be kept on file in the office of the CityClerk. (‘84 Code, § 4-141) (Ord. 298, passed 12-27-77)
Sec. 151.99. Penalty.
(A) Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no other penalty has been provided for shall be punished asprovided in
§ 10.99
.
(B) Any person, firm or corporation who knowingly or intentionally violates § 151.36(B) shall be deemed guilty of amisdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined any sum not to exceed $2,000.00 and assessed court costs asprovided by law.
(Am. Ord. O-19-07, passed 9-25-07)
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 205/350
CHAPTER 152: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 152.01. Statutory authorization.
The legislature of the state has in the Flood Control Insurance Act, Texas Water Code, section 16.315, delegated theresponsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the city council,does ordain as follows. (Ord. O-18-07, passed 9-25-07; Ord. O-02-2021, passed 1-11-21; Ord. O-02-2021R, passed 2-11-21)
Sec. 152.02. Findings of fact.
(A) The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, healthand safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for floodprotection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
(B) These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase inflood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous toother lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.
(Ord. O-18-07, passed 9-25-07; Ord. O-02-2021, passed 1-11-21; Ord. O-02-2021R, passed 2-11-21)
Sec. 152.03. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and privatelosses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at theexpense of the general public;
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone andsewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas insuch a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and
(7) Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
(Ord. O-18-07, passed 9-25-07; Ord. O-02-2021, passed 1-11-21; Ord. O-02-2021R, passed 2-11-21)
Sec. 152.04. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods:
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or causeexcessive increases in flood heights or velocities;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected againstflood damage at the time of initial construction;
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which areinvolved in the accommodation of floodwaters;
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage;
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which mayincrease flood hazards to other lands.
(Ord. O-18-07, passed 9-25-07; Ord. O-02-2021, passed 1-11-21; Ord. O-02-2021R, passed 2-11-21)
Sec. 152.05. Definitions.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 206/350
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to give them the meaning theyhave in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
Alluvial fan flooding
. Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apexand is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; andunpredictable flow paths.
Apex
. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fanbecomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
Appurtenant structure
. A structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and theuse of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure
Area of future conditions flood hazard
. The land area that would be inundated by the 1-percent-annual chance (100 year)flood based on future conditions hydrology.
Area of shallow flooding
. A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map(FIRM) with a 1 percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly definedchannel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding ischaracterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Area of special flood hazard
. The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a 1 percent or greater chance offlooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). Afterdetailed rate-making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A,AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V.
Base flood
. The flood having a 1 percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Base flood elevation (BFE)
. The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the accompanyingflood insurance study (FIS) for Zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevationresulting from the flood that has a 1% chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year - also called the baseflood.
Basement
. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Breakaway wall
. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design andconstruction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the buildingor supporting foundation system.
Critical feature
. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protectionprovided by the entire system would be compromised.
Development
. Any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or otherstructures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
Elevated building
. For insurance purposes, a nonbasement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised aboveground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
Existing construction
. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the “start of construction” commencedbefore the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. “Existing construction”may also be referred to as “existing structures.”
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision
. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction offacilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installationof utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before theeffective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
. The preparation of additional sites by the construction offacilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, theconstruction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
Flood elevation study
. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, correspondingwater surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-relatederosion hazards.
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)
. An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agencyhas delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
Flood insurance study (FIS)
. See flood elevation study.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 207/350
Flood or flooding
. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood protection system
. Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, andexpended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within acommunity subject to a “special flood hazard” and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typicallyincludes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are thoseconstructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
Floodplain management
. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flooddamage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain managementregulations.
Floodplain management regulations
. Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, specialpurpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and otherapplications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which providestandards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
Floodplain or floodprone area
. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition offlooding).
Floodproofing
. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures whichreduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and theircontents.
Floodway
. See regulatory floodway.
Functionally dependent use
. A use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in closeproximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloadingof cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or relatedmanufacturing facilities.
Highest adjacent grade
. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed wallsof a structure.
Historic structure
. Any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of theInterior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individuallisting on the National Register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historicalsignificance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary [of the Interior]to qualify as a registered historic district;
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs whichhave been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programsthat have been certified either:
(a) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(b) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Levee
. A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with soundengineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
Levee system
. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closureand drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
Lowest floor
. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure,usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered abuilding's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicablenonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 208/350
Manufactured home
. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and isdesigned for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term “manufacturedhome” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”
Manufactured home park or subdivision
. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufacturedhome lots for rent or sale.
Mean sea level
. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced.
New construction
. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the “start of construction”commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includesany subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, “new construction” meansstructures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain managementregulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
New manufactured home park or subdivision
. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction offacilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation ofutilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after theeffective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
Recreational vehicle
. A vehicle which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational,camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Regulatory floodway
. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved inorder to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designatedheight.
Riverine
. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
Special flood hazard area
. See area of special flood hazard.
Start of construction
. For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act(Pub. L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actualstart of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days ofthe permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such asthe pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage ofexcavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include landpreparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does itinclude excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include theinstallation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part ofthe main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall,ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of thebuilding.
Structure
. For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that isprincipally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
Substantial damage
. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial improvement
. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of whichequals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before “start of construction” of the improvement. Thisterm includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed. Theterm does not, however, include either:
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, orsafety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are theminimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 209/350
(2) Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure'scontinued designation as a “historic structure.”
Variance
. A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full requirements seesection 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.)
Violation
. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain managementregulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence ofcompliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) [of the National Flood InsuranceProgram regulations] is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Water surface elevation
. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum,where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
(Ord. O-18-07, passed 9-25-07; Ord. O-02-2021, passed 1-11-21; Ord. O-02-2021R, passed 2-11-21)
Sec. 152.06. Lands to which this chapter applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. (Ord. O-18-07, passed 9-25-07;Ord. O-02-2021, passed 1-11-21; Ord. O-02-2021R, passed 2-11-21)
Sec. 152.07. Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current scientific andengineering report entitled, “The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Jack County and all outlining areas,” dated February 12,2021, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) dated February 12, 2021, and any revisions thereto are herebyadopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. (Ord. O-18-07, passed 9-25-07; Ord. O-02-2021, passed 1-11-21; Ord. O-02-2021R, passed 2-11-21)
Sec. 152.08. Establishment of development permit.
A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. O-18-07,passed 9-25-07; Ord. O-02-2021, passed 1-11-21; Ord. O-02-2021R, passed 2-11-21)
Sec. 152.09. Compliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms ofthis chapter and other applicable regulations. (Ord. O-18-07, passed 9-25-07; Ord. O-02-2021, passed 1-11-21; Ord. O-02-2021R, passed 2-11-21)
Sec. 152.10. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whicheverimposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. O-18-07, passed 9-25-07; Ord. O-02-2021, passed 1-11-21; Ord.O-02-2021R, passed 2-11-21)
Sec. 152.11. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(Ord. O-18-07, passed 9-25-07; Ord. O-02-2021, passed 1-11-21; Ord. O-02-2021R, passed 2-11-21)
Sec. 152.12. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based onscientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may beincreased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazardsor uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on thepart of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter orany administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. O-18-07, passed 9-25-07; Ord. O-02-2021, passed 1-11-21;Ord. O-02-2021R, passed 2-11-21)
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 210/350
FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
Sec. 152.20. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantialimprovements:
(1) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequatelyanchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic andhydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
(2) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices thatminimize flood damage;
(3) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flooddamage;
(4) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation,plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as toprevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding;
(5) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration offloodwaters into the system;
(6) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration offloodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and,
(7) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from themduring flooding.
(Ord. O-18-07, passed 9-25-07; Ord. O-02-2021, passed 1-11-21; Ord. O-02-2021R, passed 2-11-21)
Sec. 152.21. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in
§§ 152.07
,
152.22
(C), or
152.36
(8), the following provisions are required:
(1)
Residential construction
. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shallhave the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registeredprofessional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator thatthe standard of this subsection as proposed in
section 152.37
(A)(1), is satisfied.
(2)
Nonresidential construction
. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrialor other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above thebase flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base floodlevel the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structuralcomponents having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Aregistered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, andplans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance withaccepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes thespecific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintainedby the floodplain administrator.
(3)
Enclosures
. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowestfloor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basementand which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exteriorwalls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either becertified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one squareinch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than 1 foot above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided thatthey permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(4)
Manufactured homes
.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 211/350
(a) Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRMshall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of thisrequirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateralmovement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties toground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements forresisting wind forces.
(b) Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH,and AE on the community's FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in anew manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home parkor subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufacturedhome has incurred “substantial damage” as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundationsuch that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation andbe securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateralmovement.
(c) Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existingmanufactured home park or subdivision with Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that arenot subject to the provisions of this subsection (4) of this section be elevated so that either:
(i) The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation, or
(ii) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elementsof at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securelyanchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateralmovement.
(5)
Recreational vehicles
. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AEon the community's FIRM either (A) be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, or (B) be fully licensedand ready for highway use, or (C) meet the permit requirements of
section 152.37
(A), and the elevation andanchoring requirements for “manufactured homes” in subsection (4) of this section. A recreational vehicle isready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect typeutilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
(Ord. O-18-07, passed 9-25-07; Ord. O-02-2021, passed 1-11-21; Ord. O-02-2021R, passed 2-11-21)
Sec. 152.22. Standards for subdivision proposals.
(A) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistentwith
sections 152.02
–
152.04
of this chapter.
(B) All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks andsubdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of
section 152.08
and
section 152.37
; and theprovisions of
sections 152.20
–
152.23
of this chapter.
(C) Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development includingthe placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is lesser, ifnot otherwise provided pursuant to
section 152.07
or
section 152.36
(8) of this chapter.
(D) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequatedrainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(E) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have publicutilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminateflood damage.
(Ord. O-18-07, passed 9-25-07; Ord. O-02-2021, passed 1-11-21; Ord. O-02-2021R, passed 2-11-21)
Sec. 152.23. Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones).
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in
section 152.07
areas designated as shallow flooding. Theseareas have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist,where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized byponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply:
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (includingbasement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as thedepth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no depth number is specified); or
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 212/350
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures;
(a) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or thehighest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (atleast two feet if no depth number is specified); or
(b) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base specifiedflood depth in an AO Zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH Zone, level the structure iswatertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural componentshaving the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy.
(3) A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administratorthat the standards of this section, as proposed in
section 152.37
are satisfied.
(4) Require within Zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guidefloodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
(Ord. O-18-07, passed 9-25-07; Ord. O-02-2021, passed 1-11-21; Ord. O-02-2021R, passed 2-11-21)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 152.35. Designation of the floodplain administrator.
The emergency management officer is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement theprovisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance - NationalFlood Insurance Program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. (Ord. O-18-07, passed 9-25-07; Ord. O-02-18,passed 1/8/18; Ord. O-02-2021, passed 1-11-21; Ord. O-02-2021R, passed 2-11-21)
Sec. 152.36. Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site project, includingthe placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding.
(3) Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this chapter.
(4) Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained fromthose federal, state or local governmental agencies (including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution ControlAct Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required.
(5) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special floodhazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual fieldconditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
(6) Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is the TexasWater Development Board (TWDB) and also the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), prior toany alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal EmergencyManagement Agency.
(7) Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse ismaintained.
(8) When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with
section 152.07
, the floodplainadministrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway dataavailable from a Federal, State or other source, in order to administer the provisions of
sections 152.20
–
152.23
.
(9) When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that nonew construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within ZonesA1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposeddevelopment, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the watersurface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community.
(10) Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Programregulations, a community may approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 213/350
which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than 1 foot, provided that the communityfirst completes all of the provisions required by section 65.12.
(Ord. O-18-07, passed 9-25-07; Ord. O-02-2021, passed 1-11-21; Ord. O-02-2021R, passed 2-11-21)
Sec. 152.37. Permit procedures.
(A) Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnishedby him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, andelevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufacturedhomes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information isrequired:
(1) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new andsubstantially improved structures;
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed;
(3) A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofedstructure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of
section 152.21
(2);
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as aresult of proposed development;
(5) Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with
section 152.36
(1);
(B) Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of theprovisions of this chapter and the following relevant factors:
(1) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(2) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damageon the individual owner;
(3) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(4) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(5) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(6) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance andrepair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
(7) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and theeffects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
(8) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(9) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use.
(Ord. O-18-07, passed 9-25-07; Ord. O-02-2021, passed 1-11-21; Ord. O-02-2021R, passed 2-11-21)
Sec. 152.38. Variance procedures.
(A) The appeal board, as established by the community, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances fromthe requirements of this chapter.
(B) The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in anyrequirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of thischapter.
(C) Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board may appeal such decision in the courts ofcompetent jurisdiction.
(D) The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to theFederal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
(E) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the NationalRegister of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 214/350
remainder of this chapter.
(F) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or lessin size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing therelevant factors in
section 152.37
(B) of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the 1/2acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(G) Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this chapter, the appeal board may attach suchconditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this chapter (
section152.03
).
(H) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flooddischarge would result.
(I) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposedrepair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is theminimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
(J) Prerequisites for granting variances:
(1) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(2) Variances shall only be issued upon: (a) showing a good and sufficient cause; (b) a determination thatfailure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (c) a determination thatthe granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict withexisting local laws or ordinances.
(3) Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will bepermitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of floodinsurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
(K) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for otherdevelopment necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
(1) The criteria outlined in subsection (A)–(I) are met; and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the baseflood and create no additional threats to public safety.
(Ord. O-18-07, passed 9-25-07; Ord. O-02-2021, passed 1-11-21; Ord. O-02-2021R, passed 2-11-21)
Sec. 152.39. Severability.
If any word, section, article, phrase, paragraph, sentence, clause or portion of this chapter or application thereto to anyperson of circumstances is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall notaffect for any reason, the validity of the remaining portion of this chapter; and the city council hereby declares it would havepassed such portions of this chapter despite such invalidity, which remaining portions shall remain in full force and effect.(Ord. O-18-07, passed 9-25-07; Ord. O-02-2021, passed 1-11-21; Ord. O-02-2021R, passed 2-11-21)
Sec. 152.40. Penalties for noncompliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with theterms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply withany of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shallconstitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall uponconviction thereof be fined not more than $500.00 for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expensesinvolved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent city council from taking such other lawful action as isnecessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. O-18-07, passed 9-25-07; Ord. O-02-2021, passed 1-11-21; Ord. O-02-2021R, passed 2-11-21)
CHAPTER 153: SUBDIVISION CODE
*
2
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 153.01. Title.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 215/350
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the City of Jacksboro Subdivision Code. (Ord. 3-3-01 § 1.1, passed 3-13-01)
Sec. 153.02. Policy.
(A) It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to consider the subdivision of land and the subsequent developmentof the subdivided plat as subject to the control of the city pursuant to the zoning code for the orderly, planned, efficient andeconomical development of the city.
(B) Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used safely for building purposes without danger tohealth or peril from fire, flood, or other menace, and land shall not be subdivided until available public facilities andimprovements exist and proper provision has been made for drainage, water, sewer, and other capital improvements asdetermined by the city council and planning and zoning commission.
(C) The existing and proposed public improvements shall conform to and be properly related to the proposals shown inthe zoning code, official map, and the capital budget and program of the city. It is intended that these regulations shallsupplement and facilitate the enforcement of the provisions and standards contained in the building and housing codes,zoning ordinance, zoning code and capital budget of the city.
(D) The city manager shall have the authority to approve minor plats and replats in accordance with section 212.0065 ofthe Local Government Code.
(Ord. 3-3-01 § 1.2, passed 3-13-01; Ord. O-13-19, passed 6-10-19)
Sec. 153.03. Purposes and jurisdiction.
(A) The City Council does hereby adopt the following regulations to hereafter control the subdivision of land within thecorporate limits of the city and within the extraterritorial jurisdiction thereof, in order to provide for the safe, orderly andhealthful development of the community and to secure adequate provisions for traffic, light, air, recreation, transportation,water, drainage, sewage, and other public facilities.
(B) The territorial jurisdiction under this Subdivision Code shall include all land located within the corporate limits of thecity and all land lying within one-half mile of the corporate limits of the city, as from time to time extended.
(Ord. 3-3-01 § 1.3, passed 3-13-01)
Sec. 153.04. Application.
(A) This Subdivision Code shall, from and after the passage hereof, govern every person, firm, partnership, association,corporation or other legal entity owning any tract of land within the corporate limits of the city and within the extraterritorialjurisdiction of this city as prescribed by the State law, as from time to time amended, who may hereafter divide any tract intwo or more parts for the purpose of laying out any subdivision of any tract of land or any addition to the city, or for layingout suburban lots or building lots or any lots, and streets, alleys or parks or other portions intended for public use of the useof purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any land owner, or the agent of any land owner, to lay out, subdivide, plat, or replat any landinto lots, blocks, and streets within the jurisdictional limits of the city without the approval of the Planning and ZoningCommission. It shall also be unlawful for any such owner or agent to offer for sale or to sell any such property therein orthereby which has not been laid out, subdivided, platted, or replatted in accordance with this Subdivision Code.
(C) The city will make no improvements nor will the city maintain any streets or furnish any public utility service in anyaddition or subdivision for which approved preliminary and final plats are not on file with the City Secretary and CountyClerk.
(D) No street number and no building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building on any piece of propertysubdivided after November 8, 1978, unless the property has been subdivided, or resubdivided in accordance with thisSubdivision Code.
(Ord. 3-3-01 § 1.4, passed 3-13-01)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 153.99
.
Sec. 153.05. Reservations.
(A) No land contained in the proposed subdivision shall be reserved for any use other than a use permitted by the ZoningOrdinance for the district in which the land to be reserved is located.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 216/350
(B) The specific use for which each piece of land is to be reserved must be shown by appropriate label or description onthe subdivision plat. Provision for future abandonment of a reservation as may be appropriate must likewise be shown onthe plat.
(Ord. 3-3-01 § 1.5, passed 3-13-01)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 153.99
.
Sec. 153.06. Definitions.
(A) For the purpose of this Subdivision Code, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Terms not defined herein shallbe construed in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance, other codes and ordinances or their customary usage andmeaning.
(B) The word “building” shall include the word “structure;” the word “shall” is mandatory and not directive; the word “lot”includes the word “plot.”
(C)
Definitions
.
Alley
. A public minor way which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwiseabutting on a street or highway.
Block
. An area enclosed by streets and occupied by or intended for buildings; or if the word is used as a term ofmeasurement, it shall mean the distance along a side of a street between the nearest two streets which intersect the streeton the that side. In cases where platting is incomplete or disconnected, the zoning administrative official shall determine theoutline of the block.
Building lot
. A tract of land which, at the time of filing for a building permit, is intended by its owner or developer to be used,developed, or built upon as a unit. It shall front upon a dedicated public street.
City
. The City of Jacksboro, Texas.
City Council
. The City Council of the City of Jacksboro, Texas.
Extraterritorial jurisdiction
. That area adjacent to the corporate limits of the city over which the city is authorized to control,among other things, subdivisions as described or defined by law.
Lot
. Any plot of land occupied or intended to be occupied by one main building and the required parking, or a group of mainbuildings, and accessory building(s) and uses, including such open spaces as are required by the Zoning Ordinance, andother laws or ordinances, and having its principal frontage on a public street.
Lot lines
. The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
(1)
Lot line, front
. The narrower side of the lot abutting a street. When two lot lines abutting streets are ofequal length, the owner shall have the choice in designating which shall be the lot frontage. For a lot that has aboundary line which does not abut the front street line, is not a rear lot line and lies along the same generaldirectional orientation as the front and rear lot lines, then the line shall be considered a front lot line inestablishing minimum setback lines. The boundary between a lot and the street on which it fronts.
(2)
Lot line, rear
. The lot line farthest from and most parallel to the front lot line. For triangular lots, the pointopposite the front lot line shall be considered the rear lot line and have a value of zero. The boundary line that isopposite and most distant from the front street line; except that in the case of uncertainty the Building Officialshall determine the rear line.
(3)
Lot line, side
. Any lot boundary line not a front or rear line thereof. A side lot line may be a party lot line, aline bordering on an alley or place or side street line.
Lot measurements
.
(1) Area of the lot shall be the net area of the lot, expressed in square feet or acreage, and shall not includeportions of any public street or alley.
(2) Depth of the lot shall be the length of a line connecting the mid-point of the front and rear lot lines.
(3) Width of the lot shall be the length of a line drawn perpendicular to the lot depth at its point of intersectionwith the front yard line, connecting the side lot lines.
Lot of record
. A lot, which is typically a part of a subdivision, that has been appropriately platted by a registered engineer orsurveyor and has been recorded in the office of the County Clerk.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 217/350
Lot types
.
(1)
Corner lot
. A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. A corner lot shall be deemed tofront on that street on which it has its least dimension, unless otherwise specified by the Building Official.
(2)
Cul-de-sac lot
. A lot whose frontage is along the turn around portion of a street which has only oneopening and terminates with a turn around at the closed end.
(3)
Interior lot
. A lot other than a corner lot with only one street frontage and whose side lot lines do not abutany street.
(4)
Through lot
. A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street. Through lots abutting twostreets may be referred to as double frontage lots.
Major subdivision
. A division of land resulting in four lots or more (see “subdivision”).
Minor subdivision
. A division of land resulting in three lots or less (see “subdivision”).
Planning and zoning commission
. The agency appointed by the City Council as an advisory body to it and which isauthorized to recommend changes in zoning and land uses.
Plat
. A plan or subdivision of land creating building lots or tracts and showing all essential dimensions and other informationessential to comply with the subdivision standards of the city and subject to approval by the Planning and ZoningCommission.
Reference to a plat in this Subdivision Code means an official plat of record that has been approved by the Planning andZoning Commission and the City Council and filed in the plat records of Jack County.
Resubdivision
. The division of an existing subdivision, together with any change of lot size therein, or with relocation of anystreet lines.
Right-of-way (R-O-W)
. The area dedicated for streets, highways and thoroughfares including all necessary publicinfrastructures such as sidewalks, water and sewer lines, and telephone and electric poles.
Setback
. The minimum horizontal distance between the front wall of any projection of a building, excluding steps andunenclosed porch and the platted property or street line. (Same as “Building Line.”)
Street
. Any public thoroughfare dedicated to the public use and not designated as an alley or officially approved place.
(1)
Collector/arterial streets
. Collector/arterial streets are typically designed for medium volume,predominately automobile traffic. Collector/arterial streets collect traffic from and distribute traffic to residentialareas, industrial streets and thoroughfares. All collector/arterial streets shall have minimum 64-foot R-O-W andpavement sections not less than 47 feet wide.
(2)
Industrial
. Any street that primarily serves heavy volume truck traffic to a specific site or sites. All industrialroadways shall have minimum 75-foot R-O-W and pavement sections not less than 52 feet wide.
(3)
Residential
. Residential streets are designed for light to medium automobile traffic serving individualresidential neighborhoods. All residential streets shall minimum 50-foot R-O-W and pavement sections not lessthan 30 feet wide.
(4)
Thoroughfare
. A principal traffic thoroughfare that continues, or is intended to continue, across the city andwhich serves to connect various parts of the city. It may also be a principal connecting street with State orFederal highways. All thoroughfares shall have minimum 100-foot R-O-W and pavement sections not less than65 feet wide.
Street line
. The right-of-way of a street.
Subdivision
. The division of any lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots or sites for the purpose of sale or buildingdevelopment or transfer of ownership, whether immediate or future. Such term shall include resubdivision of land or lots.The following shall not be defined as subdivision: testamentary division of property, partnership division of property upondissolution, or division of property between two or more owners of an undivided interest by court order. Division of land intoparcels of five acres or more shall not be included within this definition of subdivision unless any such subdivision of fiveacres or more includes the planning or development of a new street.
Zoning district map
. The official certified map upon which the boundaries of the various Zoning Districts are drawn andwhich is an integral part of the Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 3-3-01 § 5.3, passed 3-13-01)
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 218/350
PROCEDURE AND CONTENT
Sec. 153.20. General subdivision procedures.
(A)
Classification
.
(1) Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed, before any contract is made for the sale of any partthereof, and before any permit for the erection of a structure in such proposed subdivision shall be granted, theapplicant or his authorized agent shall apply for and secure approval of such proposed subdivision inaccordance with the procedures in this Subdivision Code which includes:
(a) Minor Subdivision - Final Subdivision Plat.
(b) Major Subdivision - Preliminary Subdivision Plat and Final Subdivision Plat.
(2) For the purposes of this Subdivision Code, a subdivision of three lots or less shall be known as a minorsubdivision and a subdivision of four lots or more shall be known as a major subdivision.
(B)
Official Submission Dates
. For the purpose of this Subdivision Code for both minor and major subdivisions, the dateof the regular meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission at which the public hearing for approval is closed shallconstitute the official submittal date for the submitted subdivision plat. This applies to the preliminary and/or final plat asrequired.
(C)
Pre-Platting Conference
. The city encourages a pre-plat conference between the developer and the city prior to thesubmittal of preliminary or final plats.
(Ord. 3-3-01 § 2.1, passed 3-13-01)
Sec. 153.21. Minor subdivision plat.
(A) The applicant shall prepare and submit a final plat of the total tract to be subdivided with new lot lines indicated. Areproducible tracing and five legible white print copies shall be submitted to the Building Official for presentation to thePlanning and Zoning Commission not less than 15 days prior to the meeting at which approval is asked.
(B) The plat shall be drawn to a minimum scale of one inch to 100 feet. The plat shall be drawn in ink on tracing cloth,mylar or equivalent, sheets 24 inches by 30 inches.
(C) The information that shall be shown on the plat is to include the volume and page number of the original tract asfound in the County Courthouse; dimensions of new platting; north arrow; scale of drawing; name and address of owner;and any dedication instruments for streets, alleys, or easements.
(D) The minor subdivision plat, at the discretion and judgment of the Planning and Zoning Commission, need not besubject to the full review process as a regular (major) subdivision plat; however, it must be approved and signed by thePlanning Commission Chairperson and Mayor prior to filing at the County Courthouse.
(Ord. 3-3-01 § 2.2, passed 3-13-01)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 153.99
.
Sec. 153.22. Major subdivision–Preliminary plat.
(A) The subdivider shall submit a preliminary plat of the entire area being subdivided. A reproducible tracing and fivelegible copies shall be submitted to the Building Official for presentation to the Planning and Zoning Commission not lessthan 15 days prior to the meeting at which approval is asked.
(B) The preliminary submittal shall contain a listing of all adjacent property owners and other property owners within 200feet of the property proposed to be subdivided, with addresses as recorded by the County Clerk.
(C) The Building Official will mail a notice, by ordinary U.S. Mail, postage prepaid, to each property owner named asrequired by division (B) of this section, which notice shall state in effect that a subdivision proposal is pending before thePlanning and Zoning Commission and shall include the date, place, and time of the Planning and Zoning Commissionmeeting.
(D) The plat shall be drawn to a scale of one inch to 100 feet, and shall show or be accompanied by the followinginformation:
(1) The name of the subdivision, which shall not duplicate an existing or pending subdivision.
(2) A complete legal description by metes and bounds of the land being subdivided.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 219/350
(3) The layout of streets and alleys and widths of rights-of-way.
(4) The name of the owner (and address unless given in letter of transmittal). If the owner is a partnership,corporation, or other entity other than an individual, the name of the responsible individual such as president orvice-president must be given.
(5) North point, north to be at top of sheet if possible.
(6) Date, each revision shall be a new date.
(7) Ownership boundaries shall be drawn in very heavy lines and shall include overall dimensions andbearings.
(8) Boundary lines and adjacent right-of-way lines of the proposed subdivision drawn with dashed lines.
(9) A tie to an original corner of the original survey of which the land is a part.
(10) Name and location of adjacent subdivisions, streets, easements, pipelines, water courses, etc., and theproperty lines and name of adjoining property owners in unsubdivided tracts.
(11) Existing water courses and ravines, high banks, width of existing or proposed easements, floodplains,and any other physical features pertinent to the subdivision.
(12) Designation of any sites for special uses including churches, sewage disposal plants, water plants,business, industry, or other special land uses.
(E) The Building Official or the Building Official's designated representative will certify that all of the above information ison the plat submitted, and incomplete submittals will be returned to the developer prior to submittal to the Planning andZoning Commission.
(Ord. 3-3-01 § 2.3, passed 3-13-01)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 153.99
.
Sec. 153.23. Review process–Preliminary plat.
(A) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the preliminary plat, and within 30 days, act upon the plat assubmitted or as modified and, if approved, shall express its approval as “Conditional Approval” and state the conditions ofsuch approval, if any, or if disapproved, shall express its disapproval and the reasons thereof.
(B) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall note its action and conditions, if any, on four copies of the preliminaryplat.
(C) Of the four copies, one shall be returned to the subdivider, one shall be filed with the City Clerk, one shall befurnished to the Building Official, and one copy shall be retained by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(D) Approval of the preliminary plat does not constitute acceptance of the subdivision, but is authority to proceed with thepreparation of the final plat. Any work done on the subdivision before the final plat is accepted and recorded is done at therisk of the subdivider. Approval of a preliminary plat expires at the end of 180 days, unless a final plat has been submittedto the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission may, if a written request from thesubdivider is received prior to the end of the 180-day period, grant an extension for up to 180 additional days. Only onesuch extension shall be granted. If any major changes are required by the Planning and Zoning Commission, theCommission may require submission of another preliminary plat.
(Ord. 3-3-01 § 2.4, passed 3-13-01)
Sec. 153.24. Major subdivision–Final plat.
(A) The subdivider shall provide one reproducible tracing and five legible white print copies of the final plat to thePlanning and Zoning Commission after the preliminary plat has been approved and all required changes and alterationsthereto have been made.
(B) No final plat will be considered unless a preliminary plat has first been submitted and approved.
(C) The final plat shall be filed with the Building Official at least 15 days prior to the meeting at which approval isrequested.
(D) The final plat shall be drawn in india ink on tracing cloth, mylar or comparable substitute, sheets 24 inches by 30inches and to a scale of one inch to 100 feet. Where more than one sheet is required, an index sheet of a maximum size of
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 220/350
24 inches by 30 inches shall be filed showing the entire subdivision. Where the area to be developed can be drawn on asheet one-half size or less with the scale of the drawing remaining one inch to 100 feet, a sheet 24 inches by 15 inchesmay be used. The following information will be shown on or will accompany the plat:
(1) A title including the name of the subdivision; the name of the land owner or owners; the name of theregistered engineer or registered public surveyor responsible for the preparation of the plat; the scale andlocation of the subdivision with reference to an original corner of the original survey of which the land is a part;the date, north point, and total acres in the subdivision.
(2) The certificate of the registered engineer or licensed surveyor who surveyed, mapped and monumentedthe land shall be placed on the face of the plat as follows:
THE STATE OF TEXAS )
)
COUNTY OF JACK )
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS:
That I,
____________
, do hereby certify that I prepared this plat from an actual and accurate on-the-ground survey of the land and that the corner monuments shown thereon were properly placed undermy personal supervision, in accordance with the Subdivision Regulations of the city.
________________________
Signature and Seal of Registered Engineer or Surveyor
(3) A certificate of ownership and dedication to the public of all streets, easements, alleys, parks, playgrounds,or other dedicated public uses, signed and acknowledged before a notary public by the owners and any holdersof liens against the land.
(4) An accurate on-the-ground boundary survey of the property with bearings and distances and showing thelines of all adjacent land, streets, easements, and alleys with their names and width. Streets, alleys, and lot linesin adjacent subdivisions shall be shown dashed. All necessary data to reproduce the plat on the ground must beshown on the plat.
(5) A certificate of approval to be signed by the Chairperson of the Planning and Zoning Commission and theMayor shall be placed on the face of the plat.
(6) The plat shall show all existing features within the area being subdivided, such as existing water courses,width of streets, alleys and easements to be retained and other physical features deemed pertinent to thesubdivision.
(7) Streets, alleys and easements that are to be dedicated shall be shown with the following engineering data:
(a) For streets: Complete Curve Data (delta, length of curve, radius, point of curvature, point of reversecurvature, point of tangency) shown on the centerline or on each side of the street; length and bearing ofall tangents; dimensions from all angle points of curve to an adjacent side lot line shall be provided.
(b) For water courses and easements: Distances to be provided along the side lot lines from the front lotline or the high bank of a stream. Traverse line to be provided along the edge of all large water courses ina convenient location, preferably along a utility easement if paralleling the drainage easement or stream.
(E) Should the final plat as submitted fail to meet the conditions and requirements of this Subdivision Code, the Planningand Zoning Commission shall disapprove the plat and note its disapproval thereon, and attach thereto a statement of thereasons for disapproval. In the event of disapproval, the city may withhold all city improvements of whatsoever natureincluding the furnishing of sewage facilities and water service from all additions which have not been approved as providedby law, and further permits may not be issued by the Building Official of the city on any piece of property other than anoriginal or a resubdivided lot in a duly approved and recorded subdivision.
(F) Approval or disapproval of the final plat shall be voted by the Planning and Zoning Commission within 30 days aftersubmission of the final plat. Failure to act within 30 days of the regularly scheduled meeting at which the plat would havebeen presented shall constitute approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission unless additional time is requested bythe developer.
(Ord. 3-3-01 § 2.5, passed 3-13-01)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 153.99
.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 221/350
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND DESIGN STANDARDS
Sec. 153.40. General provisions.
(A) The subdivider shall retain the services of an engineer, registered in the State of Texas, whose seal shall be placedon each sheet of the final drawings, and who shall be responsible for the design and inspection of the drainage, roads andstreets, and sewer and water facilities within the subdivision. The services performed by the engineer shall be asdesignated in the latest issue of “Manual of Professional Practice - General Engineering Services” published by the TexasSociety of Professional Engineers, and shall include both design and inspection as defined therein.
(B) Performance bonds and maintenance bonds shall be submitted for 100% of the cost of all work and for performanceof all materials and equipment for two years after acceptance by the city.
(Ord. 3-3-01 § 3.1, passed 3-13-01)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 153.99
.
Sec. 153.41. Blocks.
(A)
Block length
.
(1)
Residential
: Residential blocks shall be not longer than 1,350 feet, measured along the center of the block,nor shorter than 600 feet.
(2)
On Major Streets
: Maximum block length along a major street shall be 1,600 feet except under specialconditions and upon approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(B)
Block width
. Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two tiers of lots of at least minimum depth, except when preventedby the size of the property or the need to back up to a major thoroughfare.
(C)
Block numbering
. Blocks shall be numbered consecutively within the subdivision and/or sections of the overall plat asrecorded.
(Ord. 3-3-01 § 3.2, passed 3-13-01)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 153.99
.
Sec. 153.42. Lots.
The following standards apply to all residential lots.
(A)
Lot size
.
(1)
Within city
: The lot size of all lots platted within the city shall conform with the Zoning Ordinance onthe basis of the district in which they lie and the use to which they are to be put and shall conform to theregulations of the Zoning Ordinance, including minimum area, width, and depth.
(2)
Outside city
: All other subdivision plats within the jurisdiction of this Subdivision Code shall show lotsmeeting all of the following conditions:
(a) The depth of any lot shall not exceed one and one-half times the average of the front lot andrear lot dimensions.
(b) The minimum area of any lot shall be not less than 7,000 square feet.
(c) Corner lots shall have a minimum width of 75 feet on residential streets and 85 feet on majorthoroughfares.
(d) Minimum usable lot depth for lots backing on natural drainage easements shall be not less than80 feet measured between front lot line and drainage easement.
(B)
Lot facing
.
(1)
Street Frontage
: Each lot shall be provided with the minimum frontage on an existing or proposedpublic street as required by the Zoning Ordinance or 70 feet for lots located within the extraterritorialjurisdiction.
(2)
Double Front
: Double front lots are prohibited except when backing on major thoroughfares.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 222/350
(3)
Front Facing
: Wherever feasible, each lot should face the front of a similar lot across the street. Ingeneral, an arrangement placing adjacent lots at right angles to each other should be avoided.
(C)
Lot numbering
. All lots shall be numbered consecutively within each block. Lot numbering may becumulative throughout the subdivision if the numbering continues from block to block in a uniform manner thathas been approved on an overall preliminary plat.
(D)
Driveway restrictions
. Rear and side driveway access to major thoroughfares, state and county highways,shall be prohibited.
(Ord. 3-3-01 § 3.3, passed 3-13-01)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 153.99
.
Sec. 153.43. Building lines.
(A)
Residential
. Except as otherwise provided herein, a minimum setback shall be required on all residential lots asrequired by the Zoning Ordinance. For all residential lots in the extraterritorial jurisdiction, the required setback shall beequal to or greater than SF-2, Single-Family Residential District - R7.0 regulations of the Zoning Ordinance.
(B)
Commercial, industrial, and/or uses other than residential
. Except as otherwise provided herein, a minimum setbackshall be required on all nonresidential lots as required by the Zoning Ordinance. For all nonresidential lots in theextraterritorial jurisdiction, the required setback shall be equal to or greater than Neighborhood Retail District - NRregulations of the Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 3-3-01 § 3.4, passed 3-13-01)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 153.99
.
Sec. 153.44. Easements.
The subdivider shall dedicate or grant easements as follows: Where necessary to adequately serve the subdivision withpublic utilities, easements shall be retained for poles, wires, conduits, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water lines, opendrains, gas lines, or other utilities. Such easements may be required across part of lots (including side lines), other thanalong boundary lines, if in the opinion of the Planning and Zoning Commission, such easements are needed. (Ord. 3-3-01 §3.5, passed 3-13-01)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 153.99
.
Sec. 153.45. Streets.
The subdivider shall be responsible for constructing paved streets and curbs and gutters within the subdivision, subject tothe conditions contained herein.
(A)
Arrangement
. Unless otherwise provided by the Planning and Zoning Commission, provision shall bemade for the extension of major streets through any new subdivision. Collector streets shall be provided asrequired by the Commission for the circulation of traffic through the subdivision and the connection thereof to themajor streets. Adequate minor streets shall be provided to accommodate the subdivision. Off-center streetintersections with streets in adjacent subdivisions should be avoided. All major and collector streets shall becontinuous or in alignment with existing streets unless variations are deemed advisable by the Commission dueto topography and requirements of traffic circulation.
(B)
Plans and specifications
.
(1) Plans and specifications for the required improvement shall be submitted to and approved by theCity Administration prior to the time the work on such improvements is commenced. Any improvementmade shall be subject to the approval and acceptance of the City Administration. The subdivider shall paythe entire cost of street improvements. Curbs and gutters shall conform to Class A concrete in accordancewith Texas Department of Transportation Standard Specifications. All streets shall be surfaced with one ofthe surface types indicated below:
(a) Two inches or more of hot-mix asphaltic concrete (HMAC) Type D surface course (TxDOT Item340) on six inches of crushed stone, Type A, Grade 2 (TxDOT Item 247) compacted to 100%theoretical maximum density as determined by ASTM D698 (standard Proctor) constructed on aprepared subgrade compacted to 95% theoretical maximum density as determined by ASTM D698(standard Proctor). A minimum of four inches of the crushed stone base material shall extend underthe curb and gutter.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 223/350
(b) A minimum of five inches of reinforced Portland cement concrete pavement meeting therequirements of TxDOT Item 360, Class A on a minimum six inch lime stabilized subgradecompacted to minimum 95% of theoretical maximum density as determined by ASTM D698(standard Proctor). Concrete aggregate shall be TxDOT Item 421, Grade 2 (ASTM C33 Grade 467).Reinforcing shall be minimum #4 bars (deformed) on minimum 18-inch centers, each way. Thesubgrade shall be stabilized with a sufficient amount of hydrated lime added to the material to reducethe plasticity index to less than ten (TxDOT Item 262). All lime stabilization shall extend under thecurb and gutter to a point six inches back of the back of curb.
(2) All materials and constructions shall comply with the latest standards published by the TexasDepartment of Transportation.
(C)
Width
.
(1) Major streets shall have a minimum dedicated right-of-way of 80 feet and a minimum paving width of60 feet.
(2) Collector streets shall have a minimum dedicated right-of-way of 60 feet and a minimum pavingwidth of 40 feet.
(3) Minor to residential streets shall have a minimum dedicated right-of-way of 50 feet with a minimumpaving width of 30 feet.
(4) Major streets having a right-of-way width of less than 100 feet shall be increased to a 100-foot right-of-way for a distance of 150 feet on either side of any intersection with another major street. The right-of-way shall be gradually and uniformly increased from the regular right-of-way width to the 100-foot widthwithin an additional 150 feet.
(5) (a) A residential “estate type” street, meaning a two-lane street with drainage ditches on bothsides, may be constructed in residential subdivisions with deed restrictions limiting lots to a minimumone acre in size or a minimum lot frontage of 150 feet.
(b) The street shall have a minimum 60-foot right-of-way. The street shall have a crown of six toeight inches and a crown width of 36 feet consisting of a 26 feet wide, six inch depth crushed stonebase material and a 24-foot wide surface treatment. The surface treatment shall be a two coursepenetration or one and one-half inch hot mix asphaltic concrete. The street shall meet all other cityregulations.
(D)
Curves
. Complete curve data (delta, length of curve, radius, point of curvature, point of reverse curvature,point of tangency) shown on the centerline or on each side of the street; length and bearings of all tangents anddimensions from all angle points of curve to an adjacent side lot line shall be provided.
(1)
Major Streets
: Curves in major streets are to have a centerline radius of 1,000 feet or more.Exceptions to this standard may be granted only by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(2)
Collector Streets
: Curves in secondary or collector streets are to have a centerline radius of 625 feetor more. Exceptions to this standard may be granted only by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(3)
Minor Streets
: Curves in minor or residential streets are to have a minimum centerline radius of 60feet.
(4) Reverse curves are to be separated by a minimum tangent of 50 feet.
(5) Street jogs and street intersections shall be no closer than 150 feet.
(E)
Intersections
.
(1) All streets, major, secondary, or minor, shall intersect at a 90-degree angle. A minimum 75-degreeangle variation may be allowed, if approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(2) Each new street intersection with, or extending to meet, an existing street, shall be tied to theexisting street on centerline.
(F)
Culs-de-sac
.
(1) Dead-end streets may be platted where the Planning and Zoning Commission deems advisable andwhere the land being subdivided adjoins property not being subdivided, in which case, the streets shall becarried to the boundaries thereof. Streets designed to be permanently dead-end shall not be longer than
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 224/350
600 feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a paved cul-de-sac at least 80 feet in diameter on astreet right-of-way of at least 100 feet in diameter.
(2) Temporary turnarounds are to be used at the end of a street more than 400 feet long that will beextended in the future. The following note must be placed on the plat: “Cross-hatched area is temporaryeasement for turnaround until street is extended (direction) in a recorded plat.”
(G)
Partial or half-Streets
. Partial or half-streets may be provided where the Planning and Zoning Commissionfeels that a street should be located on a property line.
(H)
Street names
. New streets shall be named so as to provide continuity of name with existing streets and soas to prevent conflict with identical or similar names in other parts of the city.
(I)
Street signs
. The subdivider shall furnish and install street signs for all intersections within or abutting thesubdivision. The subdivider shall submit a list and graphical representation of all required signs as well as typicalinstallation plans for staff review and approval prior to installation. The subdivider is strongly encouraged toprovide such submittals with the preliminary and/or final plat.
(J)
Private streets
. Private streets are prohibited.
(Ord. 3-3-01 § 3.6, passed 3-13-01)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 153.99
.
Sec. 153.46. Alleys.
(A)
Pavement type
. All alleys shall be paved with materials conforming to street paving requirements.
(B)
Width
. A minimum paved width of ten feet and a minimum right-of-way of 16 feet shall be required for all alleys.
(C)
Drainage
. Adequate drainage shall be provided within the paved section or by swales to drain all lots to street withoutdrainage easements through lots where possible. The depth of swale shall be as required for drainage with a minimumlongitudinal slope of 0.5% toward a street or drainage easement.
(Ord. 3-3-01 § 3.7, passed 3-13-01)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 153.99
.
Sec. 153.47. Sidewalks.
Sidewalks shall be required and shall be a minimum of four feet wide. Sidewalks abutting the back of curb or within two feetof back of curb shall be a minimum of six feet wide. All sidewalks shall have a traverse slope of one-eighth inch per foot.(Ord. 3-3-01 § 3.8, passed 3-13-01)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 153.99
.
Sec. 153.48. Street lighting.
Street lighting shall be provided by the developer and shall conform to the latest edition of the Illuminating EngineeringSociety Handbook. Lighting levels shall be as recommended for very light traffic in residential areas; medium traffic onfeeder streets; and heavy traffic on thoroughfares. (Ord. 3-3-01 § 3.9, passed 3-13-01)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 153.99
.
Sec. 153.49. Water system.
(A)
Subdivider's responsibilities
. The purpose of this section is to establish minimum standard criteria for design of waterdistribution systems. The subdivider shall provide all water lines necessary to properly serve each lot of the proposedsubdivision, and ensure that existing and/or new water facilities can supply the required demand for domestic use and forfire protection at the desired pressure. The subdivider shall install all mains and shall extend service to all lots terminatingthereon with a curb stop. The subdivider shall submit certification to the city that the system has been designed inaccordance with the current, applicable requirements of the Texas Natural Resources Conservation Commission (TNRCC),the city, and any other rules or regulations promulgated by an appropriate governing agency.
(B)
Testing reports
. The engineer responsible for the design of the proposed improvements shall submit testing reportsperformed by the engineer of an independent testing laboratory with a verification statement to the Director of Public Worksthat the improvements have been constructed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 225/350
(C)
Line size
. The minimum pipeline size to serve residential areas shall be six inches in diameter and the minimumpipeline size serving commercial, business, industrial, and multi-family shall be eight inches. In general, all water lines shallbe looped with no dead ends, unless otherwise approved by the city. Dead end lines shall be provided with a flush valve orfire hydrant at the end. Dead end lines shall not exceed 500 feet in length without prior approval of the city. Pipelines shallbe sized to provide sufficient supply for fire flows in accordance with the minimum criteria of the Texas Commission on FireProtection and other governing authorities.
(D)
Pipe material
. Water pipelines shall be either ductile iron (polywrapped), polyvinyl chloride (PVC), or concretecylinder. In general, all water pipelines shall be minimum Class 150. PVC pipe shall meet the requirements of AWWA C-900, Class 150 (DR 18). Ductile iron pipe shall be a minimum Class 50 with a cement mortar liner. All service lines shall beType “K” copper tubing. All pipe shall be new and approved by the Underwriters' Laboratory and shall be acceptable to theTexas Commission on Fire Protection for use in water distribution systems without penalty. PVC water pipe shall also bearthe seal of approval of the National Sanitation Foundation Testing Laboratory (NSF) for potable water pipe.
(E)
Fittings
. All fittings shall be cast iron or ductile iron (polywrapped) and shall comply with American Water WorksAssociation Standard Specification AWWA C110, AWWA C111 or AWWA C153. Below-grade fittings shall be mechanicaljoint. Adequate thrust blocking shall be provided at all fittings. Above-grade fittings shall be flanged joints. Concrete cylinderpipe fittings shall be of the same material as the pipe. All fittings shall have a pressure rating equal to that of the pipe, but inno case shall be less than 150 psi. All copper fittings shall be compression fittings. No flare fittings shall be permitted.
(F)
Fire hydrants
.
(1) In general, fire hydrants shall be located at each street intersection and at intervals on the interior of eachblock. Spacing of fire hydrants in single family residential areas shall not be over 500 feet apart along the street.Spacing of fire hydrants in the commercial, industrial or high-density residential areas shall not be over 300 feetapart along the street. In all cases, the fire hydrant shall be within 500 feet of any portion of a building. If specialconditions exist, the Fire Marshall may require additional hydrants for fire protection.
(2) All fire hydrants shall be installed on a minimum six inch main. There shall be a gate valve installedbetween the main and hydrant. Fire hydrants shall be located between five and six feet back of the curb.
(3) Fire hydrants shall be iron body, bronze mounted throughout, and shall be designed for a minimumworking pressure of 150 psi. All fire hydrants shall be three-way feed with one pumper nozzle of 4.5 inches andtwo hose nozzles of 2.5 inches. The operating nut shall be a 1.5 inch pentagonal and shall open by turning tothe left (counterclockwise). Threads shall be compatible with existing fire department equipment.
(4) Fire hydrants shall be painted to meet the city's requirement for color code. In general, the developer shallfurnish hydrants that have base and bonnet painted with a red paint. After the city performs the fire flow tests onthe hydrant, the city will paint the bonnet with a color which corresponds to the flow on which it is located asshown in the following table:
Fire Hydrant Color Code
Main Flow Capacity
Color of Bonnet &Caps
0–500 gpm
Red
500–1,000 gpm
Blue
Greater than 1,000 gpm
Green
(G)
Gate valves
.
(1) All gate valves shall be resilient seat gate valves. All gate valves 16 inches and larger shall be furnishedwith bypass valves. For valves 16 inches and larger, butterfly valves may be used as an alternative to gatevalves. Any proposed alternative valves shall be submitted to the Director of Public Works for approval prior toinstallation. Valves shall open by turning counterclockwise and shall have a two inch operating nut.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 226/350
(2) In general, gate valves shall be located at intersections to allow the isolation of line for repairs. Valvesshall be placed so that not more than five lots will be out of service while a line is shut down for repair. All valvesshall be installed in the vertical position with a valve box and cover centered over the stem. A two foot squareand six-inch thick concrete pad shall be constructed around the top of the valve box.
(H)
Testing and sterilization
.
(1) All water pipelines shall be hydrostatically tested. The test shall include service lines, fire hydrants, flushvalves, etc. and all testing shall be accomplished in the presence of a representative of the city. The developershall be responsible for all expenses required to hydrostatically test the pipelines.
(2) All facilities shall be flushed and sterilized. The developer will be required to submit samples to anapproved laboratory for certification as being free of bacteria. The developer shall be responsible for sterilizationand resterilization as necessary and all associated expenses. This shall be performed in the presence of arepresentative of the city.
(I)
Location and installation
.
(1) All water mains shall be located four feet behind the curb on the north/east side of the street. Installationshall be at the line and grade as shown on the plans. The mains shall have a minimum of 48 inches of cover inopen areas. Water lines under existing streets and proposed streets shall have a minimum cover of 48 inchesfrom the finish grade of proposed pavement. Special attention shall be given to water lines in unimproved streetsin order to provide for the future grading of those streets.
(2) Water lines shall be embedded and backfilled. For trenches located in streets the backfill shall becompacted to a minimum of 95% Standard Proctor Density.
(3) All bends, fittings, etc. shall have concrete thrust blocking provided. A tracer line shall be installed inconjunction with all installations and shall be terminated at each valve location. The tracer line shall be installed12 inches above the pipe and shall be a 10-gauge insulated, colored blue.
(Ord. 3-3-01 § 3.10, passed 3-13-01)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 153.99
.
Sec. 153.50. Wastewater system.
(A)
Purpose
. The purpose of this section is to establish minimum standard criteria for design of sewer systems.
(B)
Testing reports
. The engineer responsible for the design of the proposed improvements shall submit testing reportsperformed by the engineer of an independent testing laboratory with a verification statement to the Director of Public Worksthat the improvements have been constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications. The subdivider shall certifythat the sanitary sewer improvements have been approved by the TNRCC, the city and any other appropriate governingagency that has promulgated rules or regulations for sanitary sewer systems.
(C)
Pipe size and grades
. The minimum line size shall be six inches in diameter. Sanitary sewer lines shall be designedto have a minimum mean velocity flowing full of 2.0 feet per second (fps). The minimum slope of the sewer lines shallconform to the minimums recommended by the TNRCC and the maximum velocity shall not exceed ten fps.
(D)
Pipe material
.
(1) Sanitary sewer pipe shall be polyvinyl chloride pipe (PVC) SDR 35 with SDR 26 utilized for depths greaterthan eight feet. PVC pipe shall meet the requirements of ASTM D3034. Sanitary sewer pipe and fittings shall bePVC with rubber gasket type, bell and spigot joints.
(2) All pipe shall be new and approved by the Underwriter's Laboratories, Inc. and the PVC pipe shall alsobear the seal of approval of the National Sanitation Foundation Testing Laboratory (NSF).
(E)
Manholes
.
(1) Manholes shall be located at all intersections of sewer pipelines, changes in grade, changes in alignment,and at distances not to exceed 500 feet. Manholes shall be constructed of precast reinforced concrete pipe,cast-in-place concrete, or fiberglass. Brick manholes will not be allowed. Water tight, size on size resilientconnectors allowing for differential settlement shall be used to connect pipe to manholes. Pipe to manholeconnectors shall conform to ASTM C-923.
(2) All manholes shall have 24-inch standard manhole rings and covers. Manhole rings and covers in areassubject to vehicular traffic shall be rated for H20 loading. Covers shall have pick bars and the words “sanitary
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 227/350
sewer” visible in the casting. Water tight rings and covers shall be furnished in areas subject to flooding andinstalled in accordance with TNRCC regulations.
(F)
Drop manholes
. Drop manholes shall be used at locations where the elevation of the incoming sewer line is two feetor greater from the elevation of the outgoing line. Construction shall be the same as the standard manhole. The drop pipingshall be PVC pipe. Inside or outside drops will be permitted.
(G)
Cleanouts
. Cleanouts shall be constructed at the upper end of all sewer mains. Cleanouts shall be constructed of thesame material and same size as the sewer main with a plug. The top shall have a cast iron boot with cover. A two feet bytwo feet by six inches thick concrete pad shall be placed around this boot.
(H)
Services
. Services shall be provided for each lot, tract, parcel, or subdivided property. Minimum service shall be fourinches in diameter. Services shall be located five feet upstream of the downstream property line. Each service shall beprovided with a cleanout at the property or easement line.
(I)
Force main
. Force main materials and installation shall be in accordance with all TNRCC regulations.
(J)
Lift stations
. Lift stations shall be designed in accordance with the criteria of the TNRCC. Design data will besubmitted to the city and TNRCC and approved on a case-by-case basis.
(K)
Testing
.
(1) All sewer pipe shall have deflection tests performed on them. This test shall be conducted after the finalbackfill has been in place at least 30 days. No pipe shall exceed the manufacturer's recommended deflection.Tests shall be performed using a properly sized “go - no go” mandrel.
(2) All sewer lines shall be tested for infiltration/exfiltration. The method of testing the pipe shall be by usingthe “Low-Pressure Air Test.” All manholes shall be tested by using vacuum or hydrostatic methods inaccordance with city standard specifications. All testing shall be conducted in the presence of a cityrepresentative. All expenses for this work shall be the developer's responsibility.
(L)
Location and installation
.
(1) All sewer mains shall be constructed on the opposite side of the street from the water mains. Sewer mainsshall be constructed to the line and grade as shown on the plans. Manholes shall be located at lot lineswhenever possible. The sewer line shall be located four feet from the centerline of proposed pavement.Manholes shall not be located in the bottom of drainage channels.
(2) Manholes shall be located in the maintenance strips provided.
(3) Sewer lines shall be embedded and backfilled. For trenches located in streets, the backfill shall becompacted in minimum six inch lifts to a minimum of 95% Standard Proctor Density.
(4) A tracer line shall be installed with PVC pipe and be terminated in each manhole. The tracer line shall beinstalled 12 inches above the pipe and shall be a 10-gauge insulated green wire.
(5) All subdivisions shall be provided with a sewage disposal system approved by the Texas Natural ResourceConservation Commission.
(Ord. 3-3-01 § 3.11, passed 3-13-01)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 153.99
.
Sec. 153.51. Storm drainage.
(A)
General storm sewer standards
. An adequate storm sewer system consisting of inlets, pipes, and other undergroundand above ground drainage structures with approved outlets shall be constructed where the runoff of storm water and theprevention of erosion cannot be accomplished satisfactorily by surface drainage facilities. The storm sewer system shallcomply with all applicable EPA and TNRCC rules, regulations and requirements. The filing of all applicable constructionnotices shall be the responsibility of the developer and/or contractor.
(B)
Design criteria
. Data shall be submitted as directed in this section for storm drainage installation for the city. Allsubdivision development shall be subject to these criteria. Drainage problems will be solved by the use of the “rationalmethod” assuming full development of the watershed where appropriate.
Formula: Q = CIA; where:
Q = the storm flow at a given point in cubic feet per second (c.f.s.);
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 228/350
C = a coefficient of runoff representing the ratio of rainfall to peak runoff;
I = the average intensity of rainfall in inches per hour for a period equal to the time of flow from thefarthest point of the drainage area to the point under consideration (Developed from Technical PaperNo. 40, “Rainfall Frequency Atlas of the United States,” May 1961 by the U.S. Weather Bureau);
A = the area in acres that is tributary to the point of design.
(1)
Minimum inlet time
.
(a) Residential - 15 minutes
Industrial - 10 minutes
Commercial - 10 minutes
(b) Water is assumed to be 8 inches deep with an 8-inch curb on a 30-foot street with a 6-inch crownand 6 inches deep with a 6-inch curb on a 30-foot street with a 5-inch crown. Where curb elevations aresplit, the carrying capacity shall be adjusted according to recognized engineering procedures. Widerstreets shall be treated in a similar manner.
(2)
Runoff coefficient
.
Commercial:
0.80
Industrial:
0.70
Residential:
0.50 (Lot area less than 1.0 acre)
0.35 (Lot area equal to or greater than 1.0 acre)
Parks:
0.30
Apartments:
0.75
(3)
Design frequency
.
(a) For major drainage courses and underpasses, use 100-year storm expectancy.
(b) For total capacity of any street, swale, or waterway, use 100-year storm expectancy with level of totalcapacity of waterway below finished ground at building foundations.
(c) Use 5-year storm expectancy for normal gutter or combined gutter and storm drain capacity. Culvertsand bridges shall be designed to carry the 100-year frequency storm.
(C)
Design
. Design of storm sewers, outfalls, culverts, and drainage channels shall conform to the followingrequirements:
(1)
Manholes
.
(a) Manholes shall be located at intervals not to exceed 500 feet for pipe 24 inches in diameter orsmaller. Manholes shall preferably be located at street intersections, junctions, changes of grades andchanges of alignment.
(b) Manholes for pipe greater than 24 inches in diameter shall be located at points where designindicates entrance into the pipe is desirable; however, in no case should the distance between openings orentrances be greater than 1,000 feet.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 229/350
(2)
Pipe
. Pipe for storm drains shall be concrete pipe in sizes as shown on the approved plans. Pipe 21inches or larger in diameter shall be reinforced concrete pipe (RCP), ASTM C76, Class III. Where, in the opinionof the city, added strength of pipe is needed for traffic loads over minimum cover or for excessive height ofbackfill, concrete pipe shall be ASTM C14 Extra Strength or ASTM C76, Class IV or Class V. Pipe shall have aminimum cover of not less than one foot over the top of pipe.
(3)
Channels
. Drainage channels, when approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, may be used foroutfalls to natural or major drainage channels. Where practicable, unpaved channels should have sufficientgradient, depending on the type of soil, to provide velocities that will be self-cleaning but will not be so great asto create erosion. Paved channels, drop structures, ditch checks or paved spillways may be required to controlerosion that results from the high velocities or large volumes of water on steep grades. Side slopes shall not besteeper than 2:1.
(Ord. 3-3-01 § 3.12, passed 3-13-01)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 153.99
.
Sec. 153.52. Survey requirements.
(A) Monuments, consisting of one-half inch iron pipe or one-half inch reinforced steel or larger, 24 inches in length, shallbe placed at all corners of the block lines, and at the points of intersection of curves and tangents of the subdivision.
(B) At least one bench mark for each subdivision shall be permanently installed in an approved manner, with the locationand the elevation as shown on the plat. Permanent bench marks shall be five feet long concrete posts six inches indiameter with the top to be at lease 12 inches below finished grade.
(C) Lot markers shall be metal, at least 24 inches in length, placed at each corner of all lots, flush with the averageground elevation, or they may be countersunk, if necessary, to avoid being disturbed.
(Ord. 3-3-01 § 3.13, passed 3-13-01)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 153.99
.
ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 153.60. As-built drawings.
The engineer representing the subdivider shall present to the Planning and Zoning Commission reproducible complete “as-built plans” for all paving, drainage structures, water lines and sewer lines within 30 days after completion of each contract.(Ord. 3-3-01 § 4.1, passed 3-13-01)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 153.99
.
Sec. 153.61. Final inspections.
(A) Utility inspections shall be conducted for all underground utilities to be placed below streets, sidewalks and othersuch public improvements prior to such improvements. Representatives of the city including, but not limited to, the PublicWorks Director and Building Official shall meet with the subdivider, his engineer and any other persons invited by thesubdivider to review and examine all work. The city shall prepare a list of any items needing correction and forward to thesubdivider within a reasonable time after the inspection.
(B) Final inspections shall be conducted for all public improvements constructed by the subdivider prior to the finalacceptance by the city. Representatives of the city including, but not limited to, the Public Works Director and BuildingOfficial shall meet with the subdivider, his engineer and any other persons invited by the subdivider to review and examineall work. The city shall prepare a list of any items needing correction and forward to the subdivider within a reasonable timeafter the inspection.
(Ord. 3-3-01 § 4.2, passed 3-13-01)
Sec. 153.62. Maintenance bond.
Prior to the issuance of the final plat, a Professional Engineer licensed by the State of Texas shall prepare an Opinion ofProbable Construction Cost for the construction of all public improvements to be dedicated to the city. Upon completion ofthe improvements and prior to acceptance by the city, the subdivider shall furnish to the city a good and sufficientmaintenance bond executed by a corporate surety acceptable to the city in an amount equal to the total cost of theimprovements and guaranteeing their maintenance for a period of two years. (Ord. 3-3-01 § 4.3, passed 3-13-01)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 153.99
.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 230/350
Sec. 153.63. Acceptance.
Upon meeting all requirements of the city, the City Manager or the City Manager's designee shall recommend acceptanceof the subdivision to the City Council. Upon acceptance of the City Council, the City Manager or the City Manager'sdesignee shall inform the subdivider by letter of such acceptance. (Ord. 3-3-01 § 4.4, passed 3-13-01)
Sec. 153.64. Building permits.
Building permits shall not be issued in any subdivision until the requirements of this Subdivision Code have been compliedwith and the city has accepted the required improvements. (Ord. 3-3-01 § 4.5, passed 3-13-01)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 153.99
.
Sec. 153.65. Model homes.
Model home permits may be authorized upon preliminary approval of the subdivision. A maximum of four model permitsshall be permitted. Model homes shall be located adjacent to an existing public street and shall not be sold or haveoccupancy permits issued until final plats are recorded and improvements guaranteed. Model homes may be used astemporary sales offices. (Ord. 3-3-01 § 4.6, passed 3-13-01)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 153.99
.
Sec. 153.66. Variances.
When an applicant can show that a provision of this Subdivision Code would cause unnecessary hardship if strictly adheredto and where, because of some condition peculiar to the site, in the opinion of the Planning and Zoning Commission, adeparture may be made without destroying the intent of such provisions, the Planning and Zoning Commission mayauthorize a variance. The hardship may not be self-imposed, must be unique to the property, and can not be financial innature. (Ord. 3-3-01 § 4.7, passed 3-13-01)
Sec. 153.67. Reservations.
(A)
Permitted purposes
. No land contained in the proposed subdivision shall be reserved for any use other than a usepermitted by the Zoning Ordinance for the district in which the land to be reserved is located.
(B)
Designation on plat
. The specific use for which each piece of land is to be reserved must be shown by appropriatelabel or description on the subdivision plat. Provision for future abandonment of a reservation as may be appropriate mustlikewise be shown on the plat.
(Ord. 3-3-01 § 4.8, passed 3-13-01)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 153.99
.
Sec. 153.68. Resubdivision of land.
(A)
Procedure for resubdivision
. For any change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision plat shall be approvedby the Planning and Zoning Commission by the same procedure, rules and regulations as for a subdivision if such changeaffects any street layout shown on such map, or area reserved thereon for public use, or any lot line, or if it affects any mapor plan legally reached prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions.
(B)
Procedure for subdivision where future resubdivision is indicated
. Whenever a parcel of land is subdivided and thesubdivision plat shows one or more lots containing more than one acre of land and there are indications that such lots willeventually be resubdivided into small building sites, the Planning and Zoning Commission may require that such parcel ofland allows for the future opening of streets and the ultimate extension of adjacent streets. Easements providing for thefuture opening and extension of such streets may be made a requirement of the plat.
(Ord. 3-3-01 § 4.9, passed 3-13-01)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 153.99
.
Sec. 153.69. Filing fees.
(A) Platting fees shall be charged in accordance with the fees and charges adopted in the Code of Ordinances and asmay be amended from time to time. All fees and charges shall be paid to the city when any map or plat is tendered to thecity, and each of the fees and charges provided herein shall be paid in advance, and no action of the Planning and ZoningCommission or any other board or agency shall be valid until the fee shall have been paid.
(B) All platting fees shall be charged and collected on all plats regardless of the action taken by the Planning and ZoningCommission.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 231/350
(Ord. 3-3-01 § 4.10, passed 3-13-01)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 153.99
.
Sec. 153.99. Penalty.
(A) Violation of any provision or provisions of this Subdivision Code by any subdivider shall constitute a misdemeanorand upon conviction of such violation shall result in a fine not less than $200.00 or more than $2,000.00. Each day suchviolation continues shall be considered a separate offense. In case a corporation is the violator of any provision of thisSubdivision Code, each officer, agent and/or employee in any way responsible for such violation thereof shall beindividually and severally liable for the penalties herein prescribed; provided, however, the penal provisions and applicationof this Subdivision Code shall not apply to a duly qualified County Clerk and/or Deputy County Clerk acting in their officialcapacity, or in any way be construed to conflict with Tex. Penal Code Art. 427B; and provided further, however, that anyviolation of any provision of this Subdivision Code outside the corporate limits but within the city's extraterritorial jurisdictionshall not constitute a misdemeanor, nor shall any fine be applicable to such violation within such extraterritorial jurisdiction.However, the city shall have the right to institute an action in the district court to enjoin the violation of any provision of thisSubdivision Code within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction.
(B) Penal convictions. No conviction or convictions under the penal provision of this Subdivision Code or Tex. PenalCode Art. 427B, shall ever be considered as any bar to any injunctive or other legal remedy, relief, right or power existing inthe city to enforce the application and provisions of this Subdivision Code by virtue of the Constitution and laws of the Stateof Texas.
(Ord. 3-3-01 § 4.11, passed 3-13-01)
CHAPTER 154: PLANNING AND ZONING
*
PART ONE - GENERAL
Sec. 154.01 Title.
This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as Chapter 154: Zoning Ordinance of the Code of Ordinances of the Cityof Jacksboro, Texas. (Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 1-100, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.02 Purpose and intent.
The zoning regulations and districts have been established for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, andgeneral welfare of the citizens of the City of Jacksboro. They have been designed to lessen congestion in the streets; tosecure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; toavoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools,parks and other public requirements. They have been made with reasonable consideration, among other things, for thecharacter of the district and for its peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a view to conserving the value ofbuildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the City of Jacksboro, Texas. (Ord. O-02-2020, sec.2-100, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.03 Interpretation of chapter.
(A)
Interpretation
. When interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, such provisions shall be held to be theminimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity and general welfare.
(B)
Conflict with other laws
. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as repealing any existing ordinance regulatingnuisances or as permitting or requiring uses which are now prohibited by law.
(C)
District boundaries
. When definite distances in feet are not shown on the zoning district map, the district boundarieson the map are intended to be along existing streets, alleys or property lines or extensions of, or from, the same. When thelocation of a district boundary line is not otherwise determined, it shall be determined by the scale of the map measuredfrom a given line.
(D)
Discrepancies in map
. Where the street layout, actually on the ground, varies from the street layout as shown on thezoning district map, the board of zoning adjustment may apply the designations shown on the mapped streets in such away as to carry out the intent and purpose of the plan for the particular area in question.
(E)
Non-compliant buildings, structures or uses
. No building, structure or use, which was non-compliant at the time ofadoption of this chapter, shall be, become or be made compliant solely by the adoption of this chapter.
(F)
Rules for definition
.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 232/350
(1) For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and terms that apply to the ordinance are defined in
partfive: definitions
, or as defined within a section.
(2) Words used in the present tense shall include the future, words used in the singular number shall includethe plural number and words used in the plural shall include the singular.
(3) The word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary.
(4) The word “may” is permissive.
(5) The word “lot” shall include the words “piece,” “premises,” “tract” and “parcel,” and except whenspecifically stated otherwise, shall mean a building lot.
(6) The term “less restrictive district” shall mean one with more permitted, or allowed, uses.
(7) The word “building” shall include any structure designed or built for the support, enclosure, shelter orprotection of persons or property of any kind.
(8) The phrase “used for” shall include the phrase “arranged for,” “designed for,” “intended for,” “maintainedfor,” “occupied for,” and shall apply exclusively to physically existing uses.
(Ord. O-02-2020, art. 3, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.04 Severability of zoning provisions.
(A) It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that several provisions of this chapter are severable.
(B) If any court of competent jurisdiction shall judge any provision of this chapter to be invalid, such judgment shall notaffect any other provision of the chapter not specifically included in said judgment.
(C) If any court of competent jurisdiction shall judge invalid the application of any provision of this chapter to a particularproperty, building or other structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to any other property,building or structure not specifically included in said judgment.
(Ord. O-02-2020, art. 4, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.05 Districts and boundaries thereof.
(A)
Districts established
. The city is hereby divided into eleven (11) classes of use districts, such districts being of theshapes and areas deemed best suited to carry out the purpose and intent of this chapter and are named as follows:
(1)
Residential districts
.
(a)
Single-family districts
.
1. “SF-1” single-family residential district R-9.6.
2. “SF-2” single-family residential district R-7.0.
(b)
Multifamily districts
.
1. “MF-M” multifamily residential district medium density.
2. “MF-H” multifamily residential district high density.
3. “MH-1” manufactured housing district.
(2)
Commercial districts
.
(a) “CBD” central business district.
(b) “LC” light commercial district.
(c) “TC” thoroughfare commercial district.
(3)
Industrial districts
.
(a) “TC/LMI” thoroughfare commercial/light manufacturing district.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 233/350
(b) “MI” manufacturing and industrial district.
(4)
Planned multi-use development districts
.
(a) “PD” Planned Development.
(B)
Purpose of districts
.
(1)
“SF-1” Single-family residential district - R9.6
. This district is intended to be composed of single-family,detached dwellings on large or intermediate-sized lots, which form a neighborhood characterized by owner-occupied homes in a low density setting.
(2)
“SF-2” Single-family residential district - R7.0
. This district is intended to be composed of single-familydetached homes; cluster housing, single-family attached homes; duplexes; and HUD-code manufactured homeslocated on single-family residential lots. Lot sizes and home sizes are intended to be smaller than SF-1, andsituated in a medium density setting. Attached dwellings may be clustered together in rows of townhouses andother zero-lot-line clustering, or patio homes. It is intended that these dwellings will form a neighborhoodcharacterized by owner-occupied homes in the highest density setting of such homes and by open spaces incommon ownership or otherwise which are designed to give relief to the density of dwellings and to providedesired amenities for this type of neighborhood. It is intended that advanced and creative designs or residentialdwellings and their arrangements, and landscape planning will be encouraged in this district. A master site planis required before development of cluster homes may be considered. Dwellings must meet minimum square feetliving area regulations per living area.
(3)
“MF-M” Multifamily residential district - medium density
. This district is intended to be composed of mostlyapartment buildings in a medium density setting, including the smallest size apartment buildings (duplexes andtriplexes) and those of larger sizes within a range up to that which will not exceed the maximum allowablenumber of dwelling units.
(4)
“MF-H” Multifamily residential district - high density
. This district is intended to be about the same as “MF-M” except that higher densities and taller apartment buildings are permitted.
(5)
“MH-1” Manufacturing housing district
. This district is intended to be composed of manufactured homeparks and/or manufactured home subdivisions. Recreational vehicle parks are allowed after approval of aconditional use permit.
(6)
“CBD” Central business district
.
(a) This district is intended to be composed of various uses which provide for the development of thedowntown district and preserve the historical value of the buildings. The district is also intended to allow forthe development of office buildings housing places of professional services, restaurants, personal servicesand retail.
(b) Uses permitted in the “CBD” are outlined in commercial, manufacturing and industrial use chart.
(c) The district typically is bounded by north, south, east and west streets.
(7)
“LC” Light commercial district
. This district allows for a variety of retail, business services and othercommercial business in areas other than the highway corridors and the central business district. Uses permittedin the “LC” are outlined in commercial, manufacturing and industrial use chart.
(8)
“TC” Thoroughfare commercial district
. This district is intended to accommodate all types and sizes ofcommercial enterprises exclusive of warehousing and manufacturing. It is intended that much of the landcontiguous to U.S. 281 fall in this classification. Uses permitted in the “TC” are outlined in commercial,manufacturing and industrial use chart.
(9)
“TC/LMI” Thoroughfare commercial/light manufacturing district
. This district is intended to accommodatethe development of commercial enterprises exclusive of warehousing, manufacturing, storage and industrialuses, such as fabrication of materials and specialized manufacturing and research institutions, all of a non-nuisance type. Uses permitted in the “TC/LMI” are outlined in commercial, manufacturing and industrial usechart.
(10)
“MI” Manufacturing and industrial district
. This district is intended to accommodate all types of industrialand warehousing uses, including oil and gas well servicing companies, and all other uses not prohibited byordinance. Uses permitted in the “MI” are outlined in commercial, manufacturing and industrial use chart.
(11)
“PD” Planned development district
. This district is intended to encourage creative development of theland, to provide locations for well-planned comprehensive developments and to accommodate a variety of
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 234/350
flexibility in the development patterns of the city. Land use can include well-planned comprehensive single-familyhousing developments as well as other commercial uses. Uses permitted in the “PD” are outlined in commercial,manufacturing and industrial use chart.
(C)
Zoning district map
.
(1) The boundaries of the districts are as shown on the official zoning district map, which is hereby adoptedand made a part of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the city secretary to keep the map current by marking andotherwise indicating on it the changes of the district boundaries and of uses as a result of amendments to thischapter.
(2) Where uncertainty arises with regard to the boundaries of districts as shown on the map the followingrules shall apply:
(a) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, alleys,streams, or property lines shall be construed as following such centerlines.
(b) Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limit lines shall be construed as following suchlines.
(c) The scale of the map shall determine distances not specifically indicated on the map.
(d) Where physical features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the map or inother circumstances not covered by these rules, the board of alderman shall interpret the districtboundaries.
(Ord. O-02-2020, art. 5, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.06 General provisions.
(A)
Zoning of vacated streets and alleys
. Whenever a street or alley that formed a district boundary is vacated by the citycouncil, adjacent districts shall extend to the centerline of the street or alley vacated.
(B)
Reverse corner lots
. On a reverse corner lot in any non-residential district, if the rear property line abuts a lot zonedfor residential purposes, no structure or portion of the structure shall be located within five (5) feet of the rear lot line.Additionally, if any portion of a structure on a reverse corner lot in a non-residential district is located within fifteen (15) feetof the rear lot line, then the setbacks for the side street yard shall be the same for the lot which it abuts in the rear.
(C)
Special rules for double frontage lots
.
(1) On double frontage lots, a minimum front yard shall be required on both streets and all front yardregulations shall apply.
(2) When a double frontage lot is located in any residential district, the major thoroughfare shall be the rear lotline, and such lot shall front on the minor street.
(3) Where a double frontage lot is developed with a major thoroughfare frontage as the rear lot line and ascreening device is installed along the rear line, the screening device shall meet the fence and screening devicerequirements in this chapter and shall be maintained by the property owner.
(D)
Principal and accessory buildings and uses
.
(1) All residential uses and buildings, except servant's quarters, garage apartments and guest houses, asherein defined, are principal uses and buildings. Accessory buildings are not allowed on a lot without theexistence of a principal use building.
(2) No accessory building, other than servant's quarters, guest houses and garage apartments located indistricts where those buildings are permitted, shall be used for dwelling purposes.
(3) In addition to those uses listed as accessory uses in the district regulations, the following list, while not allinclusive, are also considered uses for accessory buildings:
(a) Storage of personal or business related items.
(b) To engage in a business related activity if allowed in that particular district and/or approved by theboard of zoning adjustment.
(c) Off street motor vehicle parking areas and loading facilities for the exclusive use of the owners,customers, clients and employees.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 235/350
(d) In multifamily residential developments: club rooms, clothes washing and drying facilities, swimmingpools, sauna baths and other indoor and outdoor recreation facilities common to such developments, whensuch uses exist for the use and benefit of residents and their guests, but not the general public.
(e) Use of shipping containers as accessory buildings is prohibited.
(E)
Permitted obstructions, required yards and open spaces
. The following shall not be considered to be obstructionswhen located in the required yards and open spaces specified:
(1) In all required yards:
(a) Open terraces not over four (4) feet above the average level of the adjoining ground but not includinga permanently roofed-over terrace or porch, awnings and canopies.
(b) Steps four (4) feet or less above grade which are necessary to provide access to a permittedbuilding, or for access to a building lot from a street or alley.
(c) Chimneys projecting twenty-four (24) inches or less into the yard but not occupying more than twopercent (2%) of the required yard area.
(2) In front yards.
(a) One-story bay windows, balconies and overhanging eaves or gutters, none of which shall projectmore than four (4) feet into a required yard.
(b) Trees having single trunks shall be permitted when lower branches are pruned to a height of seven(7) feet above said grade to prevent obstruction to traffic.
(3) In side-yards: Bay windows, overhanging eaves or gutters projecting two (2) feet or less into a requiredyard, but in no case shall such eaves or gutters be closer than three (3) feet from the side lot line.
(4) In rear yards: Detached off-street parking structures; open off-street parking spaces; accessory buildings;tool rooms; and, similar buildings or structures for domestic or agricultural storage, balconies, breezeways andopen unroofed porches, one story bay windows and overhanging eaves or gutters. All such permittedobstructions shall be a minimum of 5' from all property lines.
(5) Nothing herein provided shall be construed as permitting any obstruction to view that may constitute atraffic hazard. On the contrary, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect or place or cause to be erected orreplaced on any property under his control any hedge, tree, shrub, or other growth or any fence or otherstructure in such manner or at such location as to constitute an obstruction to view creating a traffic hazard. Oncorners, or on street curves of more than sixty (60) degrees, when doubt may exist regarding sight obstructions,the approval of the supervisor, street department, and building inspector. No obstructions of any kind shall beplaced within twenty (20) feet of any corner or street curves of more than sixty (60) degrees.
(F)
Off-street parking regulations
. If a zoning district requires specific off-street parking regulations, then thoseregulations shall apply to that zoning district. Otherwise, off-street parking shall be provided, as appropriate, according tothe following:
(1) On any lot used for detached single-family residences, there shall be provided at least two (2) vehicleparking spaces of not less than two hundred (200) square feet each and spaces shall be in conformance withoff-street construction standards.
(2) No parking space shall occupy any part of the required front yard of a non-residential use in a residentialdistrict.
(3) Off-street parking regulations for uses other than residential are contained in appendix A. Theseregulations shall apply to permitted non-residential uses in residential use districts, and to the appropriatecommercial and industrial uses.
(G)
More restrictive uses in less restrictive use districts
. More restrictive uses shall be permitted in less restrictive usedistricts, subject to the limitations imposed elsewhere in this chapter. For example, a single-family detached dwelling ispermitted in a multifamily district. In such cases, the regulations regarding density, height, lot area, living area, lotdimensions, yards, coverage, floor area ratio, open space, and parking which apply to the more restrictive use shall takeprecedence in the less restrictive use district, unless otherwise provided by specific district regulations contained elsewherein this chapter. For example, a single-family detached dwelling located in a “MF-M” district must be located on a lot havingan area of not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet.
(Ord. O-02-2020, art. 6, passed 3-23-20)
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 236/350
Sec. 154.07 Nonconforming uses; definitions.
(A) Any use or structure, which does not conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located shall bedeemed a non-conforming use when:
(1) Such use or structure was in existence and lawfully operating at the time of the passage of this chapter onMarch 9, 2020 and has since been in regular and continuous use; or
(2) Such use or structure is a lawful use at the time of the adoption of any amendment to this chapter but bysuch amendment is placed in a district wherein such use is not otherwise permitted.
(B)
General
.
(1) Non-conforming uses are hereby declared to be incompatible with the permitted uses in the districtsinvolved.
(2) It is the intent of this chapter to allow non-conforming uses to continue, under regulations contained in thischapter, until the non-conforming uses are removed, however this chapter does not encourage the non-conforming uses to continue. Unless permitted in another section of this chapter, no non-conforming use of landor buildings nor any non-conforming structure shall be enlarged, changed or altered.
(C)
Changing non-conforming use
. The board of zoning adjustment may approve the change of a non-conforming use ofa building to another non-conforming use as long as the new use meets the same or more restrictive classification.Additionally, after approval by the board of zoning adjustment, when a non-conforming use is changed to a more restrictivenon-conforming use, it shall not later be changed back to the less restrictive classification.
(D)
Extension of nonconforming uses
.
(1) A non-conforming use of a building may be extended throughout the building, provided:
(a) No structural alteration may be made on or in the building except those required by law to reservesuch building in a structurally sound condition.
(b) The number of dwelling units or rooms in a non-conforming residential use shall not be increased soas to exceed the number of dwelling units or rooms existing at the time said use became a non-conforminguse.
(2) No non-conforming use within a building may be extended to occupy any land outside the building.
(3) No non-conforming use of land shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area ofland than was occupied at the time the land became a non-conforming use.
(4) In the case of existing manufactured home parks that are non-conforming, the number of manufacturedhomes may not be increased without conforming to the MH-1 district regulations of this chapter. If amanufactured home is removed from a district that does not allow manufactured homes, another manufacturedhome may not be placed on that lot.
(E)
Termination of non-conforming uses
. The right to operate a non-conforming use shall cease and such use shall beterminated under any of the following circumstances:
(1) When such use is discontinued or abandoned; discontinuance or abandonment shall be defined asfollows:
(a) When land used for a legal non-conforming use shall cease to be used in such manner for a periodof three (3) months.
(b) When a building or other structure designed or used for a non-conforming use shall cease to be usedin such manner for a period of three (3) months.
(2) When any provision of this chapter, or any other ordinance, or Federal or State Statute is violated withrespect to a non-conforming use.
(3) When a non-conforming use is changed to a conforming use by re-zoning.
(4) When the structure in which a non-conforming use is housed, operated or maintained is damaged to theextent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its value.
(5) When the right to maintain or operate a non-conforming use has been terminated by the board of zoningadjustment.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 237/350
(Ord. O-02-2020, art. 7, passed 3-23-20)
PART TWO - DISTRICT REGULATIONS
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Sec. 154.15 General provisions.
(A)
Non-residential uses in residential districts
. The following uses are permitted in residential districts
(1) Parks, playgrounds, golf courses, community centers, fire stations, police stations, and other public safetybuildings and recreational grounds and facilities operated by or under the control of the city or othergovernmental authority.
(2) Electric transmission towers and lines, gas transmission lines and metering stations, sewage pumpstations, water reservoirs, pump stations, and wells, communications lines, and other utility lines andappurtenances necessary to serve customers in any residential district.
(3) Churches, rectories, public schools, parochial schools.
(4) Libraries, museums, public administrative buildings.
(5) Truck gardens, vegetable gardens, nurseries, orchards, and other plant cultivation; provided that no retailor wholesale business shall be conducted upon the premises, and that all storage and all operations, includingcultivating, fertilizing, harvesting and the use and maintenance of all associated facilities and equipment areconducted in a manner which will not be obnoxious or offensive by reason of vibration, noise, odor, dust, smoke,or fumes, light or glare.
(6) Accessory buildings, including private garages and/or servants quarters, with the following conditions:
(a) Servant's quarters shall not be leased or rented to anyone other than a bonafide servant.
(b) Accessory buildings may be used for hobbies, provided such activities are accessory only, and arenot obnoxious or offensive by reason of vibration, noise, odor, dust, smoke, fumes, or manner of operation.
(c) Accessory buildings must be constructed with like or better materials than the primary structure, orbe constructed of similar materials as the neighboring buildings.
(d) Accessory building(s) with combined square feet totaling five hundred (500) square feet or less arenot required to meet district masonry requirements.
(e) Accessory building(s) with combined square feet totaling five hundred and one (501) square feet ormore are required to meet district masonry requirements or be constructed with like or better materialsthan primary structure.
(7) Home occupations with the following conditions:
(a) The occupational use is secondary to the primary use of the dwelling as a residence.
(b) The use does not exceed two hundred (200) square feet of floor area of the dwelling unit.
(c) The outside appearance of the residence shall not be altered in any way that would provide visibleevidence of the conducting of a home occupation.
(d) No person other than a member of the family residing at the residence may conduct a homeoccupation and no more than two persons, regardless of the total number of occupants, may participate inthe home occupation.
(e) No more than one (1) home occupation may be conducted in the residence.
(f) No advertising sign may be displayed on the premises.
(g) No outdoor activities or storage of any kind is permitted.
(h) The use shall not increase normal automobile traffic in the neighborhood and shall not requireadditional off-street parking in order to conduct business.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 238/350
(i) The occupation shall not be obnoxious or offensive by reason of vibrations, noise, odor, dust, smokeor fumes or create any nuisance.
(j) Home occupations shall typically be conducted during normal business hours.
(k) A customarily incidental use.
(B)
Non-applicability of area regulations to certain lots
. The required minimum lot width and the required minimum lotarea for any single-family residential district shall not apply to any individual lot of record which was platted prior to theadoption of this chapter.
(C)
Living area regulations
.
(1) Every single-family detached or attached dwelling (other than manufactured homes) hereafter erected orplaced shall have at least one thousand (1,000) square feet of living area, except that in SF-1 Districts, saiddwellings shall have at least one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of living area.
(2) Every apartment in an “MF-M” district having only one bedroom shall have a least seven hundred fifty(750) square feet of living area. For each additional bedroom, the apartment shall have a minimum of onehundred fifty (150) additional square feet of living area.
(3) Every apartment in an “MF-H” district having only one bedroom shall have at least six hundred fifty (650)square feet of living area. For each additional bedroom the apartment shall have a minimum of one hundred fifty(150) additional square feet of living area.
(D)
Height regulations
. The height regulations of this chapter shall not apply to non-commercial radio or TV antennas ortowers.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 8-100, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.16 “SF-1” Single-family residential district - R9.6.
This district is intended to be composed of single-family, detached dwellings on large or intermediate-sized lots, which forma neighborhood characterized by owner-occupied homes in a low density setting.
(1)
Use regulations
. Land and structures in this zoning district shall be used only for the following purposes:
(a) Dwellings, single-family, detached, including modular homes.
(b) Modular homes located on single-family residential lots.
(c) Permitted non-residential uses as listed under
section 154.15
.
(2)
Area regulations
.
(a)
Size of yards
.
1. Minimum front yard - Thirty feet (30').
2. Minimum side yard - Ten feet (10').
3. Corner lot, street side yard (minimum) - Twenty feet (20').
4. Minimum rear yard - Twenty-five feet (25').
(b)
Size of lots
.
1. Minimum lot size - Nine thousand, six hundred (9,600) square feet.
2. Minimum lot width - Eighty feet (80') .
3. Minimum lot depth - One hundred feet (100').
(c)
Minimum dwelling unit size
. One thousand, two hundred (1,200) square feet.
(d)
Maximum height
. Two and one-half (2-1/2) stories.
(e)
Minimum landscape area
.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 239/350
1. Fifty percent (50%).
2. See landscaping requirements.
(f)
Minimum masonry coverage
. Eighty-five percent (85%) of vertical wall area unless conforming to themajority of buildings in the area.
(g)
Parking regulations
.
1. Two spaces on same lot as main structure.
2. See off-street parking and loading standards.
(h)
Other regulations
. [Reserved.]
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 8-200, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.17 “SF-2” Single-family residential district - R7.0
(A) This district is intended to be composed of single-family detached homes; cluster housing, single-family attachedhomes; duplexes; and HUD-code manufactured homes located on single-family residential lots. Lot sizes and home sizesare intended to be smaller than SF-1, and situated in a medium density setting. Attached dwellings may be clusteredtogether in rows of townhouses and other zero-lot-line clustering, or patio homes. It is intended that these dwellings willform a neighborhood characterized by owner-occupied homes in the highest density setting of such homes and by openspaces in common ownership or otherwise which are designed to give relief to the density of dwellings and to providedesired amenities for this type of neighborhood. It is intended that advanced and creative designs or residential dwellingsand their arrangements, and landscape planning will be encouraged in this district. A master site plan is required beforedevelopment of cluster homes may be considered.
(B) Dwellings must meet minimum square feet living area regulations per living area.
(1)
Use regulations
. Land and structures in this zoning district shall be used only for the following purposes:
(a) Dwellings, single-family, detached.
(b) Cluster housing, single-family, attached.
(c) HUD-code manufactured homes located on single-family residential lots.
(d) Permitted non-residential uses as listed under
section 154.15
.
(2)
Area regulations
.
(a)
Size of yards
.
1. Minimum front yard - Twenty feet (20').
2. Minimum side yard - Eight feet (8').
3. Corner lot, street side yard (minimum) - Twenty feet (20').
4. Minimum rear yard - Fifteen feet (15').
(b)
Size of lots
.
1. Minimum lot size - Five thousand (5,000) square feet.
2. Minimum lot width - Fifty feet (50').
3. Minimum lot depth - Fifty feet (50').
(d)
Minimum dwelling unit size
. One thousand (1,000) square feet.
(e)
Maximum height
. Two and one-half (2-1/2) stories.
(f)
Minimum landscape area
.
1. Fifty percent (50%).
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 240/350
2. See landscaping requirements.
(g)
Minimum masonry coverage
. Seventy percent (70%) of vertical wall area unless conforming to themajority of buildings in the area.
(h)
Parking regulations
.
1. Two spaces on same lot as main structure.
2. See off-street parking and loading standards.
(i)
Other regulations
. [Reserved.]
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 8-300, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.18 “MF-M” Multifamily residential district - medium density.
This district is intended to be composed of mostly apartment buildings in a medium density setting, including the smallestsize apartment buildings (duplexes and triplexes) and those of larger sizes within a range up to that which will not exceed themaximum allowable number of dwelling units.
(1)
Use regulations
. Land and structures in this zoning district shall be used only for the following purposes:
(a) Apartment type attached dwelling units, medium density.
(b) Cluster housing, single-family, attached.
(c) All single-family residential uses in this section shall meet the requirements of
section 154.15
.
(2)
Area regulations
.
(a)
Size of yards
.
1. Yards adjacent to streets - Thirty feet (30').
2. Minimum side and rear yards - Fifteen feet (15').
(b)
Size of lots
.
1. Minimum lot size - One acre.
2. Minimum lot width - One hundred feet (100').
3. Minimum lot depth - One hundred feet (100').
(c)
Maximum density
. Sixteen (16) dwelling units per acre..
(d)
Minimum dwelling unit size
.
1. 1 bedroom unit: Seven hundred fifty (750) square feet.
2. For each additional bedroom, the apartment shall have a minimum of one hundred fifty (150)additional square feet of living area.
(e)
Maximum height
. Two and one-half (2-1/2) stories.
(f)
Minimum landscape area
.
1. Fifteen percent (15%) of lot excluding paved areas.
2. See landscaping requirements.
(g)
Minimum masonry coverage
. Fifty percent (50%) of vertical wall area unless conforming to themajority of buildings in the area.
(h)
Parking regulations
. See off-street parking and loading standards.
(i)
Other regulations
.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 241/350
1. Buildings containing dwelling units fronting on a place or court and facing other such buildingsshall be separated by not less than sixty feet (60').
2. All buildings shall be so arranged to maintain a ten-foot (10') separation between all structures.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 8-400, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.19 “MF-H” Multifamily residential district - high density.
This district is intended to be about the same as “MF-M” except that higher densities and taller apartment buildings arepermitted.
(1)
Use regulations
. Land and structures in this zoning district shall be used only for the following purposes:
(a) Apartment type attached dwelling units, high density.
(b) All single-family residential uses in this section shall meet the requirements of
section 154.15
.
(2)
Area regulations
.
(a)
Size of yards
.
1. Yards adjacent to streets - Thirty feet (30').
2. Minimum side and rear yard - Fifteen feet (15').
(b)
Size of lots
.
1. Minimum lot size - Two acres.
2. Minimum lot width - Two hundred fifty feet (250').
3. Minimum lot depth - Two hundred fifty feet (250').
(c)
Maximum density
. Twenty four (24) dwelling units per acre.
(d)
Minimum dwelling unit size
.
1. 1 bedroom unit: Six hundred fifty (650) square feet.
2. For each additional bedroom, the apartment shall have a minimum of one hundred fifty (150)additional square feet of living area.
(e)
Maximum height
. Three and one-half (3-1/2) stories.
(f)
Minimum landscape area
.
1. Fifteen percent (15%) of lot excluding paved areas.
2. See landscaping requirements.
(g)
Minimum masonry coverage
. Fifty percent (50%) of vertical wall area unless conforming to themajority of the buildings in that area.
(h)
Parking regulations
. See off-street parking and loading standards.
(i)
Other regulations
.
1. Buildings containing dwelling units fronting on a place or court and facing other such buildingsshall be separated by not less than sixty feet (60').
2. All buildings shall be so arranged to maintain a ten-foot (10') separation between all structures.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 8-500, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.20 “MH-1” Manufactured home district.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 242/350
This district is intended to be composed of manufactured home parks and/or manufactured home subdivisions. Recreationalvehicle parks are allowed after approval of a conditional use permit.
(1)
Use regulations
. Land and structures in this zoning district shall be used only for the following purposes:
(a) Manufactured home parks.
(b) Manufactured home subdivisions.
(c) Recreational vehicle park by conditional use permit only.
(2)
Area regulations
.
(a)
Size of yards
.
1. Minimum front yard - Fifteen feet (15').
2. Minimum side yard - Eight feet (8').
3. Corner lot, street side yard (minimum) - Twenty feet (20').
4. Minimum rear yard - Ten feet (10').
(b)
Size of lots
.
1. Minimum lot size - Five thousand (5,000) square feet.
2. Minimum lot width - Forty feet (40').
3. Minimum lot depth - Ten feet (10').
(c)
Minimum site area
. Four (4) acres.
(d)
Minimum density
. Ten (10) dwelling units per acre.
(e)
Minimum dwelling unit size
. Seven hundred fifty (750) square feet.
(f)
Maximum height
. Single story structure.
(g)
Minimum landscape area
.
1. Fifty percent (50%).
2. See landscaping requirements.
(h)
Minimum masonry coverage
. None.
(i)
Parking regulations
.
1. Two spaces on same lot as main structure.
2. See off-street parking and loading standards.
(j)
Other regulations
. All residential structures not directly attached to a concrete slab will be properlyunderpinned and skirted prior to occupancy.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 8-600, passed 3-23-20)
COMMERCIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Sec. 154.35 General provisions.
Refer to each specific district. (Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 9-100, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.36 “CBD” Central business district.
This district is intended to be composed of various uses which provide for the development of the downtown district andpreserve the historical value of the buildings. The district is also intended to allow for the development of office buildings
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 243/350
housing places of professional services, restaurants, personal services and retail. The district typically is bounded by north,south, east and west streets.
(1)
Use regulations
. Uses permitted in the “CBD” are outlined in commercial, manufacturing and industrial usechart.
(2)
Area regulations
.
(a)
Size of yards
.
1. Minimum front yard - None specified.
2. Minimum side yard - None specified.
3. Minimum rear yard - None specified.
(b)
Size of lots
.
1. Minimum lot size - None specified.
2. Minimum lot width - None specified.
3. Minimum lot depth - None specified.
(c)
Maximum height
.
1. Two (2) stories.
2. HVAC equipment, roof gables, vent stakes and chimneys or mechanical rooms may project upto twelve feet (12') beyond maximum building height.
(d)
Maximum lot coverage
. One hundred percent (100%).
(e)
Minimum landscape area
. See landscaping requirements.
(f)
Minimum masonry coverage
. Eighty-five percent (85%) of vertical wall area.
(g)
Parking regulations
. See off-street parking and loading standards.
(h)
Other regulations
.
1. Residential use of second story is permitted.
2. No outside storage permitted
3. Conditional use permit required unless same type business has already been permitted.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 9-200, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.37 “LC” Light commercial district.
The development standards in the “LC” district are intended to allow for the development of a variety of retail, businessservices and other commercial business in areas other than the highway corridors and the central business district.
(1)
Use regulations
.
(a) Uses permitted in the “LC” district are outlined in commercial, manufacturing and industrial use chart.
(b) Residential use will follow single-family 1 (SF-1) district regulations.
(2)
Area regulations
.
(a)
Size of yards
.
1. Minimum front yard - Thirty feet (30').
2. Minimum side yard - Ten feet (10').
3. Corner lot, street side yard (minimum) - Twenty feet (20').
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 244/350
4. Minimum rear yard - Twenty-five feet (25').
(b)
Size of lots
.
1. Minimum lot size - Twelve thousand (12,000) square feet.
2. Minimum lot width - One hundred feet (100').
3. Minimum lot depth - One hundred feet (100').
(c)
Maximum height
.
1. Two (2) stories.
2. HVAC equipment, roof gables, vent stakes and chimneys or mechanical rooms may project upto twelve feet (12') beyond maximum building height.
(d)
Maximum lot coverage
. Seventy-five percent (75%).
(e)
Minimum landscape area
.
1. Fifteen percent (15%).
2. See landscaping requirements.
(f)
Minimum masonry coverage
. Seventy percent (70%) of vertical wall area, unless conforming tobranded business franchise building standards.
(g)
Parking regulations
. See off-street parking and loading standards.
(h)
Other regulations
. [Reserved.]
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 9-300, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.38 “TC” Thoroughfare commercial district.
This district is intended to accommodate all types and sizes of commercial enterprises exclusive of warehousing andmanufacturing. It is intended that much of the land contiguous to U.S. 281 fall in this classification.
(1)
Use regulations
.
(a) Uses permitted in the “TC” district are outlined in commercial, manufacturing and industrial use chart.
(b) Residential use will follow single-family 1 (SF-1) district regulations.
(2)
Area regulations
.
(a)
Size of yards
.
1. Minimum front yard - Thirty feet (30').
2. Minimum side yard - Ten feet (10').
3. Corner lot, street side yard (minimum) - Twenty feet (20').
4. Minimum rear yard - Twenty-five feet (25').
(b)
Size of Lots
.
1. Minimum lot size - Twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet.
2. Minimum lot width - One hundred fifty feet (150').
3. Minimum lot depth - One hundred fifty feet (150').
(c)
Maximum height
.
1. Three (3) stories.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 245/350
2. HVAC equipment, roof gables, vent stakes and chimneys or mechanical rooms may project upto twelve feet (12') beyond maximum building height.
(d)
Maximum lot coverage
. Seventy-five percent (75%).
(e)
Minimum landscape area
.
1. Ten percent (10%).
2. See landscaping requirements.
(f)
Minimum masonry coverage
. Fifty percent (50%) of exterior facade with exposure to a street, unlessconforming to branded business franchise building standards.
(g)
Parking regulations
. See off-street parking and loading standards.
(h)
Other regulations
. [Reserved.]
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 9-400, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.39 Communications antennas and support structures/towers.
(A)
Applicability
.
(1) These regulations apply to all commercial and amateur antennae and support structures, unless exemptedin subsection (2) below.
(2) Exceptions: Direct broadcast satellite reception, multi-channel multi-point distribution (as defined by theFCC), television reception antennae and amateur radio antennae meeting the following requirements do notrequire a permit unless mounted on a pole or mast that is twenty (20) feet or more in height:
(a) In any zoning district, antennae that are one meter (i.e., thirty-nine inches (39") or less in diameter;
(b) In a non-residential zoning district, antennae that are two meters or less in diameter;
(c) In any zoning district, antennae designed to only receive television broadcasts;
(d) In any zoning district, amateur radio antennae concealed behind or located upon or within attics,eaves, gutters or roofing components of the building; and
(e) In any zoning district, amateur radio ground-mounted whips and wire antennae, unless mountedupon a pole or mast over twenty (20) feet in height.
(3) Support structures or antennae legally installed before the effective date of this chapter are not required tocomply with this chapter, but must meet all applicable state, federal and local requirements, building codes andsafety standards. Provided however, any new construction or expansion shall be required to comply with theterms of this chapter.
(B)
Special definitions
. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply.
Antenna, microwave reflector and antenna support structure
. An antenna is the arrangement of wires or metal rodsused in transmission, retransmission and/or reception of radio, television, electromagnetic or microwave signals (includesmicrowave reflectors/antennae). A microwave reflector is an apparatus constructed of solid, open mesh, bar-configured orperforated materials of any shape/configuration that is used to receive and/or transmit microwave signals from a terrestrial ororbitally located transmitter or transmitter relay. Microwave reflectors are also commonly referred to as satellite receive onlyearth stations (T.V.R.O.S.), or satellite dishes. An antenna support structure is any tower, mast, pole, tripod, box frame orother structure utilized for the purpose of supporting one or more antennae or microwave reflectors.
Antenna (non-commercial/amateur)
. An antenna or antenna support structure used for the purpose of transmission,retransmission and/or reception of radio, television, electromagnetic or microwave signals for private or personal use and notfor the purpose of operating a business and/or for financial gain. A satellite dish antenna not exceeding six (6) feet indiameter shall also be considered as a non-commercial antenna.
Antenna (commercial)
. An antenna or antenna support structure used for the purpose of transmission, retransmissionand/or reception of radio, television, electromagnetic or microwave signals primarily for the purpose of operating a business
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 246/350
and/or for financial gain (e.g., commercial broadcasting, cellular/wireless telecommunications, etc.). A satellite dish antennathat exceeds six (6) feet in diameter shall also be considered as a commercial antenna.
Collocation
. The use of a single support structure and/or site by more than one communications provider.
Communications operations (non-commercial/amateur)
. The transmission, retransmission, and/or reception of radio,television, electromagnetic or microwave signals for private or personal use and not for the purpose of operating a businessand/or for financial gain.
Communications operations (commercial)
. The transmission, retransmission, and/or reception of radio, television,electromagnetic or microwave signals primarily for the purpose of operating a business and or for financial gain.
Height
. The distance measured from the finished grade of the lot/parcel to the highest point on the support structure or otherstructure, including the base pad and any antennae.
Radio broadcasting with tower
. See “antenna, microwave reflector and antenna support structure.”
Radio, television or communications tower (commercial and non-commercial use)
. See “antenna, microwavereflector and antenna support structure.”
Telecommunications tower, facilities or structure
. See “antenna, microwave reflector and antenna support structure.”
Temporary/mobile antenna
. An antenna and any associated support structure/equipment (including, but not limited to, asupport pole, a vehicle, etc.) that is placed and/or used on a temporary basis only (i.e., not intended to be permanent), usuallyin conjunction with a special event, news coverage or emergency situation, or in case of equipment failure or temporaryaugmentation of permanent communications equipment.
Wireless communication tower or structure
. See “antenna, microwave reflector and antenna support structure.”
(C)
General requirements
.
(1) Antennae and support structures may be considered either principal or accessory uses.
(2) Antenna installations shall comply with all other requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and the Code ofOrdinances with the exception of those specifically cited within these regulations.
(3) No commercial antenna support structure shall be closer to a residential district boundary line orresidential dwelling than a distance equal to twice the height of the support structure. Such setback/distanceshall be measured as the shortest possible distance in a straight line from the structure to the closest point of aresidential district boundary line or residential dwelling. Setbacks from residentially zoned property do not applyto antennae attached to utility structures that exceed fifty (50) feet in height or to antennae placed wholly withinor mounted upon a building.
(4) No amateur or commercial antenna, antenna support structure, microwave reflector/antenna or associatedfoundations or support wire or appurtenances shall be located within any required setback area for the front,side or rear yards.
(5) All antennae and support structures must meet or exceed the current standards, and regulations of theFederal Communications Commission (FCC), the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and/or all applicablefederal, state and local authorities. If those standards change, then the owner/user of an antenna or supportstructure must bring the antenna/structure into compliance within six (6) months or as may otherwise berequired by the applicable regulating authority.
(6) A building permit is required to erect or install an antenna, antenna support structure and relatedstructures/equipment, unless the particular antenna is exempt from these regulations (see section 9-101A.[subsection (A)(2)] above). All installations shall comply with applicable Federal, State and local building codesand the standards published by the electronic industries association. Owners/users shall have thirty (30)calendar days after receiving notice that an installation is in violation of applicable codes in order to bring it intofull compliance.
(7) Antennae (amateur or commercial) shall not create electromagnetic or other interference with the City ofJacksboro's or Jack County's radio frequencies and public safety operations, as required by the FCC. Antennaealso shall not interfere with radio or television reception or nearby property owners. In no manner shall the useof such equipment infringe upon adjoining property owners.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 247/350
(8) No antenna or support structure shall be located so as to create a visual obstruction within critical visibilityareas (such as street intersections or where a private driveway enters a roadway) or a traffic safety problem
(9) Safeguards shall be utilized to prevent unauthorized access to an antenna installation (e.g., on a watertower or utility structure, a freestanding installation, etc.). Safeguards include certain devicesidentified/recommended by the manufacturer of the antenna or support structure, a fence, a climbing guard orother commercially available safety devices. Climbing spikes or other similar climbing devices, if utilized, shallbe removed immediately following use.
(10) Temporary antennae shall only be allowed in the following instances:
(a) In conjunction with a festival, carnival, rodeo or other special event/activity;
(b) In case of an emergency (e.g., severe weather, etc.) or a news coverage event;
(c) When needed to restore service on a temporary basis after failure of an antenna installation. The citymust be notified within 72 hours of the placement of a temporary antenna. If the temporary antenna is tobe needed for more than seven (7) calendar days, then the owner/user must apply for and acquire a permitfor the temporary installation on or before the eighth (8th) day following initial placement of the antenna.
(D) Collocation is greatly encouraged by the city and preference shall be given to collocated facilities.
(1) All new support structures over fifty (50) feet in height shall be constructed to support antennae for at leasttwo carriers, unless the structure is an alternative or stealth design, or the support structure is replacing anexisting utility structure or light standard. Sufficient area for associated structures and equipment shall also beprovided.
(2) A support structure which is modified or reconstructed in order to accommodate collocation shall be of thesame type, design and height as the existing structure, and it may be moved on the same property within fifty(50) feet of its original location provided that it is not moved any closer to residentially zoned property orresidential dwelling (if the structure was allowed by a conditional use permit (CUP), then its new location shall bewithin the physical/land boundaries of the CUP). The original (i.e., former) support structure shall be removedfrom the property within ninety (90) calendar days following completion of the new structure.
(3) Where an additional antenna is to be attached to an existing support structure that already has an antennamounted upon it, the new antenna shall comply with and be compatible with the design of the existing antennaon the collocated structure.
(E) Support building and equipment storage areas/buildings shall be screened from public view if mounted on a rooftop,and such screening device shall be architecturally compatible with the design and materials of the building. When groundmounted, they shall meet all applicable front, side and rear yard setback requirements of the applicable base zoningdistrict. They shall also be of neutral color and shall use exterior finish colors and materials that are compatible with nearbystructures. They shall be screened from public view by a dense, opaque evergreen landscaped screen with an initialplanting height of three (3) feet, and which will attain an ultimate height of six (6) feet at maturity. A six foot (6') solidmasonry wall may be used in lieu of the landscaped screen provided exterior finish materials are compatible with nearbystructures. The use of a wood fence for screening is prohibited, and wrought iron or chain link may only be used inconjunction with a landscaped screen as specified above.
(F) Satellite dishes and other similar antennae shall be permitted on the roof of a building, so long as satellite dishes donot exceed one meter (39") in diameter and antennae do not extend over ten (10) feet above the roof of the building. Roof-mounted antennae that comply with the provision of these regulations do not require additional yard setbacks or setbacksfrom residential areas or dwellings.
(G) Only one (1) amateur antenna/support structure shall be permitted per residential lot, except that a maximum of two(2) satellite dishes may be allowed if both units are no larger than one meter (39") in diameter (only one allowed if over onemeter in diameter). Satellite dishes in any residential district shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in diameter. Notwithstandingthe foregoing, an amateur station antennae structure, meeting all federal guidelines and requirements for such facilities andlicenses, may be erected at such heights and dimensions sufficient to accommodate amateur service communications.
(H) All commercial signs, flags, lights and attachments other than those required for emergency identification,communications operations, structural stability, or as required for flight visibility by the FAA and/or FCC shall be prohibitedor any antenna or antenna support structure. However, lights may remain or be placed upon light standards that are alteredor replaced in order for them to serve as antenna support structures provided that said lights are not commercial (i.e., for-profit) in nature, and provided that said lights are placed/replaced as the same size, configuration, number of bulbs ordegree of luminance as they previously exited prior to support structure modification/replacement.
(I) Any publicly owned antennae or antenna support structures shall be permitted in any zoning district (e.g., public safetycommunications).
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 248/350
(J) In all residential zoning districts (including, SF-1, SF-2, MF-M, MF-H, MH-1 and PD), commercial antennae andantenna support are prohibited, except as specified within this section.
(1) A commercial antenna may be attached to a utility structure (e.g., electrical transmission/distribution tower,elevated water storage tank) provided that the utility structure exceeds fifty feet (50') in height and provided thatthe antenna does not extend more than ten (10) feet above the height of the utility structure (see subsection (C)(3) above).
(2) A commercial antenna may be placed wholly within any building permitted in the zoning district (seesubsection (C)(3) above). A commercial antenna may also be mounted flush to the exterior of abuilding/structure if it is painted and/or disguised to integrate into the overall architectural design and it is notreadily visible/identifiable as an antenna from public roadways or from neighboring residential properties.
(K) In nonresidential zoning districts (including CBD, LC, TC, TC/LMI and MI) commercial antennae and antenna supportstructures are allowed as follows:
(1) Commercial antenna support structures are allowed by right if they do not exceed the maximum buildingheight allowed for the zoning district in which they are located. Structures in excess of the height allowed in thezoning district may be allowed by conditional use permit (CUP) provided the structure conforms in all otheraspects of the base zoning district's regulations, and provided that all applicable setback requirements aresatisfied. In all nonresidential zoning districts, antenna support structures must meet all setback requirements,particularly from residential zoning districts.
(2) A commercial antenna may be attached to a utility structure (e.g., electrical transmission/distribution tower,elevated water storage tank) provided that the utility structure exceeds fifty (50) feet in height and provided thatthe antenna does not extend more than ten (10) feet above the height of the utility structure (see subsection (C)(3) above).
(L) A commercial antenna may be placed wholly within any building permitted in the zoning district (see subsection (C)(3)above). A commercial antenna may also be mounted flush to the exterior of a building/structure if it is painted and/ordisguised to integrate into the overall architectural design and it is not readily visible/identifiable as an antenna from publicroadways or from neighboring residential properties.
(M) The city council may consider the proximity to other telecommunication facilities when considering the placement andconstruction of other similar facilities.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 9-500, passed 3-23-20)
MANUFACTURING AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Sec. 154.45 General provisions.
Refer to each specific district. (Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 10-100, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.46 “TC/LMI” Thoroughfare commercial/light manufacturing.
This district is intended to accommodate the development of commercial enterprises exclusive of warehousing,manufacturing, storage and industrial uses, such as fabrication of materials and specialized manufacturing and researchinstitutions, all of a non-nuisance type.
(1)
Use regulations
.
(a) Uses permitted in the “TC/LM” district are outlined in commercial, manufacturing and industrial usechart.
(b) Permitted uses shall not disseminate dust, fumes, gas, noxious odor, smoke, glare, or otheratmospheric influence.
(c) Permitted uses shall produce no noise exceeding in intensity, at the boundary of the property, theaverage intensity of noise of street traffic.
(d) Machine shops and fabrication of metal of not more than ten (10) gauge in thickness
(2)
Area regulations
.
(a)
Size of Yards
.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 249/350
1. Minimum front yard - Thirty feet (30').
2. Minimum side yard - Ten feet (10').
3. Corner lot, street side yard (minimum) - Twenty feet (20').
4. Minimum rear yard - Twenty-five feet (25').
(b)
Size of lots
.
1. Minimum lot size - Twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet.
2. Minimum lot width - One hundred fifty feet (150').
3. Minimum lot depth - One hundred fifty feet (150').
(c)
Maximum height
.
1. Three (3) stories.
2. HVAC equipment, roof gables, vent stakes and chimneys or mechanical rooms may project upto twelve feet (12') beyond maximum building height.
(d)
Maximum lot coverage
. Seventy-five percent (75%).
(e)
Minimum landscape area
.
1. Ten percent (10%).
2. See landscaping requirements.
(f)
Minimum masonry coverage
. Fifty percent (50%) of exterior facade with exposure to a street, unlessconforming to branded business franchise building standards.
(g)
Parking regulations
. See off-street parking and loading standards.
(h)
Other regulations
. [Reserved.]
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 10-200, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.47 “MI” Manufacturing and industrial district.
This district is intended to accommodate all types of industrial and warehousing uses, including oil and gas well servicingcompanies, and all other uses not prohibited by ordinance.
(1)
Use regulations
. Uses permitted in the “MI” district are outlined in commercial, manufacturing andindustrial use chart.
(2)
Area regulations
.
(a)
Size of yards
.
1. Minimum front yard - One hundred feet (100').
2. Minimum side yard - Fifty feet (50').
3. Corner lot, street side yard (minimum) - Seventy-five feet (75').
4. Minimum rear yard - Fifty-feet (50').
(b)
Size of lots
.
1. Minimum lot size - Twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet.
2. Minimum lot width - One hundred fifty feet (150').
3. Minimum lot depth - One hundred fifty feet (150').
(c)
Maximum height
.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 250/350
1. Three (3) stories.
2. HVAC equipment, roof gables, vent stakes and chimneys or mechanical rooms may project upto twelve feet (12') beyond maximum building height.
(d)
Maximum lot coverage
. Seventy-five percent (75%).
(e)
Minimum landscape area
.
1. Ten percent (10%).
2. See landscaping requirements.
(f)
Minimum masonry coverage
. Fifty percent (50%) of exterior facade with exposure to a street, unlessconforming to branded business franchise building standards.
(g)
Parking regulations
. See off-street parking and loading standards.
(h)
Other regulations
. [Reserved.]
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT REGULATIONS
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 10-300, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.55 “PD” Planned development district .
(A)
Use regulations
. This district is intended to encourage creative development of the land, to provide locations for well-planned comprehensive developments and to accommodate a variety of flexibility in the development patterns of the city.Land use can include well-planned comprehensive single-family housing developments as well as other commercial uses.
(B)
Approval procedures
.
(1) An application for a zoning change to a planned development district, or for approval of a developmentplan in an existing planned development district, shall be submitted in accordance with
section 154.159
of thischapter and
Chapter 153: Subdivision Code
of the City of Jacksboro Code of Ordinances.
(2) The procedures for hearing a request for a zoning change to a planned development district shall be thesame as for a requested change to any other district, except for the requirement of a development planapproval.
(3) Prior to the approval of a development plan, the city council shall request a recommendation from thecommission concerning the proposed plan.
(4) After receiving a report of the Commission's recommendation, the city council shall hold a public hearing toconsider approval of a development plan.
(C)
Development plan standards
.
(1) The development Plan shall clearly indicate all significant features of the proposed development on anaccurate scaled drawing, to include:
(a) The boundaries of the area included in the plan surveyed by a competent licensed engineer orsurveyor.
(b) The total area of the plan.
(c) All recorded or physically existing public and private right-of-way and easement lines located on oradjacent to the plan area.
(d) The approximate topography of the plan area.
(e) The proposed land uses and the approximate location of proposed buildings and other structures onthe plan area site and structures and existing uses adjacent to said site.
(f) The character and approximate density of all proposed uses in the plan area.
(g) The approximate location and dimensions of all parking areas, malls, water bodies, open areas andrecreational areas.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 251/350
(h) All streets, alleys, ways, including walkways, dedicated to public use, and the location of all utilities.
(i) All areas reserved for common ownership with an indication of the particular properties, the owners ofwhich will share the common ownership.
(j) The location and type of walls, fences, screen planting and landscaping.
(k) A plan, including side elevation drawings, showing location, size, height, orientation and design of allsigns.
(l) In multifamily, townhouse and commercial sections of the plan the location of each outside facility forwaste disposal.
(m) A development schedule, indicating the following:
1. The estimated date when development construction in the plan area shall commence;
2. The stages, if any, in which the plan area will be developed and the estimated date each stagewill commence;
3. The estimated date of completion of each stage in the development; and
4. The area and location of common open space that will be developed at each stage.
(2) The development plan shall clearly indicate that the proposed development will be in complete accordancewith all provisions of the applicable planned development district regulations.
(3) Upon receipt of an approved development plan, the city secretary shall register with the county clerk areproducible copy thereof.
(4) All development plans registered and recorded thereof, shall hereunder be binding upon the applicantthereof, his successors and assigns, and control all building permits.
(5) Prior to issuance of any building permits, the property shall be platted in accordance with the subdivisionordinance and platting policies of the commission and the city.
(D)
Use regulations
. A building or premises in this zoning district shall be used only for the following purposes:
(1) All uses permitted in the following districts:
(a) “SF-1” Single-family residential district R-9.6.
(b) “SF-2” Single-family residential district R-7.0.
(c) “MF-M” Multifamily residential district - medium density.
(d) “LC” Light commercial district.
(2) Churches, schools, parks, community centers and public or private utility facilities necessary to servebasic neighborhood units.
(3) Commercial uses and other non-residential permitted uses shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of thegross area of the project.
(E)
Area regulations
.
(1) The area regulations of all use districts applicable to planned development districts shall be the same asthose regulations which govern said uses in the most restrictive districts in which such uses are permitted,except as otherwise provided by specific planned development district regulations.
(2) The minimum area of a planned development district project shall be eight (8) acres.
(F)
Special set-back and yard regulations
.
(1) The minimum setback adjacent to a state highway either federally numbered or state numbered, shall beforty (40) feet from the right-of-way line.
(2) The minimum set-back adjacent to any federally numbered highway shall be one hundred (100) feet forany portion of any building which exceeds one story in height.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 252/350
(3) Yards on the boundaries of the “PD” district and abutting property not within the district shall be no lessthan the immediately adjacent required yard of such abutting property.
(G)
Special conditions
.
(1) No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any of the commercial uses permitted in theapproved development plan until the completion of at least forty percent (40%) of the total number of dwellingunits in the approved development plan.
(2) The permanent character of common open space lands shall be insured by private reservation for the useand benefit of residents, by dedication to public use, or by a combination thereof. The owner shall maintaincommon open spaces not dedicated to public use thereof. Land required for common open space shall notinclude the following:
(a) Areas reserved for the exclusive use and benefit of an individual tenant or owner.
(b) Dedicated streets or other public rights-of-way.
(c) Parking facilities, private streets, loading or storage areas.
(3) Sign regulations:
(a) In this district, no sign shall be erected, placed, displayed, located or altered, except when inaccordance with the requirements of the Development Plan.
(b) The size, height, character and spacing of signs in planned development district shall not exceed themaximum as provided in
sections 154.85
-
154.108
sign regulations hereof, unless specifically approved asa part of the development plan.
(4) No building permit shall be issued and no use of land or buildings shall be made in the district until thesame have been approved as a part of a final development plan in compliance with the procedures inaccordance with the terms and conditions provided in this section.
(Ord. O-02-2020, art. 11, passed 3-23-20)
PART THREE - OTHER REQUIREMENTS
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS
Sec. 154.65 Purpose.
Off-street parking and loading regulations are designed to lessen congestion on public streets, to facilitate adequateprovisions of transportation and to provide adequate access for public safety equipment. (Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 12-100,passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.66 Off-street parking regulations - residential.
(A) All residential lots in zoning districts SF-1, SF-2 and MH-1 shall provide a minimum of two (2) parking spaces per lot.
(B) All required parking spaces shall be provided on the same site as the use it serves.
(C) All required parking spaces shall be provided on concrete, asphaltic concrete or other improved surface.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 12-200, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.67 Off-street parking regulations - non-residential and mf districts.
(A) All required parking spaces, driveways, maneuvering areas, traffic lanes and loading areas shall be provided onconcrete, asphaltic concrete or other improved surfaces.
(B) All parking lots shall utilize continuous concrete curb and gutter sections to delineate the outside boundaries of thelot, any and all landscape medians, driveways or other areas not accessible to vehicular traffic.
(C) For firefighting and safety purposes, free access through to adjacent parking areas shall be provided betweenadjoining parcels or building sites.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 253/350
(D) All required parking spaces shall be provided on the same site as the use it serves unless the board of zoningadjustment grants a special exception. Parking spaces shall be permanently and clearly marked by stripes, buttons, tiles,curbs, barriers or other approved methods. Non-permanent markings, such as paint, shall be regularly maintained toensure continuous clear identification of the space.
(E) Each standard 90-degree off-street parking space shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet in width and twenty (20) feet indepth. Truck spaces shall be a minimum of forty (40) feet by fifty (50). Traffic lanes shall support bi-directional traffic and bea minimum of twenty-four (24) feet in width. Other parking standards and arrangements are shown in appendix A, parkingillustrations.
(F) All parking and loading spaces, and vehicle sales areas on private property, shall have a vehicle stopping deviceinstalled so as to prevent the parking of motor vehicles in any required landscaped areas, and to prevent any parkedvehicle from overhanging a public right-of-way line or a public sidewalk. Parking shall not be permitted to encroach uponthe public right-of-way in any case. All vehicle maneuvering shall take place on-site and no public right-of-way shall be usedfor backing or maneuvering into or out of a parking space (See appendix A, parking illustrations).
(G) Handicap parking space(s) shall be provided according to the state program for the elimination of architecturalbarriers.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 12-300, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.68 Off-street loading regulations - all districts.
All retail, commercial and industrial structures having five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of gross floor area shallprovide and maintain an off-street area for the loading and unloading of merchandise and goods at a ratio of at least one (1)space for the first twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of gross floor area and one space for each additional twentythousand (20,000) square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof. A loading area shall consist of an area of a minimum oftwelve (12) feet by thirty (30) feet. All drives and approaches shall provide adequate space and clearances to allow for themaneuvering of trucks off-street. Each site shall provide a designated maneuvering area for trucks (See appendix A, parkingillustrations). (Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 12-400, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.69 Parking requirements.
Off-street parking spaces in accordance with the following requirements shall be provided at the time any building orstructure is erected or structurally altered.
(1) Automotive, bus or truck repair, parking or storage area, or garage - One (1) space for each two hundred(200) square feet of gross floor area with a minimum of five (5) spaces.
(2) Bank, savings and loan or similar financial institution - One (1) space for each three hundred (300) squarefeet of gross floor area.
(3) Bed and breakfast facility - One (1) space per guest room plus the requirements for a normal residentialuse.
(4) Bowling alley - Six (6) spaces for each lane.
(5) Business or professional office (general) - One (1) space per three hundred (300) square feet of grossfloor area except as otherwise specified herein.
(6) Churches - One (1) space for each three (3) seats in the main body of the church for worshipers.
(7) Clinics or doctors' offices - One (1) space for each three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area witha minimum of five (5) spaces.
(8) Commercial (outdoor) amusement - Twenty (20) spaces plus one (1) space for each one hundred (100)square feet of gross floor area over one thousand (1,000) square feet.
(9) Convalescent home or home for aged - One (1) space for each three (3) beds.
(10) Dance hall, assembly or exhibition hall without fixed seats - One (1) space for each two-hundred (200)square feet of gross floor area.
(11) Day nursery - One (1) space per five (5) pupils plus one (1) space per teacher.
(12) Gasoline service station - Minimum of six (6) spaces.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 254/350
(13) Golf course - Minimum of thirty (30) spaces
(14) High school - One (1) space for each classroom, laboratory or instruction area plus one (1) space foreach one and one half (1 1/2) students accommodated in the school.
(15) Hospitals - One (1) space for every two (2) beds.
(16) Hotel or motel - One (1) space for each room, unit or guest accommodations plus requirements for clubs,restaurants and other uses.
(17) Institutions of a philanthropic nature - Ten (10) spaces plus one (1) space for each employee.
(18) Library or museum - Ten (10) spaces plus one (1) space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floorarea.
(19) Manufacturing, processing or repairing - One (1) space for each two (2) employees or one (1) space foreach one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area, whichever is greater.
(20) Offices, general - One (1) space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area (minimum fivespaces).
(21) Places of public assembly not listed - One (1) space for each three (3) seats provided.
(22) Recreational, private or commercial area or building (other than listed) - One (1) space for every three (3)persons to be normally accommodated in the establishment.
(23) Restaurant or cafeteria - One (1) space for every three (3) seats under maximum seating arrangement(minimum of five spaces).
(24) Retail or personal service - One (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area (minimumof five spaces).
(25) Schools, elementary or junior high - One (1) space for each classroom plus one (1) space for each six (6)seats in any auditorium, gymnasium or other place of assembly.
(26) Storage or warehousing - One (1) space for each two (2) employees or one (1) space for each onethousand (1,000) square feet of floor area, whichever is greater.
(27) Theaters, meeting rooms and places of public assembly - One (1) space for every three (3) seats.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 12-500, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.70 Special off-street parking regulations.
(A) In computing the parking requirements of any building or development, the total parking requirements shall be thesum of the specific parking space requirements for each class of use included in the building or development.
(B) In all residential districts, no parking space, garage or carport, or other automobile storage space or structure shall beused for storage of any truck, truck trailer or van except panel and pickup trucks not exceeding one (1) ton capacity.
(C) Floor area of structures devoted to off-street parking of vehicles shall be excluded in computing the off-street parkingrequirements of any use.
(D) No open parking space or surfaced area shall be located nearer than two (2) feet to the side lot line.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 12-600, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.71 Parking requirements for new and unlisted uses.
(A) Where questions arise concerning the minimum off-street parking requirements for any use not specifically listed, therequirements may be interpreted by the city manager as those of a similar listed use.
(B) Where a determination of the minimum parking requirements cannot be readily ascertained for new or unlisted usesaccording to above or where uncertainty exists, the planning and zoning commission shall establish the minimum off-streetparking requirements.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 12-700, passed 3-23-20)
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 255/350
Sec. 154.72 Fire lanes and hydrants.
Fire lane and hydrant easements shall be provided in accordance with the standard fire prevention code and/or as required bythe fire marshal. (Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 12-800, passed 3-23-20)
SIGN REGULATIONS
Sec. 154.85 Purpose.
The regulations balance the need to protect the public safety and welfare, the need for a well maintained and attractivecommunity, and the need for adequate identification, communication and advertising. The regulations for signs have thefollowing specific objectives:
(1) To ensure that signs are designed, constructed, installed and maintained according to minimum standardsto safeguard life, health, property and public welfare;
(2) To allow and promote positive conditions for sign communications;
(3) To reflect and support the desired ambience and development patterns of the various zones, and promotean attractive environment;
(4) To allow for adequate and effective signs whose dimensional characteristics further the interests of publicsafety and the needs of the motorist, where signs are viewed from a street or roadway; and
(5) To ensure that the constitutionally guaranteed right of free expression is protected.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 13-100, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.86 Scope.
(A)
General
. The requirements of this code apply to all signs, sign structures, awnings, and other types of sign deviceslocated within the City of Jacksboro, except as specified in subsection (B), below.
(B) Signs and sign structures located within the City of Jacksboro that cannot be seen from a public roadway are notsubject to the size, height, locations and number regulations listed herein. These signs must however comply with safetyand construction building code provisions in the city.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 13-200, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.87 Hierarchy of regulations.
(A) Where there is a conflict between specific sign regulations and the base or general sign regulations of this Code, thespecific sign regulations supersede the base sign regulations.
(B) Other conflicts. Where there is a conflict between a land use regulation and a structural regulations, or other conflictsnot otherwise addressed by this section, the most restrictive applies.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 13-300, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.87 Definitions.
Abandoned sign
. A sign that no longer identifies or advertises an ongoing business, product, location, service, idea, oractivity conducted on the premises on which the sign is located. Whether a sign has been abandoned or not shall bedetermined by the intent of the owner of the sign and shall be governed by applicable state case law and statutory law onabandoned structures.
Alteration
. A change in the size or shape of an existing sign. Copy or color change of an existing sign is not an alteration.Changing or replacing a sign face or panel is not an alteration.
Animated sign
. A sign employing actual motion, the illusion of motion and/or color changes achieved through mechanical,electrical, or electronic means. Animated signs, which are differentiated from changeable signs as defined and regulated bythis code, include the following types:
(1)
Environmentally activated
. Animated signs or devices motivated by wind, thermal changes, or othernatural environmental input. Includes spinners, pinwheels, pennant strings, and/or other devices or displays that
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 256/350
respond to naturally occurring external motivation.
(2)
Mechanically activated
. Animated signs characterized by repetitive motion and/or rotation activated by amechanical system powered by electric motors and other mechanically induced means.
(3)
Electrically activated
. Animated signs producing the illusion of movement by means of electronic,electrical, or electromechanical input and/or illumination capable of simulating movement through employment ofthe characteristics of one or both of the classifications noted below:
(a)
Flashing
. Animated signs or animated portions of signs whose illumination is characterized by arepetitive cycle in which the period of illumination is either the same as or less than the period of non-illumination. For the purposes of this chapter, flashing will not be defined as occurring if the cyclical periodbetween on-off phases of illumination exceeds four (4) seconds.
(b)
Patterned illusionary movement
. Animated signs or animated portions of signs whose illumination ischaracterized by simulated movement through alternate or sequential activation of various illuminatedelements for the purpose of producing repetitive light patterns designed to appear in some form of constantmotion.
Architectural projection
. Any projection from a building that is decorative and/or functional and not intended foroccupancy, and that extends beyond the face of an exterior wall of a building but that does not include signs as definedherein. See also: awning; back-lit awning; and canopy, attached and freestanding.
Awning
. An architectural projection or shelter projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a building andcomposed of a covering of rigid or non-rigid materials and/or fabric on a supporting framework that may be eitherpermanent or retractable.
Awning sign
. A sign displayed on or attached flat against the surface or surfaces of an awning. See also: Wall or FasciaSign. An awning that contains a “sign” section or copy area shall comply with the applicable sign area requirements forparallel signs (see
table 3
) contained in this code. Only the sign or copy area displayed on an awning shall be used todetermine the permitted sign area - the entire awning shall not be included in a Sign Area calculation. Refer also to
section154.88
for visual reference example.
Back-lit awning
. An awning comprised of covering material exhibiting the characteristic of luminosity obtained by meansof a source of illumination contained within its framework.
Banner
. A flexible substrate on which copy or graphics may be displayed.
Banner sign
. A sign utilizing a banner as its display surface.
Bench sign
. A sign applied or affixed to the seat or back of a bench.
Billboard
. See off-premises sign and commercial outdoor advertising sign.
Building facade
. That portion of any exterior elevation of a building extending vertically from grade to the top of a parapetwall or eaves and horizontally across the entire width of the building elevation.
Building sign
. A sign that is applied or affixed to a building.
Canopy (attached)
. A multi-sided overhead structure or architectural projection supported by attachment to a building onone or more sides and either cantilevered from such building or also supported by columns at additional points. Thesurface(s) and/or soffit of an attached canopy may be illuminated by means of internal or external sources of light. Similar toa marquee.
Canopy (freestanding)
. A multi-sided overhead structure supported by columns, but not enclosed by walls. The surface(s)and or soffit of a freestanding canopy may be illuminated by means of internal or external sources of light.
Canopy sign
. A sign affixed to the visible surface(s) of an attached or freestanding canopy. May be internally or externallyilluminated. Similar to a marquee sign. Refer also to
section 154.88
herein for visual reference example.
Changeable sign
. A sign with the capability of content change by means of manual or remote input, includes the followingtypes:
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 257/350
(1)
Manually activated
. Changeable sign whose message copy or content can be changed manually on adisplay surface.
(2)
Electrically activated
. Changeable sign whose message copy or content can be changed by means ofremote electrically energized on-off switching combinations of alphabetic or pictographic components arrangedon a display surface. Illumination may be integral to the components, such as characterized by lamps or otherlight-emitting devices; or it may be from an external light source designed to reflect off the changeablecomponent display. See also electronic message center.
Channel letter (open faced)
. A dimensional letter with a back and sides but no face at the front of the letter. Open facedchannel letters may be non-lit, externally illuminated, or illuminated by a light source contained inside the open channel ofthe letter itself, such as a neon tube.
Channel letter (internally illuminated)
. A dimensional letter with a back, sides and a translucent front face capable oftransmitting light from an internal light source within the letter.
Channel letter (reverse)
. A dimensional letter with a face and sides but no back, opposite to an open faced channel letter.A reverse channel letter has an open channel facing the wall or building to which it is affixed. A reverse channel letter maycontain a source of illumination designed to project lighting against the surface behind the letter, commonly referred to as abacklit channel letter; also referenced as a halo or silhouette lighted channel letter. The face of a reverse channel letter doesnot illuminate.
Cladding
. A non-structural covering designed to conceal the actual structural supports of a sign. See also pole or pyloncover.
Commercial outdoor advertising sign
. A temporary off-premises sign erected, maintained or used in the outdoorenvironment for the purpose of providing copy area for commercial or noncommercial messages.
Conforming sign
. A sign that is legally installed in conformance with all prevailing jurisdictional laws and ordinances.
Copy
. The graphic content or message of a sign.
Copy area of sign
. The actual area of the sign copy as applied to any background. Copy area on any individual backgroundmay be expressed as the sum of the geometrically computed shape or shapes encompassing separate individual letters,words, or graphic elements on the background. See
sections 154.89
and
154.90
for computational methodology.
Dimensional letter, symbol, or graphic
. A letter, symbol, or graphic that is three dimensional in character, containingheight, width, and depth.
Directional sign
. Any sign that is designed and erected for the purpose of providing direction and/or orientation forpedestrian or vehicular traffic.
Display time
. The amount of time a message and/or graphic is displayed on an electronic message sign.
Dissolve
. A mode of message transition on an electronic message sign accomplished by varying the light intensity orpattern, in which the first message gradually appears to dissipate and lose legibility with the gradual appearance andlegibility of the second message.
Double-faced Sign
. A sign with two faces, back to back.
Dynamic frame effect
. An electronic message sign frame effect in which the illusion of motion and/or animation is used.
Electric sign
. Any sign activated or illuminated by means of electrical energy.
Electronic message center or sign (EMC)
. An electrically activated changeable sign whose variable message and/orgraphic presentation capability can be electronically programmed by computer from a remote location. Also known as anEMC. EMCs typically use light emitting diodes (LEDs) as a lighting source. (See also following terms principally associatedwith electronic message centers: display time, dissolve, dynamic frame effect, fade, frame, frame effect, scroll, transition,travel).
Externally illuminated sign
. See illuminated sign.
Exterior sign
. Any sign placed outside a building.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 258/350
Facade
. See building facade.
Fade
. A mode of message transition on an electronic message sign accomplished by varying the light intensity, where thefirst message gradually reduces intensity to the point of not being legible and the subsequent message gradually increasesintensity to the point of legibility.
Fascia sign
. See wall sign.
Flashing sign
. See animated sign, electrically activated.
Font
. A set of letters, numerals, symbols, or shapes conforming to a specific set of design criteria.
Frame
. A complete, static display screen on an electronic message sign.
Frame effect
. A visual effect on an electronic message sign applied to a single frame. See also dynamic frame effect.
Freestanding sign
. A sign principally supported by one or more columns, poles, or braces placed in or upon the ground.May also be referenced as a ground or monument sign. Refer also to
section 154.88
for visual reference examples.
Frontage (property)
. The length of the property line(s) of any single premises along either a public way or other propertieson which it borders.
Frontage (building)
. The length of an exterior building wall or structure of a single premises along either a public way orother properties that it faces.
Ground sign
. See freestanding sign.
Illuminance
. The amount of light falling upon a real or imaginary surface, commonly called “light level” or “illumination.”
Illuminated sign
. A sign characterized by the use of artificial light, either projecting through its surface(s) (internally ortrans-illuminated); or reflecting off its surface(s) (externally illuminated).
Internally illuminated sign
. See illuminated sign.
Interior sign
. Any sign placed within a building, but not including window signs as defined by this chapter. Interior signs,with the exception of window signs as defined, are not regulated by this chapter.
Listed sign
. A sign manufactured and labeled in accordance with specifications promulgated by a recognized testinglaboratory designed to assure compliance with applicable American National Standards (ANSI) and/or the NationalElectrical Code (NEC).
Luminance
. The light that is emitted by or reflected from a surface.
Mansard
. A roof-like facade comparable to an exterior building wall. See section 14-800 [
section 154.91
] for visualreference.
Marquee
. See canopy (attached).
Marquee sign
. See canopy sign.
Multiple-faced sign
. A sign containing three (3) or more faces.
Non-conforming sign
. A sign that was legally installed by permit in conformance with all municipal sign regulations andordinances in effect at the time of its installation, but which may no longer comply with subsequently enacted laws andordinances having jurisdiction relative to the sign.
Non-conforming use
. A continued and lawful use of property, including a sign or signs lawfully installed in accordancewith laws or ordinances prevailing at the time of installation.
Off-premises sign
. See outdoor advertising sign. See also, wayfinding sign.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 259/350
On-premises sign
. A sign erected, maintained or used in the outdoor environment for the purpose of the display ofmessages appurtenant to the use of, products sold on, or the sale or lease of the property on which it is displayed.
Outdoor advertising sign
. A temporary sign erected, maintained or used in the outdoor environment for the purpose of thedisplay of commercial or noncommercial messages not appurtenant to the use of, products sold on, or the sale or lease of theproperty on which it is displayed. May also be referenced as an off-premises sign, billboard, or commercial outdooradvertising sign.
Parallel sign
. See wall sign.
Parapet
. The extension of a building facade above the line of the structural roof.
Perpendicular sign
. See also freestanding sign; see also projecting sign.
Pole cover or pylon cover
. An enclosure designed to conceal poles and/or other structural supports of a sign. See alsocladding.
Pole sign
. See freestanding sign.
Political sign
. A temporary sign intended to advance a political statement, cause, or candidate for office.
Portable sign
. Any cord-connected sign not permanently attached to the ground and can be removed without the use oftools.
Projecting sign
. A sign other than a wall sign that is attached to or projects more than eighteen (18) inches from a buildingface or wall or from a structure whose primary purpose is other than the support of a sign. Refer also to section 14-500[
section 154.88
] for visual reference example.
Pylon sign
. See freestanding sign.
Real estate sign
. A temporary sign advertising the sale, lease, or rental of the property or premises upon which it islocated.
Revolving sign
. A sign that has the capability to revolve three hundred and sixty degrees (360º) about an axis. See also:animated sign, mechanically activated.
Roof line
. The uppermost line of the roof of a building or, in the case of an extended facade or parapet, the uppermost pointof said facade or parapet.
Roof sign
. A sign mounted on the main roof portion of a building or on the uppermost edge of a parapet wall of a buildingand which is wholly or partially supported by such building. Signs mounted on mansard facades, pent eaves, andarchitectural projections such as canopies or marquees shall not be considered to be roof signs. Refer also to section 14-800[
section 154.91
] for visual reference examples of roof signs, and comparison of differences between roof and fascia signs.
Scroll
. A mode of message transition on an electronic message sign in which the message appears to move vertically acrossthe display surface.
Sign
. Any device visible from a public place whose essential purpose and design is to convey either commercial ornoncommercial messages by means of graphic presentation of alphabetic or pictorial symbols or representations.Noncommercial flags or any other flags displayed from flagpoles or staffs will not be considered to be signs.
Sign structure
. Any structure designed for the support of a sign.
Sign area
. The area of the smallest geometric figure, or the sum of the combination of regular geometric figures, whichcomprise the sign face. The area of any double sided or “V” shaped sign shall be the area of the largest single face only. Thearea of a sphere shall be computed as the area of a circle. The area of all other multiple sided signs shall be computed as fifty(50) percent of the sum of the areas of all faces of the sign. See
sections 154.89
and
154.90
for computational methodologyfor various sign area configurations.
Sign copy
. The letters, numerals, figures, symbols, logos and graphic elements comprising the content or message of a sign,exclusive of numerals identifying a street address only.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 260/350
Sign face
. The surface upon, against or through which the sign copy is displayed or illustrated, not including structuralsupports, architectural features of a building or sign structure, nonstructural thematic or decorative trim, or any areas that areseparated from the background surface upon which the sign copy is displayed by a distinct delineation, such as a reveal orborder. Refer to
sections 154.89
and
154.90
for sign face computational illustrations.
(1) In the case of panel or cabinet type signs, the sign face shall include the entire area of the sign panel,cabinet or face substrate upon which the sign copy is displayed or illustrated, but not open space betweenseparate panels or cabinets.
(2) In the case of signs painted on a building, or individual letters or graphic elements affixed to a building orstructure, the sign face shall comprise the sum of the geometric figures or combination of regular geometricfigures drawn closest to the edge of the letters or separate graphic elements comprising the sign copy, but notthe open space between separate groupings of sign copy on the same building or structure.
(3) In the case of sign copy enclosed within a painted or illuminated border, or displayed on a backgroundcontrasting in color with the color of the building or structure, the sign face shall comprise the area within thecontrasting background, or within the painted or illuminated border.
Site
. The ground area legally designated as a zoning lot, which may be categorized as a permanent parcel (a lot of record),multiple lots of record, or a portion of a lot of record.
Special event sign
. A temporary sign pertaining to any civic, patriotic, or special event of general public interest.
Temporary sign
. A sign intended to display either commercial or noncommercial messages of a transitory or temporarynature. Portable signs or any sign not permanently embedded in the ground, or not permanently affixed to a building or signstructure that is permanently embedded in the ground, are considered temporary signs.
Trans-illuminated sign
. See internally illuminated sign.
Transition
. A visual effect used on an Electronic Message Sign to change from one message to another.
Travel
. A mode of message transition on an electronic message sign in which the message appears to move horizontallyacross the display surface.
Under canopy sign or under marquee sign
. A sign attached to the underside of a canopy or marquee.
V sign
. A sign containing two faces of equal size, positioned at an interior angle subtending less than one hundred seventy-nine degrees (179°) at the point of juncture of the individual faces.
Wall or fascia sign
. A sign that is in any manner affixed to any exterior wall of a building or structure and that projects notmore than eighteen (18) inches from the building or structure wall. Also includes signs affixed to architectural projectionsthat project from a building provided the copy area of such signs remains on a parallel plane to the face of the buildingfacade or to the face or faces of the architectural projection to which it is affixed. Refer also to
section 154.88
for visualreference examples, and comparison examples of differences between wall or fascia signs and roof signs.
Wayfinding sign
. A sign, frequently off-premises, specifically designed to provide directional or destination information.See also, off-premises sign.
Window sign
. A sign affixed to the surface of a window with its message intended to be visible to the exterior environment.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 13-400, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.88 Typical on-premises sign types.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 261/350
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 13-500, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.89 Area computational methodology/ground signs.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 262/350
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 13-600, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.90 Area computational methodology/freestanding and wall / fascia signs.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 263/350
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 13-700, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.91 Comparison: roof and wall sign distinctions.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 264/350
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 13-800, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.92 Exemptions.
The following are exempt from the regulations of this Code, but may be subject to other Codes enacted by the City ofJacksboro where applicable:
(1) Signs which are not visible from a public roadway; however, these signs must comply with any buildingand construction provisions enacted by the City of Jacksboro.
(2) Signs inside a building.
(3) Signs carved into a building or raised in integral relief on a building.
Clarification notes: Signs or letters that are raised must be a physical part of the building facade to qualify under this provision; theymust be a part of the physical construction of the building materials comprising the facade; letters or signs that are merely attached tothe exterior facade of the building do not qualify, even if the same finish or color.
(4) Signs required by federal or state law.
(5) Flags and individual pennants (not on a string).
(6) Signs required by municipal authority.
(7) Painted and/or applied wall accents and decorations.
(8) Illuminated building accents and decorations.
(9) Public art, including permitted original art murals.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 265/350
(10) Name and address - Up to two (2) signs indicating address, number and/or name of occupants of thepremises, that do not exceed two (2) square feet in area per side, and do not include any commercialadvertising or other identification.
(11) Decals - Decals and/or logos affixed to windows or door glass panels, such as those indicatingmembership in a business group or identifying credit cards accepted at the establishment.
(12) Handicapped parking space - Signs not exceeding two (2) square feet in area reserving parking forhandicapped individuals.
(13) Private drive signs - On-premises private drive signs are limited to one (1) per driveway entrance, notexceeding two (2) square feet in area.
(14) Public signs - Signs erected by government agencies or utilities, including traffic, utility, safety, railroadcrossing and identification signs for public facilities and any signs erected by the City of Jacksboro.
(15) Security and warning signs - On-premises signs regulating the use of the premises, such as “notrespassing,” “no hunting” and “no soliciting” signs that do not exceed one (1) sign two (2) square feet in area inresidential areas and one (1) sign five (5) square feet in area in commercial and industrial zones. Theselimitations shall not apply to the posting of conventional “no trespassing” signs in accordance with state law.
Clarification notes:
In order to be constitutionally sound, a Code should keep the list of “exempted” signs to an absolute minimum if the exemptions arebased on:
- differentiating between uses and/or who is speaking, as this would represent a control of content based on the status ofthe “speaker”;
- or if there can be some perceived discrimination between certain types of signs that are exempt from the Code, andothers that fall within the parameters of the Code. A properly drafted Sign Code will avoid, as often as possible, makingdistinctions between uses and/or speakers.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 13-900, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.93 Prohibitions.
The following signs are prohibited:
(1) Signs containing strobe lights.
(2) Abandoned sign structures, as defined by this code.
(3) Signs placed on or painted on a motor vehicle or trailer parked with the primary purpose of providingsignage not otherwise allowed by the code; prohibited is any sign displayed on a parked trailer or truck or othervehicle where the primary purpose of the vehicle is to advertise a product, service business, or other activity.This regulation shall permit the use of business logos, identification or advertising on vehicles primarily andactively used for business purposes and/or personal transportation.
(4) Signs that imitate or resemble official traffic lights, signs or signals or signs that interfere with theeffectiveness of any official traffic light, sign or signal.
(5) Mechanically moving signs - An environmentally activated sign or other display with actual mechanicalmotion powered by natural, manual, mechanical, electrical or other means, including but not limited to pennantstrings, streamers, spinners, propellers, and searchlights.
(6) Flashing signs - See definitions. For the purposes of this code, a sign that has a change rate or dwell timeof four (4) seconds or longer does not fit within the prohibition noted herein.
(7) Inflatable signs and other permanent objects - Signs and other objects which are inflated, including, butnot limited to, balloons. Balloons may be permitted in temporary non-commercial situations; for instance: theyare permitted for special occasions at a residence.
(8) Posters and handbills - Any signs affixed to any structures, trees or other natural vegetation, rocks orpoles.
(9) Roof signs - Roof signs, except for those permitted by special exception in commercial and industrialzones. See
section 154.91
.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 266/350
(10) Simulated traffic signs and obstructions - Any sign which may be confused with, or obstruct the view of,any authorized traffic sign or signal, obstruct the sight-distance triangle at any road intersection or extend intothe public right-of-way.
(11) A-frame/wheeled signs - Any portable “A” frame or similar portable sign is prohibited except as describedunder temporary signs below.
(12) Signs adversely affecting safety. Signs which prevent free ingress or egress from any door, window, fireescape, or that prevent free access from one part of a roof to any other part. No sign other than a safety signshall be attached to a stand-pipe or fire escape.
(13) Sign emissions - No sign which emits smoke, visible vapors, particles, sound or odor shall be permitted.Open flames used to attract public attention to a place of business or to an advertising sign shall not bepermitted.
(14) Mirrors. No mirror device shall be used as part of a sign.
Clarification notes:
This model code recommends that cities include language that makes “prohibited” signs general in nature; all municipalities havedifferent regulatory and community needs in regard to available signs types. “regulation” over “prohibition” is always preferred, from alegal and constitutional perspective. This commentary to the USSC Model Sign Code merely suggests that the above noted sign typesare often included by cities in their sign code “prohibitions” section.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 13-1000, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.94 General rules for reading and applying the code language.
(A)
Reading and applying the code
. Literal readings of the code language will be used. Regulations are no more or lessstrict than as stated. Application of the regulations that are consistent with the rules of this code are non-discretionaryactions of the building inspector and/or code enforcement officer to implement the code. The action of the building inspectorand/or code enforcement officer is final.
(B)
Situations where the code is silent
. Where the code is silent, or where the rules of this code do not provide a basis forconcluding that a sign is allowed, said sign is therefore prohibited.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 13-1100, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.95 Terms.
(A)
Defining words
. Words used in the code have their dictionary meaning unless they are listed and describedotherwise. Definitions: Words listed in the definitions chapter have the specific meaning stated, unless the context clearlyindicates another meaning. The word “sign” in this code always refers to an “on-premises” sign.
(B)
Tenses and usage
.
(1) Words used in the singular include the plural. The reverse is also true.
(2) Words used in the present tense include the future tense. The reverse is also true.
(3) The words “shall,” “must,” “will,” and “may not” are mandatory.
(4) “May” is permissive.
(5) When used with numbers, “Up to x,” “Not more than x” and “ a maximum of x” all include x.
(C)
Conjunctions
. Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following conjunctions have the following meanings:
(1) “And” indicates that all connected items or provisions apply;
(2) “Or” indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply singly or in combination;
(3) “Either...or” indicates that the connected items or provisions apply singly, but not in combination.
(D)
Lists
. Lists of items that state “including the following,” “such as,” or similar language are not limited to just thoseitems. The lists are intended to provide examples, but not to be exhaustive of all possibilities.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 13-1200, passed 3-23-20)
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 267/350
Sec. 154.96 Sign face area.
(A)
Sign cabinets
. The area of sign faces enclosed in frames or cabinets is determined based on the outer dimensions ofthe frame or cabinet.
(B)
Double sided signs
. Only one (1) side of a double sided sign is counted in determining the area of sign faces. Wherethe two (2) sides are not of equal size, the larger of the two (2) sides is used for the determination of sign area. The area ofmultiple-faced signs in which the interior angle formed by the faces is greater than ninety-one degrees (91°) shall beexpressed as the sum of the areas of all the faces, except for multiple-faced signs containing faces that are configuredback to back, in which case the area of the faces configured back to back will be calculated according to the rule for doublefaced signs.
(C)
Round, oval and irregularly shaped signs
. To be measured based on the appropriate mathematical formula to obtainthe sign area for a circle, an oval or irregularly shaped sign.
(D)
Calculating sign area
.
(1)
Signs containing integral background areas
. The area of a sign containing a clearly defined backgroundarea shall be calculated based on the area of the smallest standard geometric shape or combination ofgeometric shapes capable of encompassing the perimeter of the background area of the sign. In the case ofsigns in which multiple background areas are separated by open space, sign area shall be calculated based onthe sum of the areas of all separate background areas, calculated as referenced above, but without regard forany open space between the separate background areas.
(2)
Signs without integral background areas
. In instances in which a sign consists of individual elements suchas letters, symbols, or other graphic objects or representations that are painted, attached to, or otherwise affixedto a surface such as a wall, window, canopy, awning, architectural projection, or to any surface not specificallydesigned to serve as a sign background, the sign area shall be based on the sum of the individual areas of thesmallest geometric shape or combination of geometric shapes capable of encompassing the perimeters of theindividual elements comprising the sign.
(3)
Awnings and marquees
. When graphics or sign copy is incorporated into an awning, the sign area isdetermined by computing the area of a standard imaginary geometric shape or combination of shapes drawnaround the sign copy area or graphics. When the ends of awnings or marquees are parallel and containgraphics or sign copy, only one side is counted in addition to the sign face area on the front.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 13-1300, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.97 Height of signs.
(A) The overall height of a freestanding sign or sign structure is measured from the lowest point of the ground directlybelow the sign to the highest point of the freestanding sign or sign structure.
(B) Exception: Where a freestanding sign or sign structure is mounted along a roadway that has a higher grade level ascompared to the grade level directly below the freestanding sign or sign structure, then the freestanding sign or structure'sheight will be measured from the roadway grade level to the highest point of the freestanding sign or sign structure. Seefigure A.
Figure A
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 268/350
Clarification notes:
The intent of this section is to describe how freestanding sign height is determined: by measuring from the grade level directly beneaththe freestanding sign to the top of the sign. An exception is included in order to assist adopting jurisdictions in conserving resources andto avoid unnecessary Zoning Appeals, as illustrated below.
If a freestanding sign is installed along a roadway that is elevated as compared to grade level around the freestanding sign, then thereis the potential that the freestanding sign will sit too low as compared to motorists on the roadway, and sign visibility and legibility will becompromised. The exception is a reasonable adjustment to address this type of situation administratively via the routine sign permitapplication, and will allow jurisdictions to avoid the bureaucratic time and expense involved in hearing Zoning Appeals filed to addressthe height disparity.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 13-1400, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.98 Standards in residential zones.
(A)
General standards
. standards for permanent on-premises signs in the residential, apartment, multifamily, agriculturaland sub-division development zones are described below and on
table 1
.
(B)
Residential properties
. All single-family residential properties that are located in residential zoning districts arepermitted signs not to exceed eight (8) square feet in total sign area per road frontage. Corner lots and lots with frontage onmore than one street are entitled to eight (8) square feet per frontage. This sign area allowance covers but is not limited to:address signs, home occupation signs, lawn signs, real estate signs, contractor signs, and political signs. Signs may befreestanding, mounted to a permanent building structure or displayed in a window. Trees, rocks or other naturally occurringlandscape features may not be used to support a residential sign.
Clarification notes:
It is the intent of this model code to give a specific overall sign area allowance to a residential property, and no more. It is then up to theindividual property owner how the overall sign area is apportioned. This relieves the city from the responsibility of making differentiationsand distinctions between types of signs and speech on residential properties and its attendant constitutional implications. The ModelCode recommends a maximum area of eight (8) square feet as a reasonable allowance that will meet most residential sign needs -particularly if there is more than one sign involved, if even on a temporary basis (for instance, a political sign and a contractor's sign).
(C) Subdivisions, apartment, multifamily dwellings and condominium complexes are permitted a freestanding sign not toexceed sixty-four (64) square feet, and further provided that one (1) such sign shall be permitted for each separate streetand/or separate building frontage occupied by the subdivision, apartment, or condominium complex and/or for each meansof entrance to or exit from the subdivision, apartment, or condominium complex. Wall signs are also permitted not toexceed five (5) percent of the area of the facade in elevation view upon which they are placed.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 269/350
(D) For properties located in a residential zone as described in subsection (C) above, other directional, incidental and/oraccessory signs are also permitted, to be located within the subdivision, complex or multifamily residential development.Such directional, incidental and/or accessory signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in sign area and eight (8) feet inheight (if freestanding).
(E) Other permitted non-residential uses in a residential zone are permitted a freestanding sign not to exceed forty-eight(48) square feet, and further provided that one (1) such sign shall be permitted for each separate street and/or separatebuilding frontage occupied by the permitted use, and for each means of entrance to or exit from the permitted use. Wallsigns are also permitted not to exceed five (5) percent of the area of the facade in elevation view upon which they areplaced.
(F)
Electronic message centers
. EMC's are allowed, by special exception only, on properties with permitted non-residential uses in a residential zone. They are prohibited on residential properties and on subdivision, apartments,multifamily dwellings and condominium properties.
(G)
Animated signs
. As defined by this code, animated signs are prohibited in residential zones.
(H)
Roof signs
. As defined by this code, roof signs are prohibited in residential zones.
Table 1 - Signs in Residential Districts
Types of SignsAllowed
Number of SignsAllowed
Permitted SignArea
Maximum
(if applicable)
Residential propertiesincluding single-familydetached, townhomes
Freestanding or wall
Any number solong as the total SFof all signs doesnot exceed 8 SFper frontage
8 SF
6
'
-0
"
Residentialsubdivisions, apartmentcomplexes, multifamilydwellings,condominiums
Freestanding
One per frontage
64 SF
15
'
-0
"
Wall
One per façade
5% of facade
-----
Incidental or directional
unlimited 6 SF
8
'
-0
"
Permitted nonresidentialuses in residentialzones
Freestanding
One per frontage
48 SF
15
'
-0
"
Wall
One per façade
5% of facade
-----
Incidental or directional
unlimited
6 SF
8
'
-0
"
Electronic message centers are allowed by special exception on properties wherepermitted nonresidential uses in a residential zone are located
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 13-1500, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.99 Standards in office and professional zones.
(A) Any signs permitted in a residential zone that relate to a use permitted in the office and professional zones arepermitted.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 270/350
(B) Signs for any permitted use, office, office development or professional building, including a directory of tenantsengaged in professional and/or commercial activity on the premises. The area of any such sign shall not exceed sixty-four(64) square feet and not more than two (2) such signs shall be permitted on premises held in single and separateownership unless such premises fronts on more than one (1) street in which case two (2) such signs shall be permitted oneach separate street frontage, and further provided that one (1) sign, the area of which shall not exceed sixty-four (64)square feet, shall be permitted for each means of entrance to or exit from the premises.
(C) Unless otherwise regulated by specific reference herein, freestanding signs shall be limited to a height above thegrade level on which they are placed of twelve (12) feet to the top of the sign.
(D) Electronic message centers: EMC's are permitted in office and professional zones.
(E) Animated signs are prohibited in office and professional zones.
(F) Roof signs are prohibited in office and professional zones.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 13-1600, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.100 Standards in commercial and industrial zones.
General standards and sign features: The standards for permanent signs in commercial and industrial zones are as follows.All such signs must conform to the regulations of this section.
(1) Any signs permitted in a residential zone or office and professional zones are permitted in commercial andindustrial zones.
(2) Signs on commercial and industrial properties as regulated by reference to types noted below.
(a) Freestanding signs:
1. Freestanding signs shall be limited to one (1) per property held in single and separateownership except for a property that has frontage on more than one (1) street, in which case one (1)such sign shall be permitted for each separate street frontage. If a property has frontage thatexceeds three hundred (300) lineal feet on any given roadway, one (1) additional such sign on suchfrontage shall be permitted; and for each multiple of three hundred (300) lineal feet of frontagethereafter, one (1) additional such sign shall be permitted for each separate street frontage. Unlessotherwise regulated by specific reference herein, the area and height above grade of anyfreestanding sign shall not exceed the amounts specified in
table 2
below.
2. In the case of a property designated as a shopping center or planned industrial park, additionalfreestanding signs shall be permitted for each vehicular entrance to the property. Permitted sign areafor these additional freestanding signs shall be sixty (60) percent of the sign area permitted by
table 2
for signs in commercial and industrial zones. Sign height shall be in conformance with
table 2
.
Table 2
Freestanding signs in commercial and industrial districts values indicated are maximum limits onsign size and height
A = Sign area in square feet; H = Sign height in lineal feet
Zoning District
Downtown
NeighborhoodCommercial
HighwayCommercial
Industrial
Limited AccessHighway
Speed Limit
A
H
A
H
A
H
A
H
A
H
25
24
14
50
22
78
26
78
26
30
28
16
72
26
112
30
112
30
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 271/350
35
32
18
98
30
153
36
153
36
40
128
34
200
42
200
42
45
162
38
253
48
253
48
50
200
42
312
52
312
54
55
378
56
378
60
457
66
60
450
60
450
66
544
70
65
639
74
70
741
78
75
850
86
(3) Building signs:
(a) Building signs include wall or fascia signs, roof signs, and signs otherwise permanently applied towalls or other building surfaces.
(b) The total area of all parallel wall signs applied to any given facade shall not exceed the areacomputed as a percentage of the building facade in elevation view, including window and door areas andcornices to which they are affixed or applied in accordance with
table 3
for Parallel Signs in Commercialand Industrial zones.
(c) In the case of a shopping center or a group of stores or other business uses on a lot held in singleand separate ownership, the provisions of this section relating to the total area of signs permitted on apremises shall apply with respect to each building, separate store, separate storefront, or separate use.Only wall signs shall be permitted for individual establishments in a shopping center or on a property withmore than one use, entity or business (multi-use or multi-tenant properties; these properties may also haveone (1) freestanding sign per street frontage).
Table 3 - Parallel Signs
Distance of sign from road or adjacentcommercial or industrial zone.
Percentage of building elevationfaçade permitted for sign area
0 to 100 feet
Fifteen (15%)
101 to 300 feet
Twenty (20%)
Over 301 feet
Twenty-five (25%)
Clarification notes:
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 272/350
Tables #2 and #3 above are included in order to provide the local city with specific dimensional values for sign area, sign size and signheight, all based on existing scientific research related to on-premises signs. The intent of this Code is to provide guidelines for theregulation of on-premises sign dimensions that are based on scientific principles, and thereby assist the local city in crafting a SignCode that is fact-based, and to eliminate subjective or individual preferences, which can vary greatly.
These standards are objective in nature. They have their basis in furthering the interests of traffic safety. They will insure that on-premises signs in the Commercial and Industrial zones have adequate visibility and legibility for motorists, again in the interests ofpublic safety.
The primary goal of these standards is to insure that all on-premises signs have sufficient area and height to provide a motorist withadequate time and travel distance to detect a sign, read and understand its contents, and then execute an appropriate drivingmaneuver. Factors that would impede this process (making the sign smaller, lowering its height) would be at odds with traffic safetyprinciples, and should be avoided by a local city, assuming that the goal of public and motorist safety is paramount.
(4) Roof signs, special considerations:
(a) Roof signs are permitted by special exception in the commercial and industrial zones and are in lieuof a building or wall sign. For permitted roof sign area, see
table 3
above for parallel signs in commercialand industrial zones. The height of any roof sign above the highest architectural point of the building towhich it is mounted shall not exceed the percentage of the vertical dimension of the building facadeparallel to the sign in accord with sections (1) and (2) below. Measurements shall be computed from thehighest building point to the top of the sign.
1. Commercial zones - Twenty-five (25) percent.
2. Industrial zones - Forty (40) percent.
(b) The area calculation for any roof sign whose orientation on a roof may be other than parallel to anindividual building facade shall be computed with reference to the building facade that most closelyparallels the orientation of such sign.
(c) Canopy signs (also marquee signs and signs on architectural projections): Special considerations.
(d) Canopy signs, marquee signs and signs on architectural projections are signs that are mounted toeither structures that project off the face of the building more than eighteen (18) inches or signs that aremounted to a freestanding structure not attached to a building that creates a canopy or covering over anarea below.
Clarification notes:
Canopy signs, marquee signs and signs on architectural projections are special sign applications. Although they are unique, they shouldbe provided for in comprehensive sign code. An example of a canopy sign would be lettering installed on a canopy over a series of gaspumps at a service station - it is neither a true wall sign nor freestanding sign. An example of a marquee sign would be lettering andgraphics displayed on the front and sides of a theater marquee that projects out over a portion of a downtown sidewalk. An example ofa sign on an architectural projection would be letters installed on a decorative masonry feature that projects off a building face.
(e) Signs affixed or applied in an essentially flat plane to the face of a building or freestanding canopy,marquee, or architectural projection provided that the copy area of any such sign, as defined herein, doesnot exceed an area equal to forty (40) percent of the product of the height and length of the face area ofthe canopy, marquee, or architectural projection to which such sign is affixed or applied, or fifteen (15)percent of the building facade to which it is attached, whichever is greater.
(f) Graphic treatment in the form of striping or patterns shall be permitted on the face of any building orfreestanding canopy, marquee, or architectural projection without restriction, and the area of any suchgraphic treatment shall not be calculated as a component of permitted copy area.
(5) Awning signs:
(a) Graphics affixed or applied to the face or side surfaces of an awning or backlit awning are permittedprovided that the copy area of any such sign copy or graphic, as defined herein, does not exceed an areain accordance with
table 3
for parallel signs, to which the awning is attached.
(b) Graphic treatment and/or embellishment in the form of striping, patterns, or valances shall bepermitted on the face or side surfaces of any awning or backlit awning without restriction, and the area ofany such graphic treatment and/or embellishment shall not be calculated as a component of permittedcopy area.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 273/350
(c) Projecting signs: Permitted in commercial zones only.
(d) Projecting signs shall be limited to one (1) per building facade on which any such sign is mountedexcept for a use that fronts on more than one (1) street, in which case, one (1) such sign shall be permittedper facade for each separate street frontage. In the case of a building in which any individual facadeexceeds two hundred (200) lineal feet, one (1) such sign shall be permitted for each two hundred (200)lineal feet of such facade or multiple thereof on each separate street on which such facade fronts.
(e) The area of any projecting sign shall not exceed one (1) square foot per every two (2) lineal feet ofthe building facade on which such sign is mounted, except that no such sign shall be larger in area thanone hundred (100) square feet.
(f) No projecting sign shall extend in a vertical dimension above the highest architectural point of thefacade to which it is mounted in excess of twenty-five (25) percent of the vertical dimension of the facadeitself.
(g) Projecting signs extending over a public sidewalk shall be limited to a projection distance not toexceed two-thirds (2/3) of the width of the sidewalk.
(h) Projecting signs shall not be permitted in addition to any permitted freestanding signs on any givenproperty frontage, except that, in the case in which a premises is permitted either freestanding orprojecting signs on any one frontage, projecting signs may be substituted for any of the permittedfreestanding signs on such frontage, provided that the requirements herein specifically relating to size,height, and extension of projecting signs are met.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 13-1700, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.101 Additional standards in all zones.
(A)
Where these regulations apply
. These regulations apply to all signs regulated by this code.
(B)
Sign placement
. All signs and sign structures must be erected and attached totally on or within the site or property towhich they refer, behind any applicable legal right of way.
(C)
Signs extending into the right-of-way
. Exceptions:
(1) Projecting signs: In a downtown or central business District, projecting over a public sidewalk.
(2) Awnings and marquees: In a downtown or central business district, projecting over a public sidewalk.
(3) A-frame signs: A-frame signs may be used in a downtown or central business district if they meet thefollowing standards:
(a) The sign is entirely outside the street or roadway;
(b) The sign is no larger than ten (10) square feet;
(c) The sign does not obstruct a continuous through pedestrian zone of at least six (6) feet in width.
(d) The sign does not obstruct pedestrian and wheelchair access from the sidewalk to any of thefollowing:
1. transit stop areas;
2. designated disabled parking spaces;
3. disabled access ramps; or
4. building exits including fire escapes.
Clarification notes:
The above exceptions for projecting signs, awnings and marquees and A-frame signs are included for municipalities where an area ofspecial interest or a central town district has been created with features such as sidewalks, buildings located close to the street orroadway, no front lawns or landscaped areas, substantial pedestrian traffic in addition to vehicular traffic.
(D)
Removal of signs
. Building Inspector may require signs extending into the right-of-way to be modified or moved ifstreets are widened, or other improvements made in the right-of-way, which result in the creation of unsafe conditions. The
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 274/350
modification or moving will be at the owner's expense. If a nonconforming sign is moved under this requirement, it may bere-erected on the site without being brought into conformance.
(E)
Freestanding signs
. Freestanding signs may not extend into the right-of-way.
(F)
Fascia or wall signs
.
(1)
Vertical extensions
: Fascia or wall signs may not extend above the top of the building wall upon which theyare mounted.
(2)
Horizontal extensions
: Fascia or wall signs may not extend more than eighteen (18) inches out from thewall or structure to which they are attached.
(G)
Pitched roof signs
.
(1)
Vertical extensions
: A pitched roof sign may not extend above the roofline.
(2)
Placement and angle
. Pitched roof signs must be parallel to the building face. They may not extendbeyond the building wall. See illustrations in section 9 [
section 154.91
].
(3)
Support structures
: Support structures must be designed so that there is no visible support structureabove the sign.
(H)
Projecting signs
.
(1)
Placement
: Projecting signs are not allowed on rooftops or on pitched roofs. Projecting signs may notextend over a right-of-way unless they are located in a downtown or central business district.
(I)
Directional signs
.
(1)
General standards
: Directional signs that meet the standards of this subsection are allowed in all zonesand are not counted in the total square footage of permanent signage allowed on any property or site.
(2)
Size
: Freestanding directional signs may be up to six (6) square feet in area and ninety-six (96) inches inheight. Fascia directional signs may be up to sixteen (16) square feet in area.
(3) Directional signs in any zone may have internal or external illumination.
(J)
Permanent banners
.
(1)
General
: Banners used as permanent signs are allowed in all commercial and industrial zones and will beincluded in the total square footage of permanent signage allowed on the site. Temporary banners are regulatedunder subsection (K)(3), below.
(2)
Standards
: Permanent banners are subject to the standards for either fascia signs or projecting signsdepending on how the banner is supported or anchored.
(K).
Temporary signs
.
(1) Signs that meet the standards of this subsection are exempt from the standards for permanent signs andare not counted in the total square footage of signage allowed on any particular property or site. Signs that donot meet the standards of this subsection are subject to the standards for permanent signs.
(2) Temporary signs may have external or internal illumination.
(3)
Temporary banners
: Temporary banners are subject to the following regulations:
(a) In all residential zones, temporary banners are not permitted on sites with houses, duplexes, andattached houses. Exception: banners for holidays, religious commemoration, and special family events.
(b) In the office, professional, commercial and industrial zones, one banner no larger than thirty-two (32)square feet in size is permitted per property or, on a multi-use property, per storefront. Only one (1) ofthese banners may be hung on each building wall or on each separate structure. Any additional banners,or banners larger than thirty-two (32) square feet in size, must meet the following standards for permanentsigns in this Code.
1. In no case may a site or storefront have more than two (2) temporary banners.
2. In no case shall a temporary banner be larger than fifty (50) square feet in size.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 275/350
(c) A temporary banner may be displayed no longer than ninety (90) days per calendar year.
(d) Banners that do not meet the regulations of this subparagraph, must meet the standards forpermanent signs.
(4)
Temporary wall or fascia signs
. One (1) temporary wall sign is allowed per street frontage in thecommercial and industrial zones. Temporary wall signs may be up to thirty-two (32) square feet in area.Temporary wall signs may not extend above roof lines. Extensions into the right-of-way are prohibited. Atemporary wall sign may be displayed no longer than ninety (90) days.
(5)
Temporary freestanding or portable signs
. One (1) temporary freestanding sign is allowed per property inthe commercial zones and is not counted in the total square footage of permanent signage allowed on the site.Temporary freestanding signs may be up to thirty-two (32) square feet in area. Extensions into the right-of-wayare prohibited. A temporary freestanding sign may be displayed no longer than ninety (90) days.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 13-1800, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.102 Off-premises commercial advertising signs.
General standards and sign features: The standards for off-premises commercial advertising signs in commercial andindustrial zones are as follows. All such signs must conform to the regulations of this Section.
(1) Freestanding signs shall not exceed a height greater than fifteen (15) feet above the street upon which thesign faces.
(2) The maximum square footage shall not exceed twenty-five (25) square feet.
(3) Off-premises advertising signs may be displayed no longer than one-hundred and eighty (180) dayswithout a separate permit.
(4) The property owner must give written consent to display the sign.
(5) Off-premises commercial advertising signs must comply with Texas Department of Transportation Right-of-Way regulations.
(6) Electrical or mechanical signs are not permitted.
(7) Permit is required.
(8) A “City of Jacksboro” permit sticker with expiration date is required on all off-premises signs (8-1/2" X 5-1/2" to be placed in the bottom right-hand corner).
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 13-1900, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.103 Electronic message centers
(A) In the office, professional, commercial and industrial zones, electronic message centers (EMCs) are permitted inaccordance with the sign areas noted in
table 2
or
table 3
respectively.
(B) Additional general EMC regulations:
(1) An EMC sign may be a portion of a building sign or freestanding sign, or may comprise the entire signarea.
(2) All EMC signs shall have automatic dimming controls, either by photocell (hardwired) or via softwaresettings, in order to bring the EMC lighting level at night into compliance with
section 154.104
of this code “signillumination standards.”
(C) EMC regulations by zone:
(1) In residential zones, EMC signs are permitted only in certain circumstances by special exception inaccordance with section 16(G) [
section 154.98
(F)] of this code. They are otherwise prohibited in residentialzones.
(2) In residential zones, where permitted, EMC signs shall have a minimum display time of twelve (12)seconds. The transition time between messages and/or message frames is limited to one (1) second.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 276/350
(3) In residential zones, where permitted, the following EMC display features and functions are prohibited:scrolling, traveling, flashing, spinning, rotating, fade, dissolve, any other moving effects, and all dynamic frameeffects or patterns of illusionary movement or simulated movement.
(4) In office and professional zones, EMC signs shall have a minimum display time of eight (8) seconds. Thetransition time between messages and/or message frames is limited to three (3) seconds and these transitionsmay employ fade, dissolve, and or other transition effects.
(5) In office and professional zones, the following EMC display features and functions are prohibited:continuous scrolling and/or traveling, flashing, spinning, rotating, and similar moving effects, and all dynamicframe effects or patterns of illusionary movement or simulating movement.
(6) In commercial and industrial zones, all EMC display features and functions are permitted, with theexception of (a) flashing, which is prohibited, and (b) full motion video or film display via an electronic fileimported into the EMC software or streamed in real time into the EMC. Full motion video as described shall bepermitted by special exception only.
Clarification notes:
1. Electronic Message Center control and code enforcement issues have become a matter of great interest at the municipal level acrossthe United States. This interest has been spurred primarily by the availability of EMC technology, its increasing quality, and the interestof sign owners / end users in utilizing the technology.
2. Most EMC signs installed today are illuminated via LEDs, or light emitting diodes. LEDs are the current industry standard for theillumination of EMC signs, and it is likely that this will remain so for the near future, until another technology is perfected that is bothtolerant to outdoor environmental conditions, sufficiently bright, and cost effective. There may be other sources of illumination in thenear future, so the term EMC is intended to refer to any on-premises sign that can display messages and change them at regularintervals via a computer-controlled interface.
3. From a legal and practical standpoint, experience indicates that local control of EMC signs is preferred over an outright ban. Somecommunities have attempted to implement a prohibition on EMC signs, but it should be noted that there has been a heavy costassociated with these types of bans - legal and administrative costs to the city to defend such a ban; acrimony created within thecommunity by the denial of this new communication technology without a scientific or traffic safety research basis; loss of the benefitscreated by enhanced EMC communication. In addition, a substantial percentage of EMC signs are installed at churches, municipalbuildings, libraries, fire and rescue facilities, hospitals and out-patient medical offices. Therefore, a more prudent and balancedapproach to EMC regulation based on sound scientific principles may serve the local AHJ in both the long and short terms.
4.In regard to traffic safety issues and EMC signs, a local city can rely on this statement to be true: up to this time, research has shownno correlation between EMC signs and traffic accidents, and EMC signs have not been found to be a distraction having impact on thedriving task or to cause unsafe driving behavior that causes an accident in driver distraction studies. Some have offered opinions andtheories about EMC signs and so called distractions, but there has been no direct scientific research on these distractions and EMCsigns. The term “distraction” in and of itself is a pejorative term, suggesting a negative outcome or result. What research on motoristbehavior has shown is that drivers engage in a wide variety of activities while operating a motor vehicle, and some for two (2) secondsor longer. Some activities that drivers engage in have a positive effect on motorist performance, even though the driver's eyes are awayfrom the road. Examples of this would be checking the rear view mirror, checking the side mirrors, or checking the speedometer. Otheractivities that drivers engage in have a demonstrated negative effect on motorist performance - most notably cell phone use and textingwhile driving. Finally, other activities appear to have no effect either way - positive or negative - on driver performance, and EMC signsfall into this category. Drivers look at EMC signs but their driving performance is not affected, and that is why accident and driverdistraction research fails to show any correlation with EMC signs.
5. All stakeholders agree that EMC lighting levels must be adjusted at night. In order for an EMC to be visible and legible during the day,the EMC sign must be energized or illuminated - it must have sufficient brightness to be seen while the sun is present. At night,however, EMC brightness must be adjusted to a much lower level, so that the sign is not over-bright and/or create glare so that amotorist cannot read the sign. Most EMC manufacturers have technology built into their products to accomplish this lighting leveladjustment, typically using photocells and/or software timing controls. Section 154.103 coordinates with the general lighting standardsof this Code contained in
section 154.104
Sign Illumination Standards to insure that all EMCs have an appropriate lighting level at night,based on the needs of the motorist and traffic safety. This standard is a “Luminance” standard, or an objective measurement and controlof the actual brightness of the EMC sign, based on on-premises sign research.
6. Section 154.103 provides regulations for “display time” on an EMC sign. Display time is sometimes also referred to as a “changerate,” and is intended to describe the rate at which a message can be changed on the EMC display panel.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 277/350
7. EMC signs are capable of a wide range of dynamic message and image presentations as well as visual effects including simplescrolling or moving message effects to full video display. Since no negative correlation between on-premises EMC signs and trafficsafety has been demonstrated by current research, any restriction on the various operational capabilities of EMC signs are necessarilyimposed for aesthetic purposes only. In placing operational restrictions on EMC sign use in Residential and Professional Zones as anaesthetic consideration, this Model accepts the premises that these zones are not normally commercially active, and do not require themore visually dynamic forms of on premises communication necessary for the rapid transfer of commercial speech in Commercialand/or Industrial Zones.
Since neither an aesthetic nor traffic safety justification can be advanced for placing similar restrictions on the dynamic operationalcapabilities of EMC signs in Commercial and/or Industrial Zones, the Model - except for prohibition of flashing and provision that videodisplay be subject to special exception - places no specific prohibitions on EMC operational usage in those zones. The city, however, inassessing local conditions involving community aesthetic considerations, may place specific usage restrictions as it determines to beappropriate, or, as the Model suggests regarding video usage, make certain operational usage features of EMC signs within itsjurisdiction are subject to special exception.
The prohibition on EMC video display is intended to cover the display of videos, films, motion video clips, and streaming video imagesthat are not a part of the standard EMC software. It is not intended to prohibit the use of standard effects that are a part of the EMCsoftware capabilities, which sometimes can be confused with actual video. These permitted effects are generally shown in thebackground of a message (flag waving, leaves falling, clouds passing) and are not the primary EMC content or message, but merely adesign element intended to compliment the primary communication. Each city may make a determination in regard to zones whereEMC video capabilities enhance the character of the zone, and where they may be prohibited, based on local conditions.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 13-2000, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.104 Sign illumination standards.
Signs may be illuminated consistent with the following standards:
(1) A sign in any district may be illuminated at night. Signs that are illuminated at night may not exceed amaximum luminance level of seven hundred fifty (750) cd/m² or Nits, regardless of the method of illumination.
(2) Signs that have external illumination, whether the lighting is mounted above or below the sign face orpanel, shall have lighting fixtures or luminaires that are fully shielded.
(3) All illuminated signs must comply with the maximum luminance level of seven hundred fifty (750) cd/m² orNits at least one-half hour before Apparent Sunset, as determined by the National Oceanic and AtmosphericAdministration (NOAA), US Department of Commerce, for the specific geographic location and date. Allilluminated signs must comply with this maximum luminance level throughout the night, if the sign is energized,until Apparent Sunrise, as determined by the NOAA, at which time the sign may resume luminance levelsappropriate for daylight conditions, when required or appropriate.
(4) On-premises signs do not constitute a form of outdoor lighting at night, and are exempt from any otheroutdoor lighting regulations that the City of Jacksboro has adopted, or will adopt in the future.
Clarification notes:
The intent of these Sign Illumination provisions is to set a clear and uniform lighting level for illuminated on-premises signs at nightbased upon research, the needs of the motorist, and traffic safety. This lighting level standard is simple and easy to understand.Experience has shown that outdoor lighting and illumination regulations can often become very complicated and use concepts andterms that even professionals do not fully understand. The goal of this Model Code is to help create enforceable standards that requirea minimum of administrative resources, yet can be applied uniformly.
The lighting standard provided controls the actual brightness of the sign, or luminance of the sign - of the sign face, the sign letters, thesign panel etc. This standard is based on existing on-premises sign research. The correct lighting level at night for an on-premises signhas been confirmed, both in a test track setting and in real world environments. The maximum luminance level noted by the Model willinsure that signs have sufficient brightness at night so that they can be detected and read by motorists at night in the interests of trafficsafety.
The luminance standard also provides flexibility to both manufacturers and cities. The luminance of a sign can be determined at theplace of manufacture prior to installation or in the field after the sign is installed. If multiple signs of the same design and manufactureare installed, then only one (1) sign needs to be measured as the representative sample, thereby conserving resources.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 278/350
This Model Code strongly recommends that other light measurement methods be avoided in regard to on-premises signs (for instance,an illuminance standard, or including ambient lighting conditions as a part of a complicated formula), because these methods do notaccount for true sign brightness which, in regard to traffic safety, is the primary determinant as to whether a sign is visible and legible tothe motorist.
It should also be noted that research has shown that on-premises signs are not a factor in creating so-called light trespass or lightspillage conditions. Regulators often confuse the fact that an on-premises sign can be seen from a distance at night with light trespass.
Instead, on-premises signs can be detected from a distance because they have proper sign brightness or luminance at night, and notbecause they project a great deal of unnecessary lighting to surrounding areas. This Model Code suggests that a light trespassmeasurement method, aimed at sign illuminance, may result in a more confusing and complicated regulatory scheme and maycompromise public safety.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 13-2100, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.105 Nonconforming signs.
Clarification notes:
The purpose of regulations related to nonconforming signs is to insure that existing signs installed by valid permit that are madenonconforming by adoption of any new Sign Code may continue and that the new sign regulations will not cause unnecessary burdens.The owner of a sign with a valid permit has a legitimate expectation that the sign can be used for the period of its useful life. Theextinguishment of nonconforming signs is sometimes goal at the local city level, under the theory that these signs are “regulatorynuisances.” A avorable outcome for all stakeholders in regard to the treatment of nonconforming signs is most often achieved when allthe interested parties are included in the process.
The intent of these regulations is not to force all signs to be immediately brought into conformance with current regulations; instead, theintent is to gradually bring existing signs into conformance. Most sign codes contain provisions for nonconforming signs.
The degree to which a sign code can extinguish nonconforming signs is also controlled by individual state law, and particular attentionshould be given to these rules.
(1) Nonconforming permanent signs may continue to exist after passage of this code. Nonconforming signswill be removed and changed in accordance with the provisions of this code.
(2) Permanent signs and sign structures that are moved, removed, replaced, or structurally altered must bebrought into conformance with the sign regulations. However, nonconforming signs required to be movedbecause of public right-of-way improvements may be re-established. Removable faces or sign panel inserts in acabinet style sign may also be changed by right, and such change does not constitute a structural alteration nortrigger loss of nonconforming status.
(3) Nonconforming temporary signs must be removed within two (2) months of the passage of this code.
(4) Ownership. The status of a nonconforming sign is not affected by changes in ownership.
(5) Once a sign is altered to conform or is replaced with a conforming sign, the nonconforming rights for thatsign are lost and a nonconforming sign may not be re-established.
(6) Loss of nonconforming sign status.
(a)
Discontinuance
. See definition of abandoned sign.
(b)
Destruction
. When a sign or sign structure is removed or intentionally destroyed, replacement signsand sign structures must comply with the current standards. However:
1.
Repair and maintenance
. A nonconforming sign or sign structure may be removed temporarilyto perform sign maintenance or sign repair.
2.
Unintentional destruction
. When a sign or sign structure that has nonconforming elements ispartially or totally damaged by fire or other causes beyond the control of the owner, the sign and signstructure may be rebuilt to the same size and height using the same materials.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 13-2200, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.106 Electrical regulations applying to all permanent and temporary on-premises signs.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 279/350
(A) All on-premises electric signs, outline lighting systems and skeleton neon lighting systems shall be manufactured andinstalled in compliance with NFPA 70, the National Electrical Code (NEC).
(B) The listing label number for all signs shall be provided on the sign permit application, or, if the sign has not beenmanufactured yet, through Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratory (NRTL) validation: A NRTL file number from the signmanufacturer shall be provided for all electric signs on the Sign Permit Application.
Clarification notes:
Sign manufacturers may not pre-assign labels before manufacture. Labels are serialized and would require the municipality to call thelisting company and verify it with the NRTL. If the manufacturer's NRTL is on file, the municipality can generally access the most currentinformation on-line, or require follow-up from the sign manufacturer. The primary purpose of this Section is to insure that signmanufacturers build, list and label their electrical signs to comply with national electrical and fire safety codes in the interest of publicsafety.
(C) The code officer shall have the authority to immediately remove any sign that is not in conformance with this section,or to have said sign removed, at the owner's expense.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 13-2300, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.107 Construction and structural requirements.
(A)
Structural standards
.
(1) Signs, sign structures, sign foundations and methods to attach and anchor signs must be designed andconstructed in accordance with applicable provisions of the building code adopted by the City of Jacksboro. Allsigns and their foundations and attachments must be designed for the appropriate dead, wind and snow loadsfor the geographic area in question.
(2) The supports and foundations used in construction for all signs and sign structures must be locatedoutside of any rights-of-way.
(3) Welds of sign structures and sections of sign structures must be welded in accordance with the buildingcode.
(B)
Engineering standards
.
(1) Signs, sign structures, sign foundations and anchorages to a building must be individually designed inaccordance with the building code and the provisions of this sign code.
(2) When the building code of the City of Jacksboro, or any building code enacted after the passage of thissign code, calls for sealed sign design construction plans to be submitted as a part of any sign permitapplication, this requirement is not compulsory as it relates to on premises signs regulated under this sign code.
Clarification notes:
Some state and local jurisdictions have interpreted certain language in the International Code Council's International Building Code(IBC) in regard to construction documents and construction permit applications to require so-called “sealed” sign designs or plans as apart of the routine sign permit application process. This reading is not entirely accurate, and has caused confusion and inefficiencies,without increasing public safety or increasing the quality of sign construction.
In general, enforcement of local building code regulations and sign code electrical regulations will insure that standard on-premisessigns are properly installed and that public safety is protected. Requirement of a sealed plan for a simple wall sign or low mountedmonument sign or for types of sign projects that are repetitively installed using the same installation system does not add to the value ofthe sign nor change how the signs will be mounted nor automatically increase public safety. The sign installer is generally the expert inthese areas, and will install the sign in the appropriate manner based on already established methods and industry acceptedprocedures.
There will be sign projects, however, that are of such size and scope that cities may want to require the services of a licensed engineerin order to confirm that the sign installation details are correct for site and geographic conditions. The criteria to determine when sealedplans are required will vary from locality to locality, and the city therefore will create its own set of rules for engineering requirements.
The intent of this section on Engineering Standards is to create a mechanism to determine when sealed sign plans are required andwhen they are not. The requirement for sealed plans will be triggered when the sign project achieves such scope as determined by thecity that the services of an engineer or architect will insure the city that proper engineering principles are being applied.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 280/350
(C)
Clearances
.
(1)
Vision clearance areas
: Vision clearance areas are triangular shaped areas located at the intersection ofany combination of rights-of-way, alleys or driveways. The sides of the triangle extend thirty (30) feet from theintersection of the right-of-way, alley or driveway in either/each direction. No sign may be installed within thisclear sight triangle.
(2)
Vehicle area clearances
: In areas outside of rights-of-way, when a sign or awning extends over an area inwhich vehicles travel or are parked, the bottom of the structure must be at least fourteen (14) feet above theground. Vehicle areas include driveways, alleys, parking areas, and loading and maneuvering areas.
(3)
Pedestrian area clearances
. When a sign or awning extends more than twelve (12) inches over asidewalk, walkway, or other space used by pedestrians, the bottom of the structure must be at least eight (8) feetabove the ground.
(4)
Clearances from fire escapes, means of egress or standpipes
. Signs, sign structures and awnings areprohibited from being erected in any manner that interferes in any way with the free use of any fire escape,means of egress or standpipe. Attaching signs, sign structures or awnings to a fire escape is prohibited.
(5)
Obstruction of windows and ventilation
. Signs, sign structures and awnings are prohibited from beinginstalled in any way that obstructs any building openings to such an extent that light, ventilation or exhaust arereduced to a level below that required by either the building code, plumbing regulations, heating and ventilatingregulations or housing and maintenance regulations.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 13-2400, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.108 Maintenance requirements.
(A) Signs, sign structures and awnings, together with their supports, braces, guys, anchors and electrical componentsmust be maintained in a proper state of repair. The code officer may order the removal of any sign, sign structure or awningthat is not maintained in accordance to this code.
(B)
Dangerous structures and equipment
.
(1) Signs, sign structures or awnings that are dangerous must be taken down and removed or made safe asthe code officer or building official deems necessary. Signs may be deemed dangerous for one or more of thefollowing reasons:
(a) Whenever a sign structure or its foundation, a sign's attachments to a building, or a building to whicha sign is attached is damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood or by any other cause, to such an extent thatthe structural strength or stability is materially less than it was before the catastrophe and is less than theminimum requirements of the building code;
(b) Whenever any portion or member of a sign, sign structure or awning is likely to fail, or becomedetached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or property;
(c) Whenever any portion or member of a sign, sign structure or awning is likely to partially or completelycollapse as a result of any cause, including, dilapidation, deterioration, or decay; faulty construction orwiring; or removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground or building necessary forsupporting such structure;
(d) Whenever a sign, sign structure or awning is structurally or electrically unsafe or otherwisehazardous to human life or safety by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, firehazard, disaster, damage or abandonment;
(2) All signs, sign structures and awnings determined after inspection by the code officer to be dangerousmust be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal;[.]
Clarification notes:
This model code includes a listing of supplementary sections, intended as a general reference, that appear in most sign codes. Theseregulations are procedural in nature. Most cities include these provisions, and they should be crafted to local standards and inaccordance with state law in the applicable jurisdiction. They are included here as a convenience to the local city.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 13-2500, passed 3-23-20)
Appendix B. Formulae: Common Geometric Shapes
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 281/350
(Ord. O-02-2020, art. 13, app. B, passed 3-23-20)
LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 154.120 Purpose.
Landscape requirements are established for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals and general welfare of theCity of Jacksboro and to improve traffic and pedestrian safety, property values, business opportunities and communityappearance. (Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 14-100, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.121 General provisions.
The following general regulations shall be applicable to all required landscaping. Where a conflict may exist between ageneral provision and a specific regulation, the specific regulation shall have priority over the general provisions.
(1) Landscaping plans shall contain the minimum following information and should typically be prepared by aperson knowledgeable in plant material usage and landscaping design.
(a) Plans shall be prepared at a scale of not less than one inch (1') equals fifty (50') feet.
(b) Location, size and species of all trees to be preserved.
(c) Location of all new trees, plants, landscaping material and landscaping features to be used.
(d) Identify types of trees and plant materials, size at time of planting and approximate size at maturity.
(e) Layout and description of any irrigation or sprinkler system to be used to maintain vegetation.
(f) North indicating mark.
(g) Name of preparer and date.
(2) New trees shall be a minimum of two to three inches (2"–3") in caliper and a minimum of 6'-8' in height attime of planting.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 282/350
(3) Shrubbery shall be a minimum of two (2') feet in height from ground level after planting, except dwarfvarieties that shall be a minimum of one foot (1') in height from ground level after planting.
(4) Earthen berms shall have slopes not exceeding 3:1 (three feet horizontal distance for each foot of rise).
(5) One tree, new or existing shall be required for each five hundred (500) square feet of landscaped area orportion thereof.
(6) One planting bed of plants and shrubbery other than grasses and groundcovers shall be required for eachone thousand (1,000) square feet of landscaped area or portion thereof.
(7) No artificial plants or turf shall be permitted for meeting minimum landscape requirements.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 14-200, passed 3-23-20)
FENCE REGULATIONS
Sec. 154.130 Purpose.
[Reserved]
Sec. 154.131 General provisions.
(A) A fence is a barrier erected upon, or immediately adjacent to, a property line for the purpose of separating properties,enclosing or protecting the property within its perimeter. Construction site barriers and landscape treatments shall not beclassified as a fence.
(B) An approved masonry fence shall include brick, decorative block, split-face stone construction, natural stone, stucco,or other material approved for the primary purpose of masonry fence construction; but shall not include concrete masonryunit (CMU) blocks.
(1)
Permit required
. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or have erected a new fence, or replace anexisting fence in the city without first obtaining a construction permit.
(2)
Encroachment on public property
. Fences, guy wires, braces or any post of such Fence shall not beconstructed upon or caused to protrude over property that the city or the general public has dominion andcontrol over, owns, or has an easement except upon private utility easements.
(3)
Height and construction requirements
.
(a) Fences shall not be erected, constructed, or reconstructed to a height of more than (6') six feetabove the adjoining ground level of the owner's or lessee's property.
(b) No fence shall be erected, constructed, or reconstructed to a height of more than (24") twenty-fourinches above the adjoining ground level of the owner's or lessee's property when placed in a front yard.
(c) Fences shall not be constructed in any manner that will disrupt proper drainage, or divert drainageonto adjacent property.
(d) Materials permitted are wood, masonry, chain link, wrought iron, galvanized steel pipe, vinyl or othermaterials designed for the primary purpose of fence construction unless otherwise regulated or prohibitedby the zoning ordinance.
(e) All structural members shall be designed to prevent rust, corrosion and rotting or be of a material thatis impervious to rust, corrosion, rotting or deterioration from the elements.
(f) All new wood fences must use metal posts set in concrete as approved by the building official.Alternative fence post materials for fences such as vinyl, masonry or post and rail fences may be approvedby the building official.
(g) Fences shall be constructed in a manner to provide a continuous barrier without missing sectionsalong each elevation side. Gates shall be allowed to be an integral part.
(h) A fence shall not be constructed to restrict the visibility of a driver of a vehicle or be sight-obscuringwithin the sight triangles set forth for street to street or drive to street intersections.
(4)
Wooden fences minimum standards
.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 283/350
(a) Materials shall be securely fastened, vertical boards to horizontal stringers, stringers to verticalposts, to ensure an ongoing attractive appearance and safe condition, free from rot, rust, vandalism, andother sources of decay.
(b) Fences shall be treated lumber or treated with weather-resistant material to prevent prematuredeterioration.
(5)
Fence maintenance
.
(a) Fences facing a thoroughfare shall be adequately maintained by the owner(s) or person(s) in chargeof the property and shall not become dilapidated or deteriorated.
(b) A Fence facing a thoroughfare shall be considered dilapidated if its pickets or structural membersbetween vertical supports are substantially damaged, missing or rotted beyond repair; or if any portion ofthe Fence is more than fifteen (15°) degrees off vertical alignment.
(c) All damaged, removed or missing portions of a fence facing a thoroughfare shall be replaced orrepaired with like materials to the remaining portion of such fence.
(d) Masonry fences and masonry fence columns facing a thoroughfare that require complete or partialreplacement, damaged or in need of repair shall be replaced, repaired or reconstructed with the same orsimilar masonry materials and same or similar color of masonry materials provided the materials are stillavailable and comply with the requirement for masonry fence construction.
(e) The owner of a property that has a masonry fence that is not required by ordinance under zoning ordevelopment standards may appeal to the board of zoning adjustments to repair or replace an existingmasonry fence or masonry fence columns facing a thoroughfare with alternative screening methods ormaterials that do not comply with regulations.
(f) Fences shall not have murals, graffiti, advertising or other illegal signage.
(6)
Construction prohibited
.
(a) No fence erected above ground on any property shall be electrically charged in any manner or formwhich includes but is not limited to Fences electrically charged by battery or those tied in with an electricaloutlet.
(b) Fences or any part of such fence shall not be constructed to impede ingress or egress of a stairway,entrance, or exit of a building.
(c) Fences shall not restrict access to fire hydrants or city utility reading devices.
(d) Fences shall not be constructed of broken concrete stacked in piles or rows, razor ribbon,sheet/corrugated metal, fiberglass panels, plywood, barbed wire, corral or feedlot panels, pallets madefrom wood or other material, or other materials not manufactured or designed for the primary purpose ofFence construction.
(7)
Temporary construction site fences
.
(a)
Construction sites
. Temporary construction site fences shall be permitted to enclose the completeproject or a partial area. Fences under this section shall be erected in such position or placed so as to notbe dangerous or detrimental to the health or safety of any person or obstruct the view so as to constitute atraffic hazard. Temporary construction fences shall be removed prior to occupancy of the facility.
(b)
Swimming pool construction sites
. A temporary fence not less than four feet in height shall beinstalled to provide a barrier for all unprotected portions of the pool capable of retaining water. A temporaryFence shall not be used as the required permanent barrier for a swimming pool.
(8)
Fence plan review
. Prior to the erection or installation of any fence, a fence application must be submittedfor review and approved. The application for permit is a no-fee permit, however it requires the requester toacknowledge an understanding of the City of Jacksboro Fence Regulations.
(9)
Fence for residential swimming pool
.
(a) Regulations for private swimming pool fence construction shall be regulated by the currently adoptedInternational Residential Code.
(b) Public and semi private swimming pools shall comply with the requirements of state law, includingbut not limited to chapter 214 of the Texas Local Government Code, chapter 757 of the Texas Health and
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 284/350
Safety Code, and chapter 341 of the Texas Administrative Code.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 15-200, passed 3-23-20)
SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 154.145 Purpose.
The purpose of site plan approval is to establish a uniform procedure for coordinating improvements to properties other thansingle-family sites. The procedure is intended to promote the efficient and harmonious use of land, safe and efficientvehicular and pedestrian circulation, parking and loading, signage, screening and landscaping. (Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 16-100,passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.146 Procedure.
A site plan shall be submitted to the city for consideration and approval prior to the issuance of a building permit orcertificate of occupancy on any properly zoned site that shall be used for any of the following identified uses. Site plans shallalso be submitted with all zoning applications for zoning districts. All conditional use permit (CUP) applications must beaccompanied by a site plan and is subject to approval by the planning and zoning commission and the city council.
(1) Any multifamily development, manufactured home subdivision or manufactured home park.
(2) Any nonresidential development.
(3) Any development with two (2) or more buildings per lot.
(4) Any planned development.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 16-200, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.147 Site plan elements.
A site plan shall be accurately and legibly drawn to scale with dimensions and shall show the following:
(1) Point of reference to accurately locate the site and north arrow designation;
(2) The property boundary line;
(3) Existing and/or proposed buildings including dimensions and square footage;
(4) Proposed occupancy;
(5) Parking layout and drives;
(6) Means of ingress and egress;
(7) Loading areas;
(8) Fire lanes;
(9) Landscaping areas;
(10) Screening;
(11) Public and private sidewalks;
(12) Screened refuse facilities;
(13) All adjoining streets and alleys including curbs, medians and storm drains;
(14) Private and public utility easements including, but not limited to, water, sewer, electric, gas, cabletelevision and drainage;
(15) Location of existing or proposed underground water, sewer, gas, electric or other utility lines;
(16) Locations, dimensions and face of all signs; and
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 285/350
(17) Any other information that may be considered essential by the city staff, planning and zoning commissionor the city council.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 16-300, passed 3-23-20)
PART FOUR - ADMINISTRATION, AMENDMENTS, ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 154.155 Planning and zoning commission.
(A)
Creation and purpose
.
(1) The planning and zoning commission as heretofore duly created by ordinance and now performing itsauthorized duties in accordance with chapter 211, Local Government Code, is hereby perpetuated.
(2) The planning and zoning commission is charged with identifying community needs and preparing goals toachieve long-range planning and development of the city.
(3) The planning and zoning commission will recommend plans, programs and policies to the city council thatwill aid the entire community in achieving long-range planning and development of the city.
(4) The planning and zoning commission will educate the public on the plans, programs and policies adoptedby the city council so that private activities can be conducted in harmony with these plans, programs andpolicies.
(B)
Membership, appointment and organization
.
(1) The planning and zoning commission shall be composed of five (5) qualified members plus two (2)alternate members. The city council shall consider members who shall constitute a commission that is broadlyrepresentative of the community.
(2) All commission members shall be appointed by the city council for a two (2) year term. Appointments shallbe staggered so that only one-half of the commission is appointed each year. City council appointments shall bemade at the first regular city council meeting in June with terms starting on July 1 and ending on June 30.
(3) Vacancies for unexpired terms shall be made in the same manner as regular appointments. Appointmentsto vacancies shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term.
(4) The commission shall select a chairman and vice-chairman from among its members at its first meeting inJuly.
(C)
Meetings and quorum
.
(1) The commission shall meet when required or at other times as the commission shall so decide.Commission members are expected to regularly attend meetings. Members who miss three consecutivemeetings without commission approval may be deemed to have vacated commission membership. The citycouncil, upon receiving verification of such absences from the commission, may fill the vacancy for theunexpired term. Members, who miss six or more absences during their appointment, either excused orunexcused, may be deemed as grounds for removal from the commission.
(2) Staff shall maintain minutes of all meetings and shall enter into the minutes attendance of all members,whether present or absent.
(3) A quorum for the purpose of conducting business shall consist of three (3) members.
(4) All meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the Texas Open Meeting Act and chapter 211, TexasLocal Government Code.
(D)
Duties and powers
.
(1) The commission shall procure information and make recommendations to the city council on the creationor modification of zoning districts in accordance with state law and said ordinance, and following due process.
(2) The commission shall serve as a recommending body to the city council regarding the approval ordisapproval of all preliminary, revised preliminary and final plats of land. The city council shall be the finalauthority for the approval or disapproval of all plats of land.
(3) The commission shall discharge all other functions devolving upon city planning and zoning commissionsby law or this chapter, and shall investigate, study, and submit reports and recommendations to the city council
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 286/350
on all such matters as it or the city council shall deem appropriate and which have any relation to municipalplanning or zoning.
(4) The commission shall provide information to the planning department as needed regarding the format forthe various application forms, procedures and lead times for the steps in zoning changes and plat approvals,and the needs for record keeping, calling of public hearings, notification to affected property owners, andpublishing of public notices.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 17-100, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.156 Board of zoning adjustment.
(A)
Creation and purpose
. The board of zoning adjustment as heretofore duly created by ordinance and now performingits authorized duties in accordance with chapter 211, Local Government Code, is hereby perpetuated.
(B)
Membership, appointment and organization
.
(1) The board of zoning adjustment shall be composed of five (5) qualified members plus two (2) alternatemembers. The city council shall consider members who shall constitute a board that is broadly representative ofthe community.
(2) All board members shall be appointed by the city council for a two (2) year term. Appointments shall bestaggered so that only one-half of the board is appointed each year. City council appointments shall be made atthe first regular city council meeting in June with terms starting on July 1 and ending on June 30.
(3) Vacancies for unexpired terms shall be made in the same manner as regular appointments. Appointmentsto vacancies shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term.
(4) The board shall select a chairman and vice-chairman from among its members at its first meeting in July.
(C)
Meetings and quorum
.
(1) The board shall meet as required or at other times as the board shall so decide. Board members areexpected to regularly attend meetings. Members who miss three consecutive meetings without Board approvalmay be deemed to have vacated board membership. The city council, upon receiving verification of suchabsences from the board, may fill the vacancy for the unexpired term. Members, who miss six or more absencesduring their appointment, either excused or unexcused, may be deemed as grounds for removal from the board.
(2) Staff shall maintain minutes of all meetings and shall enter into the minutes attendance of all members,whether present or absent.
(3) A quorum for the purpose of conducting business shall consist of four (4) members.
(D) A three-quarters vote is required to:
(1) Reverse the decision of an administrative official;
(2) Authorize a variance from the terms of a zoning ordinance; or
(3) Decide in favor of an applicant on a matter on which the board is required to rule under a zoningordinance. All other votes of the board may be by a simple majority.
(3) All meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the Texas Open Meeting Act and chapter 211, TexasLocal Government Code.
(E)
Duties and powers
.
(1) To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision ordetermination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this chapter.
(2) To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of the ordinance upon which the Board is required topass under this chapter.
(3) To authorize upon appeal in special cases such variances from the terms of the ordinance as will not becontrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, the literal enforcement of the provisions of theordinance will result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed and substantialjustice done.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 287/350
(F)
Appeals to the board of zoning adjustment
. Appeals to the Board can be taken by any person aggrieved or by anyofficer, board or department of the municipality affected by any decision of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall befiled within fifteen (15) days after the administrative officer has rendered the decision by filing a notice of appeal specifyingthe grounds for such appeal. The appeal shall be filed with the city secretary, who shall in turn transmit to the board alldocuments constituting the records of the case or action in question including the notice of appeal.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 17-200, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.157 Policy on division of functions and responsibilities.
It is declared to be the general policy of the City of Jacksboro, unless otherwise expressly provided by this chapter, that, itsmunicipal planning and zoning functions and responsibilities are distributed and assigned as follows:
(1)
City staff
. Administration, engineering, and enforcement.
(2)
Planning and zoning commission
. Study and recommendation on policy of city planning and on zoningmatters, and plat approval.
(3)
Board of zoning adjustment
. Appeals and reviews.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 17-300, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.158 Amendments.
(A)
Amendments to zoning ordinance
.
(1) The city council may from time to time amend this chapter, including modification of the boundaries of thezoning districts.
(2) Any such proposed amendment or modification must be submitted to the planning and zoning commissionfor public hearing, recommendation and report, before the same is acted on by the city council. The commissionmay undertake any such study and public hearing on its own motion, or on a request from the city council, fromany citizen, or from any party having a proprietary interest in any affected property.
(3) The commission shall hold a public hearing on any proposed amendment. Not less than eleven (11) daysprior to the scheduled hearing, each property owner, as shown on the latest approved city tax roll, who ownsreal property lying within two hundred (200) feet of the property on which the change is requested shall be sentnotice of such meeting by ordinary mail, postage prepaid, in a manner consistent with state law.
(4) A public hearing on any proposed amendment shall be considered by the city council before its adoption.Not less than sixteen (16) days prior to the scheduled hearing, a published notice of the public hearing shall begiven, by publication thereof in one issue of the official publication of the city, in a manner consistent with statelaw.
(B)
Conditional use permit “CUP”
.
(1) All zoning uses that require a conditional use permit shall be treated in the same manner as a zoningamendment.
(2) All conditional use permit applications require a site plan filed by the applicant that identifies the location ofall proposed activities, improvements and other information required by staff and outlined in the conditional usepermit application.
(C)
Variances
.
(1) The board of zoning adjustment may grant hardship variances from the terms of the zoning ordinance onlywhen unusual conditions exist that make the literal enforcement of the zoning ordinance unjust. The followingconditions must be met before staff may place a variance on the agenda for consideration by the board ofzoning adjustment.
(a) The hardship may not be self-imposed. (Failure of the applicant to obtain necessary zoning, buildingpermits, certificate of occupancy or other required actions by the applicant does not constitute a hardship.)
(b) The hardship must be unique to the property.
(c) The hardship is not just financial in nature. (The financial impacts of the zoning ordinance are notjustification for a variance.)
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 288/350
(2) The board shall hold a public hearing on any proposed variance. Not less than eleven (11) days prior tothe scheduled hearing, each property owner, as shown on the latest approved city tax roll, who owns realproperty lying within two hundred (200) feet of the property on which the change is requested shall be sentnotice of such meeting by ordinary mail, postage prepaid, in a manner consistent with state law.
(3) A public hearing notice also shall be published in the official publication of the city not less than 16 daysprior to the hearing. A meeting agenda also will be posted no less than 72 hours prior to the meeting at whichthe variance shall be considered in accordance with the Texas Open Meeting Act.
(D)
Special exceptions
.
(1) The board of zoning adjustment may grant special exceptions from the terms of the zoning ordinance onlywhen specifically authorized by this chapter and approved by the board of zoning adjustment.
(2) The board of zoning adjustment shall not approve a special exception unless it has determined therequested exception at least meets the following conditions:
(a) The special exception is specifically authorized by this chapter.
(b) The exception will be wholly compatible with the use and permitted development of adjacentproperties either as filed or subject to such requirements as the Board may find necessary to protect andmaintain the stability of adjacent properties.
(3) The board shall hold a public hearing on any proposed special exception. A public hearing notice shall bepublished in the official publication of the city not less than 16 days prior to the hearing. A meeting agenda alsowill be posted no less than 72 hours prior to the meeting at which the variance shall be considered inaccordance with the Texas Open Meeting Act.
(4)
Authorized special exceptions
. The board of zoning adjustments may only consider exceptions to thefollowing regulations.
(a) Off-street parking regulations;
(b) Signage regulations;
(c) Landscaping regulations;
(d) Commercial antennae and antenna structures;
(e) Non-conforming use regulations:
1. Expansion of an existing building;
2. Replacement of a destroyed building;
3. Reoccupancy of an abandoned non-conforming use; and
4. Amortization to eliminate a non-conforming use;
(f) Fencing regulations;
(g) Accessory building masonry requirements.
(E)
Temporary uses
.
(1)
Purpose
. Certain temporary uses of land are essential to the full development and utilization of the land forits lawful purpose. The temporary uses hereinafter enumerated shall not be deemed violations of this chapterwhen made under the conditions herein provided.
(2)
Permitted temporary uses
.
(a) The permissible temporary uses, the conditions of use and the zoning districts wherein the sameshall be permitted and approvals required are:
(b)
Construction office - all districts
. Temporary field or construction offices and temporary buildingmaterial storage areas to be used solely for construction purposes in connection with the property onwhich they are erected may be permitted for specific periods of time, not to exceed one (1) year, whenapproved by the city manager. The board of zoning adjustment may grant extensions if so requested bythe developer or construction company. All such temporary uses may be discontinued by the order of the
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 289/350
city manager. In no event shall such temporary uses continue to exist on the premises after theconstruction for which they were erected is completed.
(c)
Real estate sales office - all single-family residential districts
. Temporary field real estate sales officesmay be permitted in single-family residential subdivisions for specific periods of time, not to exceed one (1)year, when approved by the city manager. The board of zoning adjustment may grant extensions if sorequested by the developer or real estate sales company. Such temporary uses may be located in a“model home” or a portable building within the subdivision, but may be discontinued by the order of the citymanager. In no event shall such temporary uses continue to exist after the subdivision or the increment ofsame in which the use is located shall have been substantially developed. Real estate sales offices shallnot be used as a temporary or permanent residence.
(d)
Temporary storage containers for construction sites
. Temporary storage containers are to be usedsolely for construction purposes in connection with the property at which they are erected and may bepermitted for specific periods of time, not to exceed 6 months, when approved by the city manager. Theboard of zoning adjustment may grant extensions if so requested by the owner, developer, or constructioncompany. All such temporary uses may be discontinued by the order of the city manager. In no event shallsuch temporary uses continue to exist on the premises after the construction for which they were erectedis completed.
(e)
Carnival or amusement rides
.
1. The board of zoning adjustment, upon the issuance of a permit as a special exception fortemporary carnival or amusement rides, may stipulate that such permit shall be effective for anindefinite term. Thereafter, the holder of such permit may periodically engage in such use with theapproval of the city manager without further board action, provided:
2. The city manager shall be given not less than ten (10) days notice of any proposed operationsunder the permit;
3. Such operations shall not be conducted for more than eight (8) consecutive days at a time;
4. Such use shall not be engaged in more than twice in a twelve (12) month period;
5. Such use shall conform to all the terms of the board permit, including location, hours ofoperation, and the number and type of rides and concessions; and
6. The board may terminate the permit at any time.
(Ord. O-02-2020, secs. 18-100–18-500, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.159 Platting and dedication.
(A)
Platting
:
(1) Subdivisions of any land within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) shall not be approved until aplat thereof has been prepared and certified by a surveyor or qualified engineer licensed by the state. The platshall include all requirements of the City of Jacksboro Subdivision Ordinance and any required provisions of thischapter. All subdivision plats shall be referred to the planning and zoning commission for review andrecommendations before final action thereon by the city council. All such plats are required to be filed for recordin the office of the county clerk after approval. Upon such filing, they shall be posted to the official city map andthe city zoning map by the city secretary.
(2) Before being subdivided, or concurrently therewith, the area involved must be permanently zoned. No plator subdivision shall be approved within any area where a petition or ordinance for annexation or arecommendation for annexation is pending before the city council unless and until such annexation has beenapproved.
(3) Hereafter every owner of any lot or tract of land situated within the corporate limits or within theextraterritorial jurisdiction of the city who shall be required to cause a plat to be made and approved by theplanning and zoning commission and the city council as provided for in subsection (1) above shall also berequired to dedicate to the city a reasonable portion of the lot or tract being platted as a prerequisite to platapproval when such dedication is determined to be necessary for the orderly development of streets, roadways,thoroughfares, parks or utilities within the area. Provided however, that such dedication shall not exceed tenpercent (10%) of the total lot area when such lot being platted is being platted as a single lot.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 19-100, passed 3-23-20)
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 290/350
Sec. 154.160 Certificates of occupancy.
(A)
Commercial business certificate of occupancy
.
(1)
Commercial business certificate of occupancy
: No tract of land or premises nor structure thereon shall beused, occupied or changed in use until a commercial business certificate of occupancy shall have been issuedby the building official stating that the tract of land, premises or structure, as case may be, complies with theprovisions of this zoning ordinance and any other part of the city code applicable thereto.
(2)
Application for commercial business certificate of occupancy - new and alterations
: Commercial businesscertificate of occupancy for a new building or the alteration of an existing building shall be applied for coincidentwith the application for building permit, and will be issued within five (5) days after the erection or structuralalteration of such building shall have been completed inconformity with the provisions of pertinent statutes andordinances.
(B)
Commercial residential certificate of occupancy
.
(1) The intent of the commercial residential certificate of occupancy is to provide a reasonable level ofpredictability for owners, residents and inspection personnel, for the safety and welfare of the tenants, as well asthe owner.
(2) No checklist can encompass every possible scenario and not all apparent violations present a threat to thehealth or safety of tenants. Accordingly, inspectors are required to use a significant amount of professionaljudgment. The severity of the violation, along with the willingness of the building owner, to abate inspectionfindings will weigh heavily into the course of action taken by inspectors.
(3) The commercial residential certificate of occupancy safety inspection is designed to acknowledge thestandards that were in place at the time of the property's construction, provided those standards do not threatenlife-safety. It is not the intent of the program to bring Jacksboro rental properties into compliance with currentbuilding code.
(4) Commercial residential certificate of occupancy: No commercial residential tenant shall use or occupy anytract of land or premises, nor structure thereon, until a commercial residential certificate of occupancy shall havebeen issued by the building official stating that the tract of land, premises or structure, as case may be, complieswith the provisions of this zoning ordinance and any other part of the city code applicable thereto.
(5) Application for commercial residential certificate of occupancy: The commercial residential certificate ofoccupancy shall be applied for prior to the establishment of services and any occupancy with each new tenant,regardless of the length of time since the last commercial residential certificate of occupancy inspection.
(Ord. O-02-2020, secs. 20-100–20-101, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.161 Building permits.
(A) Any owner, authorized agent or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish or changethe occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical,gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the technical codes, or to cause any suchwork to be done, shall first make application to the city to obtain a building permit in accordance with the standard buildingcodes, as adopted at such time of application.
(B) An application for certificate of occupancy, if required, must accompany the application for a building permit.
(C) No building permits shall be issued for construction on any lot or tract of land that has not been properly platted asrequired by this chapter.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 21-100, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.162 Penalty for violations.
(A) Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute amisdemeanor. Any person, firm or corporation who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall,upon conviction thereof may be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than two thousand dollars($2,000.00). Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(B) The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent,or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separateoffense and suffer the penalties herein provided.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 291/350
(C) Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent orremedy any violation, including but not limited to seeking injunctions and civil penalties.
(Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 22-100, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.163 Severability.
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase, or provision of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid or heldunconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity of this Chapter as a whole or any part or provision thereof other thanthe part so decided to be invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 23-100, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.164 Ordinances repealed.
This chapter, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjectsherein enumerated and embraced. The zoning ordinance of the City of Jacksboro is deemed repealed from and after theeffective date of this chapter. (Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 24-100, passed 3-23-20)
Sec. 154.165 Preserving rights.
By passage of this chapter, no presently illegal use shall be deemed to have been legalized unless specifically such use fallswithin a use district where the actual use is a conforming use. Otherwise, such use shall remain nonconforming uses whererecognized, or an illegal use, as the case may be. It is further the intent and declared purpose of this chapter that no offensecommitted, and no liability, penalty, or forfeiture, either civil or criminal, incurred prior to the time the existing ordinancewas repealed and this chapter adopted, shall be discharged or affected by such repeal. Prosecutions and suits for suchoffenses, liabilities, penalties, or forfeitures may be instituted or causes presently pending proceeded with in all respects as issuch prior ordinance had not been repealed. (Ord. O-02-2020, sec. 25-100, passed 3-23-20)
PART FIVE - DEFINITIONS
DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are to be used and interpreted as defined hereinafter. Words used inthe present tense shall include the future tense; words used in the singular number include the plural and words in the pluralnumber include the singular, except where the natural construction of the writing indicates otherwise. The word “shall” ismandatory and not discretionary.
Accessory building
. A subordinate building or a portion of the main building located on the same lot as the main building,the use of which is incidental to that of the dominant use of the building or premises. Accessory buildings may includeparking garages, adjacent farm structures, home workshops and tool houses, storage sheds, home greenhouses, etc. Anaccessory dwelling shall mean the same as an accessory building except it may be used as a residence.
Accessory use
. A Use customarily incidental, appropriate and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building(s)and located upon the same lot therewith.
Adult entertainment enterprise
. Reference chapter 114 of the City of Jacksboro Code of Ordinances
Advertising sign or structure
. Any device or structure, regardless of the material used in the construction of such device orstructure and regardless of how such sign or structure is erected, and of any character whatsoever that advertises a business,product or activity. All such signs or structures shall be governed by
sections 154.85
-
154.108
.
Airport
. A place where aircraft may land and take off, usually equipped with hangers, facilities for repairing and/or refuelingaircraft, accommodations for training pilots and other facilities and accommodations for passengers, pilots and/or flightcrews.
Alley
. A minor right-of-way, dedicated for public use, which is used primarily for placement and maintenance of utility linesand for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on the street.
Amusement center
. A public place of business making use of three (3) or more coin operated amusement machines,devices, or apparatus, excluding pool or billiard tables, operated by insertion of a coin or similar object, for the purpose ofentertainment or skill.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 292/350
Amusement, commercial (indoors)
. An amusement enterprise wholly enclosed in a building which is treated acousticallyso that noise generated by the enterprise is not perceptible at the bounding line of the property and including, but not limitedto, a bowling alley or billiard parlor.
Amusement, commercial (outdoors)
. Any amusement enterprise offering entertainment or games of skill to the generalpublic for a fee or charge wherein any portion of the activity takes place in the open including, but not limited to, a golfdriving range, archery range and miniature golf course.
Antenna
. An instrument or device consisting of wires, poles, rods or reflecting disc, designed for transmitting or receivingany portion of the radio, microwave or electromagnetic spectrum.
Antenna, non-commercial (amateur radio or CB radio)
. An antenna not exceeding forty (40) feet in height above theground elevation at the base of the tower, pole, structure or support. If mounted atop a house or other structure, the totalheight above the ground may not exceed forty feet (40'). A satellite dish antenna not to exceed twelve (12) feet in diametershall also be considered as a non-commercial antenna.
Antenna, commercial
. An antenna in excess of forty (40) feet in height above the ground elevation at the base of the tower,pole, structure or support and primarily used for commercial broadcasting. If mounted atop a structure, the total height abovethe ground may not exceed forty feed (40'). A satellite dish antenna in excess twelve (12) feet in diameter shall also beconsidered as a commercial antenna. A microwave-transmitting tower and/or towers used for cellular transmissions also areconsidered commercial antennas.
Antique shop
. An establishment offering for sale, within a building, articles such as glass, china, furniture or similarfurnishings and decorations which have value and significance as a result of age, design and sentiment.
Apartment
. A dwelling unit contained in an apartment building and which is for rent or lease.
Apartment building or house
. A structure containing two or more apartments.
Apartment, garage
. A dwelling unit designed or constructed as a part of a private garage.
Art gallery or museum
. An institution for the collection, display and distribution of objects of art or science, and which issponsored by a public or quasi-public agency and which facility is open to the general public.
Atmospheric pollution
. The discharging from stacks, open storage, chimneys, exhausts, vents, ducts, openings, or openfires of such air contaminants as visible emissions, sulfur dioxide, particulate matter, hydrocarbons, fumes or similarmaterial or gases.
Automobile
. A self-propelled mechanical vehicle designed for use on streets and highways for the conveyance of goods andpeople and required to be registered and appropriately licensed by governmental agencies. Vehicles exceeding 2.5 tons grossvehicle weight (GVW) are excluded from this definition. The word “auto” is typically interchangeable with “automobile”
Automobile and trailer sales area
. An area, other than a street, used for the display, sale or rental of new or usedautomobiles, trucks, or trailers, where no repair work is done. Such area shall not include automobile wrecking ordismantling or the sale of salvaged parts. Such sale area shall include one space per sales unit in addition to any other on-siteparking requirements.
Automobile storage
. The storage or impoundment, on a lot or tract, of operable automobiles for the purpose of holdingsuch vehicles until claimed by its legal owner or sold for impoundment or other storage fees.
Automobile leasing and renting
. The leasing or renting of automobiles, motorcycles and light duty vehicles.
Automobile repair (minor)
. Minor repair or replacement of parts, tires, tubes and batteries; diagnostic services, minormotor services such as grease, oil spark plug and filter changing; tune-ups; emergency road service; replacement ofalternators, starters, hoses, brake parts; washing and polishing; performing state inspections and making minor repairsnecessary to pass said inspections; normal serving of air-conditioning systems; and other similar minor services forautomobiles. This definition does not include any operations named under “Automobile Repair (Major)” or any other similaruse.
Automobile repair (major)
. General repair or reconditioning of engines, air-conditioning systems and transmissions formotor vehicles; wrecker service; collision services, including body and/or frame straightening or repairing; customizing,
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 293/350
painting; vehicle steam cleaning; undercoating and rust proofing; any uses listed enter “automobile repair (minor)” and othersimilar uses.
Auto wrecking
. The collecting and dismantling or wrecking of used motor vehicles or trailers, or the storage, sale ordumping of dismantled, partially dismantled, obsolete, or wrecked motor vehicles or their parts.
Auto parts sales (new)
. An establishment providing the sale and inside display of new and reconditioned parts forautomobiles.
Automobile sales (new)
. An establishment whose primary business is the sale and display of new automobiles within ashowroom and on an adjacent open car sales lot. Used automobiles may be a secondary use.
Automobile sales (used)
. An establishment whose primary business is the sale and display of used automobiles within ashowroom or on an adjacent open car sales lot.
Background noise
. Noise from all sources other than that under specific consideration including traffic operating on publicthoroughfares.
Bar
. A place where spirituous, vinous, malt or other alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises, and morethan 20% of the gross business is derived from such sales. The term shall also include “tavern,” “inn,” “night club,” or “beerparlor.”
Board
. Board of zoning adjustment (BZA).
Boarding house or rooming house
. A building, other than a hotel, where lodging and/or meals for three or more personsare provided for compensation.
Building
. Any structure built for the support, shelter, and enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of anykind.
Building ends
. Those sides of a building having the least horizontal dimension. As used herein for the building spacingregulations for multiple-family dwelling, a building end shall be interpreted as being the narrowest side of a buildingregardless of whether it fronts upon a street, faces the rear of the lot or is adjacent to the side lot line or another building.
Building line
. A line parallel or approximately parallel to the platted property line at a specified distance therefrom makingthe minimum distance from the platted property line that a building may be erected.
Building official
. The building official or person charged with the enforcement of the planning, zoning and building codes ofthe city.
Certificate of occupancy
. An official certificate issued by the city through the enforcing official that indicates conformancewith or approved conditional waiver from the zoning regulations and authorizes legal use of the premises for which it isissued.
City council/city aldermen
. The elected, governing body of the City of Jacksboro.
Clinic, health
. A building in which a group of physicians, dentists, or physicians and dentists and allied professionalassistants are associated for the purpose of treating and diagnosing ill or injured out-patients. A clinic may include a dentalor medical laboratory or a dispensing apothecary.
Club, private
. Quarters for a private organization, a principal purpose of which is the preparation and service of food and/ordrink for members and their guests only.
Club or lodge
. An association of persons for the promotion of a nonprofit common objective such as literature, science,politics, good fellowship and similar objectives, which meets periodically and which is limited to members.
Commission
. See planning and zoning commission.
Community center
. A building dedicated to social or recreational activities, serving the city or a neighborhood and ownedand operated by the city, or by a non-profit organization dedicated to promoting the health, safety, morals or general welfareof the city.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 294/350
Comprehensive plan
. Graphic and textual form policies which govern the future development of the city and whichconsists of various components governing specific geographic areas and functions and services of the city.
Condominium
. The same as an apartment except that the tenant has the option of obtaining title of ownership of thedwelling space and physical interior of the dwelling space. The building's owner retains title to the building frame, thebuilding physical exterior, and all physical service facilities and ways of the building which are not part of the physicalinterior described above, and the land on which the building is located. Restrictive covenants ensure that the functional andenvironmental conditions of the interior of each dwelling unit are maintained to the extent that the value of all the otherdwelling units in the same building is protected.
Convalescent home
. Any structure used for or occupied by a person recovering from illness or suffering from theinfirmities of old age.
Country club/golf course
. A golf course and clubhouse that are available to a specific recorded membership. Such a clubmay include, as adjunct facilities: a dining room, private club, swimming pool, cabanas, tennis courts and similar service andrecreational facilities for the members.
Court
. An open, unoccupied space, bounded on more than two sides by the walls of a building. An inner court is a courtentirely surrounded by the exterior walls of a building. An outer court is a court having one side open to a street, alley, yardor other open space.
Coverage
. The percent of a lot or tract covered by the roof or first floor of a building. Roof eaves to the extent of two (2)feet from the walls of a building shall be excluded from coverage computations.
Custom personal service
. Tailor, dressmaker, shoe shop or similar shop offering custom service.
Customarily incidental use
. A use of a building or premises, not involving the conduct of a business, which is onlysecondary to the principal use and is necessary to the enjoyment of the premises for any of the principal uses permittedwithin a zoning district. A customarily incidental use may include a customary home occupation.
Customary home occupations
. A customary home occupation is an occupation customarily carried on in the home by amember of the occupant's family without significant structural alterations in the building or any of its rooms, without theinstallation of machinery or heavy equipment, and without the use of a sign to advertise the occupation. It is an occupationor activity that is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of premises for dwelling purposes, and is not detrimental orinjurious to the economic or aesthetic value of adjoining property. Customary home occupations shall not include barbershops, beauty shops, carpenter shops, electrical shops, plumber shops, radio shops, tin-painting, furniture repairing, signpainting, or any form of merchandising activity.
Dance hall
. Any room, space or building primarily used and commonly resorted to for the purpose of dancing, and to whichadmission by the general public can be had by paying a fee or by the purchase, possession or presentation of a ticket ortoken, or, to which the public generally may gain admission with the payment of a fee directly or indirectly or withoutpayment of a fee.
Day camp
. A facility arranged and conducted for the instruction and organized outdoor recreation of children on a daytimebasis.
Day nursery/day care center
. A place where children are left for care a part of the twenty-four (24) hours of the day; alsoknown as a day care center.
Day spa
. a facility primarily engaged in providing services generally involved in the care of the person for personal,cosmetic and weight loss services including: ear piercing, electrolysis, hair care, microblading, microdermabrasion, nailcare, permanent makeup, shaving, skin care, tanning, waxing, non-medical weight reduction services.
Depth of rear yard
. The mean horizontal distance between the rear line of a building other than an accessory building andthe rear lot line.
Development site
. The tract of land on which a developer constructs physical improvements, as, for example, a residentialsubdivision, a townhouse community, or a shopping village. In most cases, this involves subdividing one larger tract into anumber of smaller parcels and constructing at least the infrastructure associated with the entire project.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 295/350
District
. A zoning district, a section of the city for which the regulations governing the area, height, and use of buildings andland are uniform.
Drive-in restaurant
. Any eating establishment which either serves food to occupants of parked automobiles or offersfacilities that would encourage patrons to eat in parked vehicles.
DU
. Abbreviation for dwelling unit.
DU/A
. Abbreviation for dwelling units per acre.
Duplex
. An apartment building containing two and only two dwelling units.
Dwelling unit
. Living quarters, including at least minimal housekeeping and sanitary facilities, for use exclusively by oneperson or one household.
Dwelling, single-family, detached
. A residential structure containing one and only one dwelling unit and not attached toany other house or structure.
Dwelling, single-family, attached
. A residential structure containing one and only one dwelling unit that is attached orjoined to one or more other dwelling units or other structures.
Dwelling, single-family, cluster
. Any arrangement, groupings, clustering, or complex of single-family dwellings of anytype.
Dwelling, multiple
. A building used or designed as a residence for two or more families or households living independentlyof each other.
Easement
. A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to and/or for the use by the public, acorporation or another person or entity.
Family home
. A place where not more than six (6) persons with physical or mental disabilities are provided room andboard, as well as supervised care and rehabilitation by not more than two (2) persons.
Field construction office
. A building or structure, of either permanent or temporary construction, used in connection with adevelopment or construction project for housing temporary supervisory or administrative functions related to development,construction or the sale of real estate properties within the active development or construction project.
Flea market
. An outdoor, or partially indoor premises, where the main use is the sale of new and used household goods,,personal effects, tools, art work, small household appliances and similar merchandise, objects or equipment, in smallquantities, in broken stalls, lots or parcels, not in bulk, of the use or consumption by the immediate purchaser in a building,open air or partly enclosed booths or stalls not within a wholly enclosed building. The term flea market shall not be deemedto include wholesale sales establishments or rental service establishments, nor does it pertain to retail sidewalk sales, garagesales, arts and craft shows or sales held by non-profit organizations.
Flood
. A temporary rise in stream flow or stage that results in water overtopping its bank and inundating areas adjacent tothe channel.
Floodplain
. The area outside the flood way that is subject to inundation by the 100-year flood.
Floodway
. The channel of a stream and adjacent land areas that are required to carry and discharge the flood water of floodflows of any stream associated with the 100-year flood with an allowable maximum increase in water surface elevationabove the 100-year flood of one (1) foot.
Floor area
. The total square feet of floor space within the outside dimensions of a building including each floor level, butexcluding cellars, carports or garages, also called living area.
Floor area ratio (far)
. The ratio between the total square feet of floor area in a structure and the total square feet of landwithin the lot or tract on which the structure is located.
Frequency
. The number of oscillations per second in a sound wave.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 296/350
Game processing
. Means the processing of hunter killed game, whether by bow and arrow or firearm, consistent with allapplicable state and local regulations and licenses as herein adopted or as may be adopted and amended, for the use and/orconsumption by the owner of said game. For purposes of this section, the following animals are game animals: mule deer,white-tailed deer, pronghorn antelope, desert bighorn sheep, gray or cat squirrels, fox squirrels or red squirrels and collaredpeccary or javelina. Game processing establishment means a commercial establishment in which game is processed orotherwise prepared and packaged for human consumption, but not for commercial or retail sale.
Garage apartment
. A dwelling unit for one family erected conjunction with a garage.
Garage, private
. An accessory building for private storage of motor vehicles.
Garage, public
. A building or portion thereof designed or used for the storage, sale, hiring, care or repair of motor vehicles,which is operated for commercial purposes.
Garage, storage
. A building or portion thereof, other than a private garage, used exclusively for parking or storage of self-propelled vehicles, but with no other services provided except facilities for washing.
Halfway house
. A home for not more than six (6) persons who have demonstrated a tendency toward alcoholism, drugabuse, anti-social or criminal conduct, together with not more than two (2) providing supervision and other services to suchpersons, all of which live together as a single housekeeping unit.
Health studio
. Any recreational facility where all activities are contained within an enclosed building which is open to thegeneral public for a fee or charge. Such facilities may include, yet are not limited to, aerobic exercise, tennis, swimming orracquet facilities, gymnasiums, weight room, sauna or other associated recreational activities.
Hospital
. An institution in which there are complete facilities for diagnosis, treatment, surgery, laboratory, X-ray, nursing,and the prolonged care of bed patients.
Incidental use
. Any use different from the primary use but which compliments and/or supplements the primary use.Incidental shall mean an area that constitutes not more than fifteen percent (15%) of the main use.
Infrastructure
. Structures built below, on, or approximately on the surface of the ground which provide the foundations forsuper-structures, or which provide services for building structures or for other utility purposes, for example, streets, waterand sewer lines and their appurtenances, and storm drain systems.
Industrial park
. A large tract of land that has been planned, developed and operated as an integrated facility for a number ofindividual industrial uses, with special attention to circulation, parking, utility needs, aesthetics and compatibility.
Institution
. A building occupied by a non-profit corporation; a non-profit establishment for public use.
Institution for the care of alcoholic, psychiatric or narcotic patients
. An institution offering resident treatment ofalcoholic, narcotic or psychiatric patients.
Junk or salvage yard
. Premises upon which waste or scrap materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, packed,disassembled or handled, including but not limited to scrap iron and other metals, paper rags, rubber tires, bottles and usedbuilding materials. This term shall also include an automobile wrecking yard and automobile parts yard.
Kennel
. Any lot or premises on which four (4) or more dogs, cats or other domestic animals at least four (4) months of ageare housed or accepted for boarding, trimming, grooming and/or bathing for which remuneration is received.
Landscaping
. The use of material such as, but not limited to, grass, groundcovers, shrubs, vines, hedges, trees or palms, andnon-living durable material commonly used in landscaping, such as, but not limited to, rocks, pebbles, sand, walls or fences,but excluding paving, to meet landscaping requirements.
Living area
. The floor area of the enclosed parts of a dwelling unit, exclusive of garages, measured by the exteriordimensions.
Local utility line
. The facilities provided by a municipality or a franchised utility company for the distribution of gas, water,surface drainage water, electric power, telephone service or cable television, or for the collection of sewage or storm water.
Lodging house
. A building other than a hotel where lodging for five or more persons is provided for compensation on amore or less temporary basis. A lodging house shall not include those uses that are customary in servicing the transient trade
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 297/350
usually associated with hotels and motels.
Lot
. Any plot of land occupied or intended to be occupied by one main building and the required parking, or a group of mainbuildings, and accessory building(s) and uses, including such open spaces as are required by the Ordinance, and other lawsor ordinances, and having its principal frontage on a public street.
Lot area
. The total area, measured on a horizontal plane, included with the lot lines.
Lot, corner
. A lot which has at least two adjacent sides abutting for its full length on a street, provided that the interior angleat the intersection of such two sides is less than one-hundred thirty-five degrees (135°).
Lot depth
. The mean horizontal distance from the front street line to the rear line.
Lot, double frontage
. A lot, other than a corner lot, which is contiguous to two streets, and which, therefore, has two frontyards.
Lot, interior
. A lot other than a corner lot.
Lot line
. The platted boundary of a lot.
Lot, frontage
. That dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting on a street, excluding the side dimension of a corner lot.
Lot line, front
. The narrower side of the lot abutting a street. When two lot lines abutting streets are of equal length, theowner shall have the choice in designating which shall be a lot frontage. For a lot that has a boundary line which does notabut the front street line, is not a rear lot line and lies along the same general directional orientation as the front and rear lotlines, then said line shall be considered a front lot line in establishing minimum setback lines.
Lot line, rear
. The lot line farthest from and most parallel to the front lot line. For triangular lots, the point opposite the frontlot line shall be considered the rear lot line and have a value of zero.
Lot line, side
. Any lot line not the front or rear lot line.
Lot of record
. A lot, which is typically a part of a subdivision that has been appropriately platted by a registered engineer orsurveyor and has been recorded in the office of the county clerk.
Lot, reverse corner
. A corner lot, the rear lot line of which abuts the side lot line of an adjacent lot.
Lot, through
. An interior lot having frontage on two streets. The same as a double frontage lot.
Lot width
. The horizontal distance measured between side lot lines parallel to the front lot line and measured from the pointon the building line that is closest to the front lot line.
Manufactured home display and sales
. The offering for sale, storage or display of trailers or manufactured homes on aparcel of land, but excluding the use of such facilities as dwellings either on a temporary or permanent basis.
Manufactured home park
. A unified development of manufactured home sites, plots or stands arranged on a large tractunder single ownership, meeting the area and yard requirements of this chapter, and designed to accommodate manufacturedhomes for a more or less permanent duration.
Manufactured home subdivision
. A parcel of land that has been designed, platted, improved and is intended for theplacement of individually owned manufactured home units on platted lots that can be purchased outright by the owners ofthe manufactured home units.
Manufactured home
. A prefab home mounted on its own vehicular chassis, including single and multiple units (forexample: “double-wide”). Also include HUD-code manufactured homes.
Masonry and glass pane
. The exterior wall surface of a building which consists of any kind of masonry, such as brick,stone, concrete block, or other such materials which are not wood, metal, or plastic, and including the areas of doors andwindows located within such exterior walls.
Microblading
. A tattooing technique in which a small handheld tool made of several tiny needles is used to add semi-permanent pigment to the skin. Microblading is also sometimes called embroidery, feather touch or hair-like strokes.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 298/350
Modular home
. A structure or building module as defined, under the jurisdiction and control of the Texas Department ofLabor and Standards and that is installed and used as a residence by a consumer, transportable in one or more sections on atemporary chassis or other conveyance device, and designed to be used on a permanent foundation system. The termincludes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained in the structure. The term does not includea manufactured home as defined in the Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Act (Article 5221fV.T.C.S.); nor does itinclude building modules incorporating concrete or masonry as the primary structural component.
Motel
. A building or group of buildings, designed, arranged or used for temporary occupancy having accommodations forhousing, parking of automobiles in close proximity to the quarters occupied by the owner of such automobile and providingfor five or more such quarters. The term “motel” shall include all establishments coming under the general classification of“drive-in hotel,” “tourist court,” and any other such establishment that houses visiting transient clientele.
Museum
. An establishment operated as a non-profit, non-commercial repository for a collection of scientific, natural orliterary curiosities or objects of interest or works of art, not including the regular sale or distribution of the objects collected.
Nonconforming use
. A building, structure or use of land lawfully occupied at the time of the effective date of this Chapteror amendments thereto, and which does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is situated.
Nursing home
. A home where elderly or handicapped persons are provided with lodging, meals and nursing care.
Occupancy
. The use or intended use of land or buildings by residents, proprietors or tenants.
Open space, common open space, permanent open space
. Open space is that land area which is relatively free ofman-made structures, where water bodies, land forms, and vegetation predominate: Common open space is that open spacewhich is owned, used or operated and maintained for the common benefit of the inhabitants of a development; permanentopen space is that open space land which is legally restricted to park, floodplain, or other open space usage; or which ispublicly owned and utilized as open space.
Open storage
. The storage of any equipment, machinery, building materials or commodities, including raw, semi-finishedand finished materials, the storage of which is not accessory to a residential use, and which is visible from ground level;provided, however, that vehicular parking shall not be deemed to be open storage.
Parking lot
. An off-street area surfaced and improved for the temporary storage of motor vehicles.
Parking space
. A nine-foot (9') wide by eighteen (18) feet in depth area designated for off-street parking.
Parking lot driving lane
. A driving area between parking spaces or providing access to parking spaces. Driving lanes willbe fifteen (15) feet wide for one-way traffic and twenty-five (25) feet wide for two-way traffic.
Parkway
. That public property situated between the curb or edge of a street and the property line of the land adjacent.
Particulate matter
. Any material, except uncombined water, which exists in a finely divided form as a liquid or solid atstandard conditions when released into the atmosphere.
Patio home
. A single-family detached home or residence with permitted side and rear yards as narrow as five (5) feet eachand which has constructed entirely around it, along the lot lines, a masonry wall eight (8) feet in height except for anopening for a driveway entrance.
Pawn shop
. An establishment where money is loaned on the security of personal property pledged in the keeping of theowners (pawnbroker). Retail sales of primarily used items also may be permitted.
Permanent makeup
. a cosmetic technique which employs tattoos (permanent pigmentation of the dermis) as a means ofproducing designs that resemble makeup, such as eyelining and other permanent enhancing colors to the skin of the face,lips, and eyelids.
Philanthropic institution
. Any organization operating under a non-profit charter, the activities of which are devotedexclusively to benevolent purposes.
Planning and zoning commission (P&Z)
. A board, appointed by the city council, to carry-out the duties set forth by thecity council in accordance with 211.007 of the Local Government Code for the proper and orderly growth of the community.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 299/350
Plat
. A plan of a subdivision of land creating building lots or tracts and showing all essential dimensions and otherinformation essential to comply with the subdivision standards of the City of Jacksboro and subject to the approval by theplanning and zoning commission and city council and filed in the plat records of Jack County. A registered engineer orsurveyor must prepare such plat.
Portable building sales
. An establishment that displays and sells structures capable of being carried and transported toanother location, but not including manufactured homes.
PPM (vol)
. Parts per million by volume.
Pre-fab home
. A detached single-family dwelling which is prefabricated and assembled at a fabricating plant site fortransporting in finished form to a residential lot site. This includes such homes which may be prefabricated into two or moremajor component parts, but each such part is structurally complete and otherwise finished, the only remaining operationbeing to connect said parts together and fix them to a foundation on the residential lot site.
Primary use
. The principal or predominant use of any lot or building.
Primary building
. The building or buildings on a lot that are occupied by the primary use.
Private club
. An establishment providing social and/or dining facilities which may provide alcoholic beverage service to anassociation of person, or in which alcoholic beverages are stored, possessed, mixed or consumed and served by the drink orin broken or unsealed containers, and otherwise falling within the definition, and permitted under the provisions of chapter32 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as the same may be hereinafter amended and as it pertains to the operation ofprivate clubs. A private club shall be limited to membership by invitation only. No conditional use permit shall be grantedfor such use unless the use shall be in strict accordance with the standards and distance requirements of chapter 32 of theTexas Alcoholic Beverage code. An applicant for a conditional use permit for a private club shall furnish with suchapplication a site plan showing the property, location of all buildings in which a private club is to be located and the closestdistance of such structure to the nearest property line.
Private recreation facility or private park
. A recreation facility operated for the exclusive use of private residents orneighborhood groups and their guests, and not the general public.
Private utility, other than listed
. A non-public utility requiring special facilities in residential areas or on public propertysuch as heating, cooling, or communications not customarily provided by the municipality or public utilities.
Public building or facility
. Any building which is owned, leased, primarily used and/or primarily occupied by the UnitedStates government, the State of Texas, the City of Jacksboro, the Jacksboro Independent School District, Jack County or anysubdivision or agency of the United States, the State of Texas or the City of Jacksboro, or any public or quasi-public utility.
Publish/publication
. Notice in City of Jacksboro Official Newspaper.
Radio broadcasting without tower
. Facility used for studio, office or other broadcasting requirement without a tower.
Recreational area
. An area devoted to facilities and equipment for recreational purposes such as swimming pools, tenniscourts, playgrounds, community clubhouses, or other similar uses.
Recycling center
. A facility, that is not a junkyard, and in which recoverable resources, such as newspapers, glass,aluminum and metal cans are collected, stored, processed for delivery to an end-user within a completely enclosed building.
Residence home for aged
. A home where elderly people are provided with lodging and meals with or without nursingcare.
Residential structure
. Any structure containing one or more dwelling units and their accessories.
Rest home or nursing home
. A private home for the care of the aged or infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodilydisorders, not containing equipment for surgical care or treatment of disease or injury.
Restaurant (or cafeteria)
. An eating establishment where customers are primarily served at tables or self-served and foodis consumed on the premises. Drive-through window service as an incidental service is included as permitted by zoningdistricts.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 300/350
Restaurant (drive-in)
. Any eating establishment which either serves food to occupants or parked automobiles or offersfacilities that would encourage patrons to eat in parked vehicles.
Rowhouse
. One of several attached single-family dwellings positioned so as to form a row.
Screening device
. A structure such as a fence or wall not less than six (6) feet high nor greater than eight (8) feet highwhich serves as a visual screen. A structure in excess of eight (8) feet in height shall be deemed a wall and shall be subject tothe provisions of the building code of the city.
Secondary use
. A collateral use of land or buildings, which is customarily done or performed in conjunction with apermitted principal use, but not constituting a majority of either the employment, area or revenue of the combined uses.
Servants quarters
. An accessory building located on the same lot or grounds with the main building and used as livingquarters for servants employed on the premises and not rented or otherwise used as a separate domicile.
Small animal clinic
. An establishment for the care and medical veterinary practice on or for domestic household animals,conducted completely within an enclosed, soundproofed and air-conditioned structure and not using any yard or open spacefor the activities defined.
Spa services
. Refer to definition for day spa.
Stable
. A stable and related open pasture where horses are quartered for owners on a fee basis. No horses or other livestockshall be stabled or corralled within one hundred (100) feet of any bounding property line.
Stable commercial
. An establishment where horses are kept and rented to the general public for riding. No horses or otherlivestock shall be stabled or corralled within one hundred (100) feet of any bounding property line.
Stable, private club
. A paddock, stable and related riding and quartering facilities for horses owned by a specific numberof recorded members and maintained for the exclusive use of such members and guests. No horses or other livestock shall bestabled or corralled within one hundred (100) feet of any bounding property line.
Stacked parking
. Parking of an automotive vehicle or vehicles either in a multi-level parking structure of at least twolevels, or parking in a residential or private garage so that the vehicular parking space is either immediately below orimmediately above part of the living area or other permitted use.
Stand
. A prepared place, usually in the form of a structural slab on the ground, for the purpose of providing a foundationand anchorage for a manufactured home or travel trailer, together with all related appurtenances.
Street line
. Street right-of-way line or boundary line.
Strolling path
. A pedestrian path, way, or trail which is designed, maintained, and intended for leisure walks or strolls alongit.
Structural alterations
. Any change in the supporting member of a building, such as a bearing wall, column, beams orgirders.
Structure
. A constructed facility; something (as a building) that is constructed.
Swim or tennis club
. A private recreational club with restricted membership, usually of less area than a country club butincluding a clubhouse and a swimming pool, tennis courts and similar recreational facilities none of which are available tothe general public.
Tanning salon
. Indoor tanning involves using a device that emits ultraviolet radiation to produce a cosmetic tan. Typicallyfound in tanning salons, gyms, spas, hotels, and sporting facilities, and less often in private residences, the most commondevice is a horizontal tanning bed, also known as a sunbed or solarium.
Tanning salon (limited)
. A tanning salon in the central business district is an allowed limited use only as a secondary use toan approved primary use business.
Tattoo parlor
. An establishment or facility in which the practice of producing an indelible mark or figure on the human, byscarring or inserting pigment under the skin using needles, scalpels or other related equipment.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 301/350
Taxidermy
. A facility for the preparing, stuffing and mounting the skins of animals, birds, and fish. The use of the propertyfor this purpose shall be conducted in accordance with applicable state and local regulations and licenses, as herein adoptedor as my be adopted and amended.
Temporary field or construction office
. A trailer, structure or shelter for temporary office use, subject to removal by orderof the building official, used in connection with a development or building project for housing on the site for temporaryadministrative and supervisory functions and for sheltering employees and equipment.
Temporary sales - street vending
. The sale of merchandise from a temporary facility located on a public right-of-way, orprivate property, within the front or side yard area at disassociated periods of time. Street vending shall include anymerchandise that is displayed to be sold in an open, partially open, facility and is not designated as a seasonal item or isassociated with any outside display or merchandise offered for sale by the primary use of the lot or tract on which it islocated.
Tenant
. A dweller or occupant of a building who rents or leases the building from another person or company, generallyreferred to as the landlord (or owner).
Terminal motor freight
. The use of property or buildings for the temporary parking of motor freight vehicles or trucks ofcommon carriers, during loading and unloading and between trips, including necessary warehouse space for storage oftransitory freight.
Tire dealer
. A retail establishment engaged in the sale and/or installation of tires for vehicles.
Townhouse
. A rowhouse or other attached or detached single-family dwelling in a group of other such dwellings whichmay be arranged with varying setbacks or varying orientations, and for which yard regulations are generally less restrictive.
Trailer camp or park
. Any premises on which one or more pickup coaches or travel trailers are parked or situated and usedfor the purpose of supplying to the public a parking space for one or more such coaches or trailers.
Travel trailer
. A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling and to betowed behind a motor vehicle, and not to be misconstrued as a manufactured home. A travel trailer shall not be consideredas a permanent residence.
Truck and equipment repair
. An establishment providing minor and major repair services for heavy load vehicles andequipment.
Usable open space
. An open area that is designed and intended to be used for outdoor living and/or recreation. An area ofcommon open space shall not have a slope exceeding ten percent (10%), shall have no dimension of less than ten (10) feet,and may include landscaping, walks, recreational facilities, water features and decorative objects such as art work orfountains. Usable open space shall not include rooftops, accessory buildings, parking areas, driveways, turnaround areas orthe rights-of-way or easements for streets or alleys.
Used car lot
. A lot or portion thereof to be used only for the display and sale of automobiles that are in condition to bedriven on or off the lot. A used car lot shall not be used for the storage of wrecked automobiles, or the dismantling of auto.
Variance
. An adjustment in the application of the specific regulations of this chapter to a particular parcel of property,which because of special conditions or circumstances of hardship peculiar to the particular parcel, is necessary to prevent theproperty from being deprived of rights and privileges commonly enjoyed by other parcels in the same vicinity and zoningdistrict. The hardship must not be self-imposed, be financial in nature only and shall be unique to the property. All variancesshall be considered and approved by the board of zoning adjustment.
Veterinary hospital
. An establishment for the care and medical treatment of large animals and domestic household petshaving treatment and boarding facilities both in an enclosed building and outside pens or runs enclosed by permanent type offencing.
Wrecking or auto salvage yard
. A yard or building where automobiles or machinery are stored, dismantled and/or offeredfor sale as whole units, as salvaged parts or as processed metal.
Yard
. The portion of a building lot that lies essentially, between the exterior wall surfaces of the principal building and thelot boundary lines. Obstructions in yards are not permitted except as provided for in 6-500.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 302/350
Yard, front
. A yard across the full width of the lot extending along the front line of the main building to the front line of thelot.
Yard, rear
. A yard between the rear lot line and the rear line of the main building and the side lot lines.
Yard, side
. A yard between the building and the sideline of the lot and extending from the front yard to the requiredminimum rear yard.
Zero lot-line
. A side lot line of a lot on which a structure is permitted to be located to the edge of the lot; that is, the sideyard width is zero.
Zoning map
. The official certified map upon which the boundaries of the various zoning districts are drawn and which is anintegral part of the zoning ordinance.
(Ord. O-02-2020, part 5, passed 3-23-20)
PART SIX - APPENDICES
APPENDIX A. PARKING ILLUSTRATIONS
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 303/350
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 304/350
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 305/350
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 306/350
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 307/350
(Ord. O-02-2020, part 6, app. A, passed 3-23-20)
APPENDIX B. COMMERCIAL, MANUFACTURING AND INDUSTRIAL USE CHART
USE
CBD
LC
TC
TC/LMI
MI
PD
RES
Not Allowedin City
Accountant or bookkeeping office
X
X
Adult entertainment enterprise
X
Aircraft & aircraft related businesses
X
X
Amusement arcade
X
X
X
Amusement complex
X
X
X
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 308/350
Amusement park (outside)
X
X
Animal shelter
X
X
Apartment or multifamily building
X
X
Apparel manufacturing
X
Appliance manufacturing
X
Appliance repair shop
X
X
X
Appliance rental & repair
X
X
X
Architects or engineers office
X
X
X
X
Artificial limb manufacturing
X
Asphalt batching plant/Concrete batching plant
X
Assembly plant
X
Assisted living facility
X
X
X
Athletic field or stadium
X
X
X
X
X
X
Athletic or fitness club
X
X
X
X
Auction
X
X
Auditorium or amphitheater
X
X
X
X
Bakery
X
X
X
X
X
Bank, savings & loan, credit union
X
X
X
X
X
Barber shop or beauty salon
X
X
X
X
X
Basketball court (private or public)
X
X
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 309/350
Batch plant (concrete & asphalt)
X
Batch plant (temporary)
X
Bed & breakfast
X
X
X
X
X
X
Bicycle sales, repair and rental
X
X
X
X
Boarding (rooming) house
X
X
Bookbinding & publishing
X
Bottling plant
X
Bowling alley
X
X
X
Box manufacturing
X
Brewery
X
Brick or tile manufacturing
X
Bus terminal
X
X
Business office/professional offices
X
X
X
X
X
Cabinet shop
X
X
X
X
Canning operation
X
Carpet manufacturing
X
Cemetery monument sales
X
X
X
Cemetery or mausoleum
X
Child care center or facility/day care center
X
X
X
X
X
Church or rectory
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 310/350
Cold storage plant
X
College or university
X
X
Community center
X
X
X
X
X
Composite manufacturing
X
Concrete casting plant
X
Condominium
X
X
X
Contractor shop with inside/outside storage
X
X
X
Convalescent center/home
X
X
Convenience store with gas pumps
X
X
X
Convenience store w/o gas pumps
X
X
X
X
Correctional facilities
X
Creamery
X
Crematorium
X
Dance studio & gymnastics
X
X
X
X
Day spa/health spa/nonmedicalcosmetic/beautification services
X
X
X
X
Dentist office
X
X
X
X
Distillation plant
X
Distribution center (small) (large)
X
Donut shop
X
X
X
X
X
Drugstore or pharmacy (see also pharmacy orretail)
X
X
X
X
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 311/350
Dry cleaning or laundry (pickup service)
X
X
X
X
Dyeing plant
X
Elderly care facility
X
X
Electrical components manufacturing
X
Electroplating
X
Employment agency
X
X
X
Explosives manufacturing
X
Farmer's market
X
X
X
Feed lot
X
Fire station
X
X
X
X
X
X
Flea market (inside) (outside)
X
X
Food processing
X
Foundry or forge plant
X
Four-family dwelling
X
X
Fraternal clubs & lodges
X
X
X
X
X
Funeral parlor or mortuary
X
X
X
Furniture manufacturer
X
Furrier
X
X
X
Game storage (cold storage)
X
X
X
X
Game processing
X
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 312/350
General professional office
X
X
X
X
X
Glass manufacturing
X
Glue manufacturing
X
Golf course & country club
X
Golf course, miniature
X
X
X
X
Golf driving range
X
Government office
X
X
X
X
X
X
Grainery or gin
X
Group day care home
X
X
Group home
X
X
Guest house/servant quarters
X
X
Gun shooting range (indoor)
X
X
Halfway house
X
X
Hardware store
X
X
X
Health studio
X
X
X
X
X
Heating & air conditioning sales & service (seealso retail)
X
X
X
X
Heavy machinery/equipment sales & service
X
Heliport or helistop
X
X
Home occupation
X
X
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 313/350
Hospital
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Hotel or motel
X
X
X
X
Housing prefabrication
X
Ice cream plant
X
X
Ice plant
X
X
Industrialized housing plant
X
Industrial park
X
Insurance agent office
X
X
X
X
Junk yard/salvage yard (including any typematerials) (conditional use permit required)
X
X
Kennel w/outside runs
X
X
X
Key shop or locksmith (see also retail orlocksmith)
X
X
X
X
Kindergarten (private)
X
X
X
X
X
X
Landscaping service company
X
X
X
Large retail facility
X
X
X
Laundry or dry cleaners
X
X
X
X
X
Library
X
X
X
X
X
Light fabrication plant
X
X
Light manufacturing
X
X
Lithographic shop (see also retail)
X
X
X
X
Livestock sales & shipping facilities
X
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 314/350
Locksmith shop (see also key shop or retail)
X
X
X
X
Machine shop
X
X
X
Manufactured home
X
X
Manufactured home park
X
Manufactured housing sales
X
X
X
Manufactured housing construction plant
X
Marketing services/graphics design
X
X
X
X
Martial art center
X
X
X
X
X
Massage therapist, spa (day spa or retreat)
X
X
X
Meat, poultry & fish market
X
X
X
X
Medical/dental related office, sales, or service,urgent care (hospital, clinic, dentist, optical,medical aids and equipment sales, laboratory,etc)
X
X
X
X
Metal fabrication plant
X
Micro-brewery (see also retail)
X
X
X
X
Micro-winery, (without vineyard) (see also retail)
X
X
X
X
Microblading
X
X
X
X
Mini-warehouse
X
X
X
X
Mobile restaurant
X
X
X
X
Mobile home sales
X
X
X
Motorized automobile, boat, equipment and
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 315/350
vehicle services
Auto glass sales & repair
X
X
X
Auto inspection station
X
X
X
Auto parts storage
X
X
X
Auto repair garage (minor)
X
X
X
Auto repair garage (major)
X
X
Auto sales lot
X
X
X
Automobile leasing & renting
X
X
X
Automobile sales (new and used)
X
X
X
Automotive paint & body repair
X
X
X
Automotive parts & supplied (new and used)
X
X
X
Boat sales (new and used)
X
X
X
Boat repair
X
X
X
Carwash (self or full service)
X
X
X
Freight or truck terminal yard
X
Lawnmower sales & service
X
X
X
Motorcycle sales (new and used)
X
X
X
Recreational vehicle sales & service
X
X
X
Trailer rental & sales
X
X
X
Truck rental or leasing
X
X
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 316/350
Truck repair
X
X
Truck sales (new or used)
X
X
Truck wash
X
X
X
Vehicle conversion facility
X
X
X
Warehouse (distribution) (storage) (vehicles,etc)
X
X
X
Wrecking yard, auto salvage, junk yard oroutside reclamation (conditional use permitrequired)
X
X
Newspaper office
X
X
X
Newspaper printing
X
X
X
X
Newsstand
X
X
X
X
X
X
Nightclub or dance hall or bar
X
X
X
X
Nursing home
X
X
Oilfield supply service & equipment yard (seealso retail)
X
X
X
Oil well service & equipment yard
X
X
X
Orchard
X
Outdoor amusement
X
X
X
X
Packing operation
X
X
X
Paintball sports, survival games
X
X
X
Pallet manufacturing
X
X
Park or playground
X
X
X
X
X
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 317/350
Parking lot (commercial, for fee)
X
X
X
X
Pet grooming shop
X
X
X
X
Petroleum or chemical products (wholesale orbulk storage)
X
Pharmaceutical manufacturing
X
Pharmacy or drug store (see also drug storeand retail)
X
X
X
X
X
Photography studio
X
X
X
X
X
Picture framing shop (see also retail)
X
X
X
X
Planing mill
X
Plastic product manufacturing
X
Plumbing sales and service (see also retail)
X
X
X
Police station
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Pool or billiard hall
X
X
X
X
Portable building sales
X
X
X
Post office
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Pottery manufacturing
X
Poultry plant
X
Print shop
X
X
Printing company
X
X
Private club (without alcohol sales)
X
X
X
X
Private club (serving alcohol)
X
X
X
X
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 318/350
Racquetball court
X
X
X
X
X
Railroad freight terminal
X
Railroad yard
X
Real estate or leasing office
X
X
X
X
X
Recording studio
X
X
X
Recreational vehicle park (conditional usepermit required)
X
X
X
Recycling collection center
X
X
X
X
Refuse transfer station
X
Restaurant w/drive thru
X
X
X
Restaurant, café or cafeteria
X
X
X
X
X
Restaurant, mobile
X
X
X
Retail sales
Alcohol sales
X
X
X
Antique shop
X
X
X
X
Apparel or clothing store
X
X
X
X
Appliance store (retail sales)
X
X
X
Art supply store
X
X
X
X
Audio store (retail)
X
X
X
X
Building materials, lumber yard & hardware(in/outside)
X
X
X
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 319/350
Camera store (retail)
X
X
X
X
Carpet store (retail)
X
X
X
Clothing or apparel store (new and used)
X
X
X
X
Computer sales & repair
X
X
X
X
Department store (retail)
X
X
X
X
Drugstore or pharmacy
X
X
X
X
Electrical sales & service
X
X
X
X
Fabric, quilting, sewing retail and craft
X
X
X
X
Farm implement sales
X
X
X
Feed store (w/o animal sales)
X
X
X
Firewood sales
X
X
Florist
X
X
X
X
X
Grocery store
X
X
X
X
X
Furniture store (retail)
X
X
X
X
Gift or novelty shop
X
X
X
X
Greenhouse & nursery (commercial)
X
X
X
Gunsmith shop
X
X
X
X
Health food/supplements
X
X
X
X
X
Heating & air conditioning sales & service
X
X
X
X
Hobby shop/craft shop
X
X
X
X
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 320/350
Ice cream & yogurt store
X
X
X
X
X
Jewelry store
X
X
X
X
Key shop or locksmith
X
X
X
X
Leather goods shop (retail)
X
X
X
X
Lithographic shop
X
X
X
X
Micro-brewery
X
X
X
X
Micro-winery, (without vineyard)
X
X
X
X
Musical instrument store
X
X
X
X
Novelty or gift shop
X
X
X
X
X
Nursery (retail)
X
X
X
Office showroom
X
X
X
X
Office supply store
X
X
X
X
X
Oilfield supply service & equipment yard
X
X
X
Paint sales store (retail)
X
X
X
Paper & chemical supply (janitorial supplies,restaurant supplies)
X
X
X
Pawn shop
X
X
X
Pet shop
X
X
X
Pharmacy or drug store
X
X
X
X
X
Picture framing shop
X
X
X
X
Plant nursery (wholesale)
X
X
X
X
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 321/350
Plumbing sales and service
X
X
X
Produce stand
X
X
X
X
Radio sales & installation
X
X
X
X
X
Rental store (heavy equipment)
X
X
X
Rental store (light equipment, lawn mowers,etc)
X
X
X
Rental store (medical equipment)
X
X
X
Rental store (appliances, furniture)
X
X
X
Secondhand store
X
X
X
Shoe sales & repair
X
X
X
X
X
Sign shop
X
X
X
X
Snow cone stand
X
X
X
X
X
Sporting goods (inc. firearm sales)
X
X
X
X
Temporary or seasonal sales (outside)(inside)
X
X
X
Tire sales, repair & installation
X
X
X
Vacuum cleaner sales & service
X
X
X
Vaping/e-cigarettes retail
X
X
Video store
X
X
X
X
X
Wallpaper, flooring & carpet supply
X
X
X
Rodeo ground, arena (public)
X
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 322/350
Roller skating rink
X
X
X
Salvage yard (conditional use permit required)
X
X
Sanitarium
X
School (elementary or middle)
X
X
X
X
X
X
School (high school)
X
X
X
X
X
X
School (nursery or kindergarten)
X
X
X
X
X
School (trade or business)
X
X
X
X
Self service or mini warehouses
X
X
X
X
Sexually oriented business, entertainment
X
Sexually oriented business, variety retail
X
Sexually oriented business, other
X
Single-family dwelling
X
X
X
Skating rink
X
X
X
X
Slaughter & meat packing plant
X
Small animal clinic
X
X
X
Small engine repair
X
X
Soccer fields (public)
X
X
Stable, private or public
X
Stone, sand, gravel or mineral extraction
X
Storage facility (indoor) (outdoor) (automobiles,boats, equipment, motorcycles, recreationalvehicles, etc)
X
X
X
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 323/350
Storage facility impounded vehicle storage
X
Swimming pool (private) (public)
X
X
X
Tailor or seamstress shop
X
X
X
X
X
Tanning salon
X
X
X
X
Tattoo shop
X
X
Taxidermist
X
X
X
Tennis & swim club
X
Tennis court (private) (public)
X
X
X
X
Textile manufacturing
X
Theater (indoor)
X
X
X
X
X
Theater (outdoor)
X
X
X
Three-family dwelling
X
X
Title & abstract office
X
X
X
X
Tool & machinery rental shop
X
X
X
Townhouse
X
X
Travel agency
X
X
X
X
Trophy sales & engraving
X
X
X
X
Truck stop with gas pumps
X
X
Two-family dwelling
X
X
Upholstery shop
X
X
X
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 324/350
Utility company service yard
X
Vehicle storage (see storage facility)
Vehicular racing facility
X
X
X
Veterinarian office w/o outside pens
X
X
X
Veterinarian office w/outside pens
X
Vineyard
X
Vocational schools
X
X
X
X
Welding shop or company
X
X
X
X
Welding manufacturing (light)
X
X
Wholesale distribution center
X
Winery, with vineyard
X
Wrecker service call station (no on-site vehiclestorage)
X
X
X
(Ord. O-02-2020, part 6, app. B, passed 3-23-20; Ord. O-04-2020, passed 6-8-20)
CHAPTER 155: RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT
Sec. 155.01. Findings and purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to:
(A) Assist in the management of facilities placed in, on or over the public rights-of-way in order to minimize thecongestion, inconvenience, deterioration, visual impact and other adverse effects and the costs to the citizensresulting from the placement of facilities within the public rights-of-way.
(B) Govern the use and occupancy of the public rights-of-way.
(C) Assist the city in its efforts to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
(D) Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public rights-of-way held in public trust by the city.
(E) Preserve the physical integrity of the streets and highways.
(F) Control the orderly flow of vehicles and pedestrians.
(G) Keep track of the different entities using the public rights-of-way to prevent interference between them.
(H) Assist in scheduling common trenching and street cuts.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 325/350
(I) Protect the safety, security, appearance and condition of the public rights-of-way.
(Ord. O-16-05, passed 11-15-05; Ord. O-12-17, passed 10-23-17)
Sec. 155.02. Authority; scope.
This chapter applies to all persons that place facilities in, on or over public rights-of-way. Compensation for use of the publicrights-of-way shall be paid in accordance with all applicable state or federal law, including, yet not limited to, cableproviders, in accordance with the Federal Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. §§ 541 et seq.; for certificated telecommunication providers,Tex. Local Gov't Code Ch. 283; for distributors of natural gas or as otherwise applicable, Tex. Tax Code § 182.025; and/or inaccordance with Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., art. 1175(1), wireless network providers, Tex. Local Gov't Code ch 284, all asapplicable, as are adopted and may be amended. (Ord. O-16-05, passed 11-15-05; Ord. O-12-17, passed 10-23-17)
Sec. 155.03. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires adifferent meaning.
Abandon (and its derivatives)
. The network nodes and node support poles, or portion thereof, that have been left byprovider in an unused or nonfunctioning condition for more than 120 consecutive days unless, after city's notice to provider,provider has established to the reasonable satisfaction of the city that the network nodes and node support poles, or portionthereof, has the ability to provide communications.
Capital improvements program or project
. The official proposed schedule of all future public projects listed in order ofconstruction priority together with cost estimates and the anticipated means of financing each project as adopted by the citycouncil.
Certificated telecommunications provider
. The same as defined in Tex. Local Gov't Code §283.002(2) (any entity thathas been issued a certificate of convenience and necessity, certificate of operating authority or service provider certificate ofoperating authority by the Texas Public Utility Commission to offer local exchange telephone service), as it may beamended.
City
. The territorial, corporate and geographic limits of the City of Jacksboro, Texas. As used throughout, the term city alsoincludes the designated agent of the city.
City property
. All city buildings, infrastructure, bridges, parks, golf courses, parking lots and all other real property that isnot dedicated for utility or street transportation purposes.
Direction of the city
. All ordinances, laws, rules, resolutions and regulations of the city that are not inconsistent with thischapter and that are now in force or may hereafter be passed and adopted.
City manager
. City manager or city manager designee.
Facilities or facility
. Any and all the wires, cables, fibers, duct spaces, manholes, poles, conduits, pipes, lines, undergroundand overhead passageways and other equipment, structures, plant and appurtenances and all associated physical equipmentplaced in, on or under the public rights-of-way.
Network node
. Provider's equipment as defined by chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code.
Node support pole
. A pole as defined by chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code.
Park
. The various properties under the direction, control and supervision of the city's city manager under the maintenance ofthe parks and recreation department pursuant to the authority granted by city council and the City Code of Ordinances.
Permit
. A document issued by the city authorizing installation, removal, modification and other work for provider's networknodes or node support poles in accordance with the approved plans and specifications.
Person
. A natural person (an individual), corporation, company, association, partnership, firm, limited liability company,joint venture, joint stock company or association and other such legal entity.
Public rights-of-way
. The same as defined in Tex. Local Gov't Code §283.002(6) (the area on, below, or above a publicroadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway or utility easement in which the municipality has an interest. The
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 326/350
term does not include the airwaves above a public right-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications), as it may beamended. The term does not include city property.
Traffic signal
. Any device, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically operated by which traffic is alternately directedto stop and to proceed.
Underground utility district
. An area where poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead or above ground structureshave been removed and buried or have been approved for burial underground.
(Ord. O-16-05, passed 11-15-05; Ord. O-12-17, passed 10-23-17)
Sec. 155.04. Municipal authorization required.
(A) Prior to installation or modification within a public right-of-way, provider shall complete and submit to the city a right-of-way permit application, along with standard required documents and the following items:
(1)
Permit fee
. Any person, entity or provider seeking to place facilities on, in or over the public rights-of-way,shall pay a $500.00 construction permit application fee (except as exempted by Tex. Local Gov't Code ch. 283and 284) and shall file an application for such construction permit with the city manager and shall abide by theterms and provisions of this chapter pertaining to use of the public rights-of-way. If there are additional directcosts to the city in processing the applications, the city may recover those from the applicant prior to theissuance of the construction permit.
(2) With such application, applicants shall submit to the city manager written applications identifying theapplicant and all of the applicant's affiliates that may have physical control of facilities within the public rights-of-way, with a map of the proposed installations, general description of the services to be provided, a constructionschedule and a general description of the effect on public rights-of-way as detailed in
§ 155.06
(D) below.
(B) Any person, except a certificated telecommunications provider, prior to placing, reconstructing, or altering facilities in,on or over the public rights-of-way, must obtain separate municipal authorization from the city, such as a license agreementor franchise, as may be applicable. For use of the public rights-of-way, all users of the public rights-of-way shallcompensate the city on the value of the public rights-of-way used, being typically either on a gross receipts basis or on alinear foot basis, to the fullest extent allowed by law.
(C) Any person with a current, unexpired consent, franchise, agreement or other authorization from the city (“grant”) touse the public rights-of-way that is in effect at the time this chapter takes effect shall continue to operate under and complywith the grant (except to the extent the police power regulations in such grant are inconsistent with this chapter, in whichevent, this chapter will control) until the grant expires or until it is terminated by mutual agreement of the city and theperson, or it terminated as otherwise provided for in law.
(D) Prerequisites to issuance of construction permit - each person must register with the city. In order for the city to knowwhich person or persons owns or has physical control over facilities in a public right-of-way within the city, each suchperson who owns or has physical controls over facilities shall register with the city and provide the following information at aminimum:
(1) Person's name, address and telephone number(s); and
(2) A 24-hour telephone number(s) to a contact person(s) with decision-making authority for the person. Eachperson shall update and keep current his or her registration with the city at all times.
(Ord. O-16-05, passed 11-15-05; Ord. O-12-17, passed 10-23-17)
Sec. 155.05. Administration and enforcement.
(A) The city manager shall administer and enforce compliance with this chapter.
(B) A person shall report information related to the use of the public rights-of-way that the city manager requires in theform and manner reasonably prescribed by the city manager.
(C) The city manager shall report to the city council upon the determination that a person has failed to comply with thischapter and the same shall be subject to the penalty provisions provided herein for violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 0·16·05, passed 11-15-05; Ord. O-12-17, passed 10-23-17)
Cross reference–
Penalty, § 155.99.
Sec. 155.06. Construction obligations.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 327/350
(A) A person is subject to reasonable police power regulation of the city to manage its public rights-ofway in connectionwith the excavation, construction, installation, expansion, reconstruction, relocation, alteration, removal, maintenance orrepair of facilities in the public rights-of-way, pursuant to the city's rights as a custodian of public property based upon thecity's historic rights under state and federal laws. Such regulations included, yet are not limited to, the following.
(B) At the city's request, a person shall furnish the city accurate and complete information relating to the excavation,construction, installation, expansion, reconstruction, relocation, alteration, removal, maintenance or repair of facilitiesperformed within the public rights-of-way underground according to the applicable city requirements unless the personmakes a compelling demonstration that, in any specific instance, this requirement is not reasonable, feasible or equallyapplicable to other similar users of the public rights-of-way.
(1) The underground placement of facilities is encouraged. In any event, facilities shall be installedunderground where existing utilities are already underground. The utility owning the underground facilities shallmake a reasonable determination as to whether space is available to accommodate the new facilities. Anegative determination shall not relieve the person of the responsibility to underground its facilities inunderground utility areas. To the degree reasonably feasible previously installed aerial facilities shall be placedunderground in concert, and on a cost-sharing basis, with other utilities when such other utilities convert fromaerial to underground construction. All undergrounding of facilities shall be at a depth of 24 inches or moreunless otherwise directed by the city.
(2) Underground conduits and ducts shall be installed in the public rights-of-way between the adjacentproperty line and curbline unless otherwise directed by the city.
(3) Conduits and ducts shall be installed parallel with the curbline and cross the public rightsof-wayperpendicular to the public rights-of-way centerline unless otherwise directed by the city.
(4) Ducts and conduits shall be installed by trenchless excavation or directional boring when placing thesefacilities under paved public rights-of-way centerline unless otherwise directed by the city.
(C) A person shall perform excavations and other construction in the public rights-of-way in accordance with allapplicable city requirements, including the obligation to use trenchless technology whenever commercially economical andpractical and consistent with obligations on other similar users of the public right-of-way. The city shall waive therequirement of trenchless technology if it determines that, based upon information provided to the city by the person, theparticular field conditions warrant a waiver. All excavations and other construction in the public rights-of-way shall beconducted so as to minimize interference with the use of public and private property. Any plant or facility placed within thepublic rights-of-way which is suspended in any manner above ground shall either be placed on existing poles or equipmentor be suspended at a height not less than 22 feet above ground level, unless otherwise approved by the city manager, butin no event less than 15 feet, except to the extent state law controls. A person shall follow all reasonable constructiondirections given by the city in order to minimize any such interference.
(D) A person must obtain a permit, as reasonably required by applicable city codes, including subsection (D)(3) of thissection prior to excavation, construction, installation, expansion, reconstruction, relocation, alteration, removal,maintenance or repair of the person's facilities.
(1) Bonding will be required as in subsection (L) below and insurance as in
§ 155.08
, herein.
(2) A construction permit is not required for routine maintenance that does not require excavation of the publicrights-of-way or which does not block traffic lanes or sidewalks during peak traffic periods between 7:00 a.m. to9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:30 p.m. on weekdays or for more than two hours during any nonpeak traffic period.The failure of the person to request and obtain a permit from the city prior to performing any of the above listedactivities in, on or over any public right-of-way, except in an emergency as provided for in subsection (J) below,will subject the person to a stop-work order from the city and enforcement action pursuant to the city's Code ofOrdinances. If the person fails to act upon any permit with 90 calendar days of issuance, the permit shallbecome invalid unless extended by the city upon a showing of good cause. Upon expiration of a permit, aperson shall be required to obtain another permit pursuant to the requirements of this chapter.
(3) At least 45 days prior to submission of an application for a construction permit for a capital improvementsproject, a person shall furnish the city manager with construction plans and maps using the standard formatadopted by the city, showing the location and plans and specifications for a permit for construction of a capitalimprovements project until all required plans and drawings have been approved in writing by the city, whichapproval will not be unreasonably withheld, taking due consideration of the surrounding area and alternativelocations for the facilities and routing.
(4) At least three days before beginning excavation, construction, installation, expansion, reconstruction,relocation, alteration, removal, maintenance or repair of facilities for a project that involves an alteration to thesurface or subsurface of the public rights-of-way but is not a capital improvements project, a person shall submitan application for a permit for the standard format adopted by the city, showing the location and proposedrouting of the excavation, construction, installation, expansion, reconstruction, relocation, alteration, removal,
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 328/350
maintenance or repair unless otherwise approved by the city manager. A person may not begin constructionuntil the location of new facilities and proposed routing of the new construction or reconstruction and all requiredplans and drawings have been approved in writing by the city and a permit has been issued, which issuance willnot be unreasonably withheld, taking due consideration of the surrounding area and alternative locations for thefacilities and routing.
(5) Construction plans and maps shall show all features within the public rights-of-way that would affect theplacement of the proposed facilities such as, yet not limited to, existing underground and aerial wires orconduits, ducts, poles, wires, pipes, sewerage, water lines and cables as well as their ownership; traffic signaland street light poles; fire hydrants; driveways; curbs, inlets and drains; sidewalks, wheelchair ramps; and, treesand large shrubs. Drawings shall be drawn to an appropriate scale of no larger than one inch equals 50 feetusing the standard formats adopted by the city. State plan coordinates shall be shown for benchmarks, curblinesand elevations. If typical are used, they shall reference the station numbers for which they are to be applied.Traffic control plans shall be in conformance with the latest revision of the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices (MUTCD).
(6) A person shall use their best efforts to coordinate joint trenching with any other persons and/or publicutilities which may be constructed in and along the same public rights-of-way in a time frame reasonably similarto the person's construction time table. The city may mandate such coordination to the fullest extent allowed bylaw.
(7) To the extent known, plans for ongoing repair, maintenance and improvements which involve cutting intopaved city roads and streets shall be submitted to the city manager on an annual basis, no later than April 1st ofeach year and updated based upon any changes. This does not require any proprietary information such asequipment or customer specific information. Such information may be designated confidential and to the extentallowed by law will be kept confidential by the city. Alternatively, a person may meet with the appropriaterepresentative of the city each calendar quarter to provide such plans to the extent known.
(8) Once a permit is issued, the city shall be notified at least 24 hours in advance that construction in thepublic rights-of-way is ready to proceed by a person or their representative. Information signs (at least three feetby three feet in size) stating the identity of the person doing the work, their telephone number and the person'sidentity and telephone number shall be placed at the location where construction is to occur 48 hours prior to thebeginning of work in the public rights-of-way and shall continue to be posted at the location during the entiretime the work is occurring and/or until permanent repairs are completed.
(9) Erosion control measures and advance warning signs, markers, cones and barricades must be in placebefore work begins. A person may be required to show proof of engineered plans relating to storm water anderosion when applicable or a letter stating a person is not required to obtain such plans. A person shall beresponsible for storm water management erosion control that complies with city, state and federal guidelines asapplicable.
(10) Lane closures on major thoroughfares will be limited to between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. unless the citygrants prior approval. Arrow boards will be required on lane closures with all barricades, advance warning signsand 36-inch reflector cones placed according to the specifications of the city. Working hours in the public rights-of-way are limited to the hours between 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. Work to be performedafter 6:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday or on Saturday must be approved by the city in advance. Directionalboring is permitted only Monday through Friday 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. No work in the public rights-of-way shallbe performed except for emergencies on Sundays or on holidays.
(11) Without affecting the legal relationship between a person and its contractors, a person is responsible forthe workmanship and any damages by a contractor or subcontractor.
(12) If additional poles and existing aerial utility route are required, a person shall negotiate with the utilitycompany for the installation of the needed poles in accordance with existing statutes and regulations. However,if the utility will not install new poles on a reasonable basis, then a person may erect its own poles.
(E) (1) Within 14 days of completion of excavation, construction, installation, expansion, reconstruction,relocation, alteration, removal, maintenance or repair of facilities or other work in the public rights-of-way, aperson shall temporarily restore and repair the public rights-of-way in accordance with applicable sections of theCode of Ordinances of the city. Within 30 calendar days after completion of work in the public rights-of-way, theperson shall permanently restore, replace, relay and/or repair the surface, base, curbs, drainage systems,irrigation systems, landscape treatment or other city facilities and infrastructure located on, in and under anypublic rights-of-way that has been excavated, altered or damaged by reason of the excavation, construction,installation, expansion, reconstruction, relocation, alteration, removal, maintenance or repair of the person'sfacilities in accordance with existing standards of the city in effect at the time of the work. Upon a showing ofgood cause, the city may at its sole discretion extend the time for restoration and repair of the public rights-of-way under this section. Unless the person provides a recent dated photograph or a video tape of the public
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 329/350
rights-of-way before the construction, the condition of the public rights-of-way before construction should bepresumed in good condition, subject only to reasonable wear and tear as determined by the city manager.
(2) Whenever a person shall disturb or destroy any right-of-way markers or monuments, it shall restore thesame within 30 days after construction has ceased. A person shall furnish three sets of drawings, blueline orblackline, detailing the restored monumentation. State plane coordinates shall be shown for all monumentation(existing or restored). The drawings shall be signed (original signature), sealed and certified by a registeredprofessional land surveyor and delivered to the city manager for approval no later than 30 days afterconstruction has ceased.
(F) Upon failure of a person to perform any such repair or replacement work after five days written notice has been givenby the city to the person, and in the event repairs have not been initiated during such five day period, the city may repairsuch portion of the public rights-of-way as may have been disturbed by the person, its contractors or agents. The city may,at its discretion for good cause, alter the five-day period. Upon receipt of an invoice from the city, the person shallreimburse the city for the costs so incurred within 30 calendar days from the date of the city invoice.
(G) Should the city manager reasonably determine within one year from the date of the completion of the repair work thatthe surface, base, curbs, drainage systems, irrigation systems, landscape treatment or other city facilities and infrastructurelocated on, in or under any public rights-of-way requires additional restoration, replacement or repair work to meet existingstandards of the city, a person shall perform such additional restoration, replacement or repair work to the satisfaction of thecity, subject to all city remedies as provided herein.
(H) Notwithstanding the foregoing in subsection (G), if the city manager determines that the failure of a person toproperly repair or restore the public rights-of-way constitutes a safety hazard to the public, the city may undertakeemergency repairs and restoration efforts after emergency notice has been provided to the extent reasonable under thecircumstances and the person failed to respond within a reasonable time specified by the city. Upon receipt of an invoicefrom the city a person shall promptly reimburse the city for all costs incurred by the city within 30 calendar days from thedate of the city invoice.
(I) If the city manager declares an emergency with regard to the health and safety of the citizens and requests by writtennotice the removal or abatement of facilities, a person shall remove or abate the person's facilities by the deadline providedin the city manager's request. The person and the city shall cooperate to the extent possible to assure continuity of service.If the person, after notice, fails or refuses to act, the city may remove or abate the facility at the sole cost and expense ofthe person without paying compensation to the person and without the city incurring liability for damages.
(J) Except in the case of customer service interruptions and imminent harm to property and persons (“emergencyconditions”), a person may not excavate the pavement of a street or public rights-ofway without first complying with cityrequirements. The city shall be notified as promptly as possible regarding work performed under such emergencyconditions and the persons shall comply with the requirements of city standards and of this chapter for restoration,replacement or repair of the public rights-of-way. Any emergency repairs requiring saw cuts shall be performed inaccordance with standards established by the city manager.
(K) (1) Within 120 days of completion of each new permitted section of a person's facilities, the person shallsupply the city with a complete set of “as built'' drawings for the segment in a format used in the ordinary courseof the person's business to the extent they are prepared in the ordinary course of business, excluding customerspecific, proprietary or confidential information and as reasonably prescribed by the city as is described below,and as may be allowed by law. Such “as built” maps may be corrected and revised construction plans. In theevent the facilities were built as specified in the originally submitted plans, the person may certify to the city thatthere were no changes. The city may, at its discretion, accept in lieu of “as built” drawings any reasonablealternative which provides adequate information as to the vertical depth, linear location and size of facilities inthe public rights-of-way which may include direct on-line access to such information.
(2) To the extent the person's customary as-built format will confirm without economic impracticability, aperson shall furnish the city “as built'' drawings as follows: drawings shall show ownership of conduits, ducts,poles, cables and any other facilities placed within the public rights-of-way. Drawings shall be drawn to a scaleof one inch equals 20 feet on 24- inch by 36-inch sheets and one inch equals 40 feet on 11-inch by 17-inchsheets using the standard format adopted by the city. A person shall provide one set of all such drawings ondiskette in Autocad format drawn to full scale and one set of blue or blacklined “as built” drawings to the citymanager. State plane coordinates shall be shown for benchmarks, curblines and structures. Drawings shallshow horizontal dimensions from the curbline and elevations.
(3) All persons who have facilities in the public rights-of-way existing as of the date of this chapter and whohave not provided “as built” drawings shall do so no later than 60 days after the passage of this chapter, unlessthe person demonstrates an economic impracticality to provide such “as built” drawings in the above format. Thecity may waive such “as built” maps as to existing facilities for good cause.
(4) If “as built” drawings submitted under this section include information expressly designated by the personas a trade secret or other confidential proprietary information protected from disclosure by state or federal law,
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 330/350
the city manager may not disclose that information to the public without the consent of the person, unlessotherwise required by an opinion of the attorney general pursuant to the Texas Public Information Act, asamended, or by a court having jurisdiction of the matter pursuant to applicable law or as otherwise required bylaw. This section may not be construed to authorize a person to designate all matters as confidential or as tradesecrets.
(L) (1) The city manager shall require reasonable bonding requirements of a person, as are required ofother entities that place facilities in the public rights-of-way. Such bonding amounts will be reasonablydetermined by the city manager depending on several factors as to public safety and risk of harm to personsand property. Such factors include:
(a) The nature of the construction project (overhead, trenchless, open trench);
(b) Type of facility (gas, electric, water, telecommunications, cable, fiber);
(c) Past construction history of person in the city as to any damage claims, repairs and timeliness ofconstruction.
(2) The city may in a nondiscriminatory manner waive or reduce the amount of the bond in the event theperson provides written documentation as to reserves available to compensate the city for damages and has atwo year history of no claims or damages to city property by the city or of prompt payment on such claims.
(M) In determining whether any requirements under this section is unreasonable or unfeasible, the city manager or his orher designee shall consider, among other things, whether the requirement would subject the person or persons to anunreasonable increase in risk or service interruption, or to an unreasonable increase in liability for accidents, or to anunreasonable delay in construction or in availability of its services or to any other unreasonable technical or economicburden.
(N) A person issued a permit pursuant to this chapter shall, at all times, employ the standard of care attendant to therisks involved to prevent actions, failures and accidents which may cause damage, injury or nuisance to persons, thepublic, the facilities of other persons, or to any city structures or structures owned by other persons located in the publicrights-of-way. A person issued a permit pursuant to this chapter shall observe all federal and state statutes and regulationsand all applicable city ordinances and safety codes. A person issued a permit pursuant to this chapter shall keep andmaintain its facilities in a safe and suitable condition and in good order and repairs sufficient for its intended purpose.
(Ord. O-16-05, passed 11-15-05; Ord. O-12-17, passed 10-23-17)
Cross reference–
Penalty,§ 155.99.
Sec. 155.07. Conditions of public rights-of-way occupancy.
(A) In the exercise of governmental functions, the city has first priority over all other users of the public rights-of-way. Thecity reserves the right to lay sewer, gas, water facilities and any other pipe lines or cables and conduits, and to dounderground and overhead work and have attachments and require restructuring or changes in the city's aerial facilities in,across, along, over or under a public street, alley or public rights-of-way that may be occupied by a person and to changethe curb, route or grade of sidewalks and streets, to the fullest extent allowed by law.
(B) The city shall assign the location in or over the public rights-of-way among competing users of the public rights-of-way with due consideration to the public health and safety considerations of each user type, and to the extent that the citycan demonstrate that there is limited space available for additional users, may limit new users, as allowed under state orfederal law. As a priority, each user of the public rights-of-way will be allowed one alignment on one side of the street forplacement of its facilities, provided there is adequate space available. In the event an additional alignment(s) or both sidesof the street has been requested by a user, the city manager will grant such request, provided there is adequate spaceavailable and the requester has demonstrated the financial or technical impracticability of the use of the requester's singlealignment or use of only one side of the street.
(C) If the city authorizes abutting landowners to occupy space under the surface of any public street, alley, or publicrights-of-way, the grant to an abutting landowner shall be subject to the rights of the previously authorized user of the publicrights-of-way.
(D) If the city manager gives written notice, a person shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently, remove,relocate, change or alter the position of person's facilities that are in the public rights-of-way within 120 days, except incircumstances that require additional time as reasonably determined by the city based upon information provided by theperson. For projects expected to take longer than 120 days to remove, relocate, change or alter, the city manager willconfer with the person before determining the alterations to be required and the timing thereof. The city manager shall givenotice whenever the city has determined that removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for theconstruction, operation, repair, maintenance or installation of a city governmental public improvement in the public rights-of-way. This section shall not be construed to prevent a person's recovery of the cost of relocation or removal from private
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 331/350
third parties who initiate the request for relocation or removal, nor shall it be required if improvements are solely forbeautification purposes without prior joint deliberation and agreement with the person. On a nondiscriminatory basis, thecity manager and a person may agree in writing to different time frames than those provided above if circumstancesreasonably warrant such a change.
(E) If the person fails to relocate facilities in the time allowed by the city manager in this section, the person may besubject to liability to the city for such delay and as set forth in the city codes or ordinance, now or hereafter enacted.
(F) A person may trim trees or other vegetation in or over the public rights-of-way as needed for the safe and reliableoperation, use and maintenance of its facilities. All tree trimming shall be performed in accordance with standardspromulgated by the city. Should the person, its contractor or agent, fail to remove such trimmings within 24 hours, the citymay remove the trimmings or have them removed, and upon receipt of a bill from the city, the person shall promptlyreimburse the city for all costs incurred within 30 working days. A person shall not be responsible for tree trimming orremoval, except as to the trimming required to construct, maintain or restore utility service.
(G) A person shall temporarily remove, raise or lower its aerial facilities to permit the moving of houses or other bulkystructures, if the requesting party provides written notice of no less than five days, except for good cause shown. Theexpense of these temporary rearrangements shall be paid by the party or parties requesting and benefitting from thetemporary arrangements. The person may require prepayment or prior posting of a bond from the party requesting thetemporary move.
(H) In the event a person's use of the facilities is discontinued, the person shall be notified by the city and thereafter shallforthwith remove its facilities there from unless specifically permitted to continue the same, and on the removal thereof shallrestore, repair or reconstruct the street area where such removal has occurred, and place the street area where suchremoval has occurred in the condition prior to the removal, as determined by the city. In the event of failure, neglect orrefusal of the person, after 30 days' notice by the city manager to repair, improve or maintain such street portion, the citymay do such work or cause it to be done, and the reasonable cost thereof as determined by the city shall be paid by theperson and collection may be made by court action or otherwise.
(Ord. O-16-05, passed 11-15-05; Ord. O-12-17, passed 10-23-17)
Sec. 155.08. Insurance requirements.
(A) A person shall obtain and maintain insurance in the amounts reasonably prescribed by the city manager with aninsurance company licensed to do business in the state and acceptable to the city. A person shall furnish the city managerwith proof of insurance at the time of the request for construction permits. The city manager reserves the right to review theinsurance requirements and to reasonably adjust insurance coverage and limits when the city manager determines thatchanges in statutory law, court decisions or the claims history of the industry or the person may require adjustment forcoverage. For purposes of this section, the city will accept certificates of selfinsurance issued by the state or letters writtenby the person in those instances where the state does not issue such letters, and in all such instances, the person that self-insures shall provide written documentation as to substantially the same coverage, claims process and defense to the cityas would be provided by an insurance carrier as required herein, all as may be detailed in the information provided to thecity. However, for the city manager to accept such self-insurance coverage the person must demonstrate by writteninformation that he or she has adequate financial resources to be a self-insured entity as reasonably determined by the city,based on financial information requested by and furnished to the city. The city's current insurance requirements aredescribed in exhibit A attached to Ordinance O-16-05.
(B) A person shall furnish to the city manager, at no cost to the city, copies of certificates of insurance evidencing thecoverage required by this section. The city may request the deletion, revision or modification of particular policy terms,conditions, limitations or exclusions, unless the policy provisions are established by a law or regulation binding the city, theperson or the underwriter. If the city requests a deletion, revision or modification, a person shall exercise reasonable effortsto pay for and to accomplish the change.
(C) The insurance certificate required under subsection (B) shall:
(1) Name the city and its officers, employees, board members and elected representatives as additionalinsureds for all applicable coverage;
(2) Provide for 30 days written notice to the city for cancellation, nonrenewal or material change; and
(3) Provide that written notice of claims shall be provided to the city manager by certified mail.
(D) A person shall file and maintain proof of insurance with the city manager. An insurance certificate obtained incompliance with this section is subject to city attorney approval. The city may require the certificate to be changed to reflectchanging liability limits. A person shall immediately advise the city attorney of actual or potential litigation that may developor affect an existing carrier's obligation to defend and indemnify.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 332/350
(E) An insurer has no right of recovery against the city. The required insurance policies shall protect the person and thecity. The insurance shall be primary coverage for losses covered by the policies.
(F) The policy clause “other insurance” shall not apply to the city if the city is an insured under the policy.
(G) A person shall pay premiums and assessments for the insurance required under this section. A company whichissues an insurance policy has no recourse against the city for payment of a premium or assessment. Insurance policiesobtained by a person must provide that the issuing company waives all right of recovery by way of subrogation against thecity in connection with damage covered by the policy.
(Ord. O-16-05, passed 11-15-05; Ord. O-12-17, passed 10-23-17)
Cross reference–
Penalty,
§ 155.99
.
Sec. 155.09. Wireless services (network nodes).
(A)
Purpose
.
(1) To establish standards and procedures to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public byminimizing and reducing impacts to public safety within the city's right-of-way and to minimize and reduceimpacts to the city, its residents and visitors; and for the general health and welfare of the public.
(2) To provide technical criteria and details for providers seeking to install and construct network nodes andnode support poles in the city's right-of-way.
(3) To encourage the deployment of state-of-the-art small cell wireless technology within the city for the manybenefits it promises the citizens of the city including increased connectivity and reliable networks and services.
(4) Providers shall adhere to the requirements found in the “right-of-way management” chapter, for theplacement of their facilities within the city's right-of-way.
(B)
Permitting
.
(1) Completion of no-fee permit.
(2) Detailed map showing the location(s) of the existing pole to which the network node is proposed to beattached, and a street view image.
(3) Plans and drawings prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the state that has evaluated theexisting pole or infrastructure for structural stability to carry proposed network nodes and can bear the wind loadwithout pole modification or whether the installation will require pole re-enforcement. If pole re-enforcement isnecessary, provider shall provide engineering design and specification drawings for the proposed alteration tothe existing pole. Any pole re-enforcement or replacement shall be at provider's sole cost. All re-enforcement orreplacement poles shall match the character of the pre-existing pole in order to blend into the surroundingenvironment and be visually unobtrusive. City reserves the right to deny a certain type of pole due to itsdifferences.
(4) Scaled dimensioned drawings or pictures of the proposed attachments of the network node to the existingpoles or structures as well as any other proposed equipment associated with the proposal, indicating thespacing from existing curb, driveways, sidewalk, and other existing light poles and any other poles orappurtenances. This shall include a before-and-after image of the pole and all proposed attachments andassociated standalone equipment.
(5) Scaled dimensioned construction plans indicating the current right-of-way line and showing the proposedunderground conduit and equipment, and its spacing from existing utilities. The drawings shall also show asectional profile of the right-of-way and identify all existing utilities and existing utility conflicts.
(6) If location on a city pole is proposed, language must be included to designate the exact pole beingproposed.
The applicant needs to provide analysis that the proposed network node shall not cause any interferencewith city public safety radio system, traffic signal light system, or other communications components. Itshall be the responsibility of the provider to evaluate, prior to making the application for the permit, thecompatibility between the existing city infrastructure and the provider's proposed infrastructure. A networknode shall not be installed in a location that causes any interference. Network nodes shall not be allowedon city's public safety radio infrastructure.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 333/350
(7) A traffic-control plan, stormwater or drainage plan, and trench safety plan may also be required based onthe proposed scope of work.
(8) The city-issued right-of-way permit authorizes use of its right-of-way. Providers/applicants are responsiblefor obtaining permission on noncity-owned infrastructure. If the project lies within the state right-of-way, theapplicant must provide evidence of a permit from the state.
(9) Notification to adjacent residential developments/neighborhoods within 300 feet is required on all nodeattachments on city infrastructure.
(10) The proposal shall comply with the following standards:
(a) Any facilities located off pole must remain in cabinetry or enclosed structure underground, except forthe electric meter pedestal. Facilities on pole shall be concealed or enclosed as much as possible in anequipment box, cabinet, or other unit that may include ventilation openings. There shall be no externalcables or electric wire/cables on pole or structures or aerial wires or cables extending from the pole orstructure.
(b) An electrical meter shall not be mounted on a city's metal pole or structure. Provider shall use 240voltage when connecting to any city infrastructure and provide key to meter upon inspection.
(c) All attachments to a pole that are projecting, or any equipment or appurtenance mounted on theground, shall comply with TAS, ADA and shall not obstruct an existing or planned sidewalk or walkway.
(d) All proposed projecting attachments to the pole shall provide a minimum vertical clearance of eight(8) feet. If any attachments are projecting towards the street side, it shall provide a minimum verticalclearance of 16 feet.
(e) The color of the network nodes shall match the existing pole color such that the network nodes blendwith the color of the pole to the extent possible. City reserves the right to deny a certain style of node dueto its difference in color to pole.
(f) There shall be no other pole, with small cell attachments permitted/under application review, within300 feet of the subject pole.
(C)
Installation of new poles
.
(1)
Existing communications lines between existing utility poles
. Micro network nodes shall only be lashed onexisting communications lines between existing utility poles (electric poles or telephone poles), with notice to thepole owner as required by the Federal Pole Attachment Act, and not placed on utility poles, node support polesor service poles.
(D)
Electrical permit
.
(1) Provider shall be responsible for obtaining any required electrical power service to the network nodes andnode support poles or structures. Provider's electrical supply shall be separately metered from the city and mustmatch city infrastructure voltage.
(2) Provider shall provide city with the electrical permit and provide sealed engineered drawings for conduitsize, circuit size, calculations for amp, distances running, etc.
(E)
Network node and node support pole requirements
.
(1)
Installation
. Provider shall, at its own cost and expense, install the network nodes and node support polesin a good and workmanlike manner and in accordance with the requirements promulgated by the “right-of-waymanagement” chapter and all other applicable laws, ordinances, codes, rules and regulations of the city, thestate, and the United States (“laws”), as such may be amended from time to time. Provider's work shall besubject to the regulation, control and direction of the city. All work done in connection with the installation,operation, maintenance, repair, modification, and/or replacement of the network nodes and node support polesshall be in compliance with all applicable laws.
(2)
Inspections
.
(a) The city may perform visual inspections of any network nodes and node support poles located in theright-of-way as the city deems appropriate without notice. If the inspection requires physical contact withthe network nodes or node support poles, the city shall provide written notice to the provider within fivebusiness days of the planned inspection. Provider may have a representative present during suchinspection.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 334/350
(b) In the event of an emergency situation, the city may, but is not required to, notify provider of aninspection. The city may take action necessary to remediate the emergency situation and the city shallnotify provider as soon as practically possible after remediation is complete.
(3)
Placement
.
(a)
Parks
. Placement of network nodes and node support poles in any parks, park roads, sidewalk, orproperty is prohibited unless such falls within the definition of public right-of-way in chapter 284 of theTexas Local Government Code and the placement complies with applicable laws, private deed restrictions,and other public or private restrictions on the use of the park.
(b)
City infrastructure
. Provider shall neither allow nor install network nodes or node support poles onany city property that falls outside the definition of public rightof-way in chapter 284 of the Texas LocalGovernment Code.
(c)
Residential streets
. Provider shall neither allow nor install network nodes or node support poles inright-of-way that is adjacent to a street or thoroughfare that is not more than thirty (30) feet wide andadjacent to single-family residential lots or other multifamily residences or undeveloped land that isdesignated for residential use by zoning or deed restrictions.
(d)
Historic district
. Provider shall neither allow nor install network nodes or node support poles in right-of-way that is within a historic district as defined by chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code,unless approved by the city in writing.
(e)
Decorative poles
. Provider shall neither allow nor install network nodes on a decorative pole asdefined by chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code, unless approved by the city in writing. Thisstandard shall be applicable to any decorative poles in the city. The city may entertain proposals forlocation on decorative poles if a stealth design is proposed.
(f)
Poles
. Wireless facilities on node support poles shall be installed at least eight (8) feet above theground. If any attachments project towards the street side, a minimum vertical clearance of 16 feet shall beprovided.
(g)
Right-of-way
. Node support poles and ground equipment shall be placed, as much as possible,within two feet of the outer edge of the right-of-way line. Node support poles and ground equipment ornetwork nodes shall not impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic in the right-of-way. If a node support poleand ground equipment or network node is installed in a location that is not in accordance with the plansapproved by the city and impedes pedestrian or vehicular traffic or does not comply or otherwise rendersthe right-of-way noncompliant with applicable laws, including the American Disabilities Act, then providershall remove the node support poles, ground equipment or network nodes.
(4)
Fiber connection
. Provider shall be responsible for obtaining access and connection to fiber optic lines orother backhaul solutions that may be required for its node support poles or network nodes.
(5)
Generators
. Provider shall not allow or install generators or back-up generators in the right-of-way.
(6)
Equipment dimensions
. Provider's node support poles and network nodes shall comply with thedimensions set forth in chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code.
(7)
Tree maintenance
. Provider, its contractors, and agents shall obtain written permission from the city beforetrimming trees hanging over its node support poles and network nodes to prevent branches of such trees fromcontacting node support poles and network nodes. When directed by the city, provider shall trim under thesupervision and direction of the city. The city shall not be liable for any damages, injuries, or claims arising fromprovider's actions under this section.
(8)
Signage
.
(a) Provider shall post its name, location identifying information, and emergency telephone number in anarea on the cabinet of the node support poles and network nodes that is visible to the public. Signagerequired under this section shall not exceed 4" x 6", unless otherwise required by law (e.g. RF groundnotification signs) or the city.
(b) Except as required by laws or by the utility pole owner, provider shall not post any other signage oradvertising on the node support poles and network nodes, or utility pole.
(9)
Overhead lines prohibited
. In areas designated as underground utility areas, provider shall neither allownor install overhead lines connecting to node support poles. All overhead lines connecting to the node support
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 335/350
pole where other overhead telecommunications or utility lines are or planned to be buried below ground as partof a project shall be buried below ground.
(10)
Repair
. Whenever the installation, placement, attachment, repair, modification, removal, operation, use,or relocation of the node support poles or network nodes, or any portion thereof is required and such installation,placement, attachment, repair, modification, removal, operation, use, or relocation causes any property of thecity to be damaged or to have been altered in such a manner as to make it unusable, unsafe, or in violation ofany laws, provider, at its sole cost and expense, shall promptly repair and return such property to its originalcondition. If provider does not repair such property or perform such work as described in this subsection, thenthe city shall have the option, upon 15 days prior written notice to provider or immediately if there is an imminentdanger to the public, to perform or cause to be performed such reasonable and necessary work on behalf ofprovider and to charge provider for the reasonable and actual costs incurred by the city. Provider shall reimbursethe city for the costs.
(11)
Graffiti abatement
. As soon as practical, but not later than fourteen (14) days from the date providerreceives notice thereof, provider shall remove all graffiti on any of its node support poles and network nodeslocated in the right-of-way.
(12)
Inventory
.
(a) Provider shall maintain a list of its network nodes and node support poles and provide city aninventory of locations within ten (10) days of installation. The inventory of network nodes and node supportpoles shall include GIS coordinates, date of installation, city pole identification, type of pole used forinstallation, pole owner, and description/type of installation for each network node and node support poleinstallation.
(b) Upon city's written request, provider shall provide a cumulative inventory within thirty (30) days ofcity's request. Concerning network nodes and node support poles that become inactive, the inventory shallinclude the same information as active installations in addition to the date the network node and/or nodesupport pole was deactivated and the date the network node and/or node support pole was removed fromthe right-of-way. City may compare the inventory to its records to identify any discrepancies.
(13)
Reservation of rights
.
(a) The city reserves the right to install, and permit others to install, utility facilities in the rights-of-way. Inpermitting such work to be done by others, the city shall not be liable to provider for any damage causedby those persons or entities.
(b) The city reserves the right to locate, operate, maintain, and remove city traffic signal poles in themanner that best enables the operation of its traffic signal system and protect public safety.
(c) The city reserves the right to locate, operate, maintain, and remove any city pole or structure locatedwithin the right-of-way in the manner that best enables the city's operations.
(14)
Coordination of traffic signal maintenance activities and emergency response
. Provider will provide city akey to each meter box at the time of inspection and have the ability to temporarily cut-off electricity to its facilitiesfor the safety of maintenance personnel. In the event of failure of components of the traffic signal system forwhatever reason, including damage resulting from vehicular collisions, weather related events, or maliciousattacks, city will respond to restore traffic signal operations as a matter of public safety. Should the events thatresult in damage or failure of the traffic signal system also affect provider's network nodes, provider shall havethe sole responsibility to repair or replace its network nodes and shall coordinate its own emergency efforts withthe city.
(F)
Interference with operations
.
(1)
No liability
.
(a) The city will not be liable to provider for any damage caused by other providers with wireless facilitiessharing the same pole or for failure of provider's network nodes for whatever reason, including damageresulting from vehicular collisions, weather related events, or malicious attacks.
(b) The city shall not be liable to provider by reason of inconvenience, annoyance or injury to thenetwork nodes or node support poles or activities conducted by provider therefrom, arising from thenecessity of repairing any portion of the right-of-way, or from the making of any necessary alteration orimprovements, in, or to, any portion of the right-of-way, or in, or to, city's fixtures, appurtenances orequipment. The city will use reasonable efforts not to cause material interference to provider's operation ofits network nodes or node support poles.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 336/350
(2)
Signal interference with city's communications infrastructure prohibited
.
(a)
No interference
. In the event that provider's network nodes interferes with the city's traffic signalsystem, public safety radio system, or other city communications infrastructure operating on spectrumwhere the city is legally authorized to operate, provider shall promptly cease operation of the networknodes causing said interference upon receiving notice from the city and refrain from operating. Providershall respond to the city's request to address the source of the interference as soon as practicable, but inno event later than twentyfour (24) hours of receiving notice.
(b)
Protocol for responding to event of interference
. The protocol for responding to events of interferencewill require provider to provide the city an interference remediation report that includes the following items:
1.
Remediation plan
. Devise a remediation plan to stop the event of inference;
2.
Time frame for execution
. Provide the expected time frame for execution of the remediationplan; and
3.
Additional information
. Include any additional information relevant to the execution of theremediation plan.
In the event that interference with city facilities cannot be eliminated, provider shall shut down thenetwork nodes and remove or relocate the network node that is the source of the interference assoon as possible to a suitable alternative location made available by city.
(c) Following installation or modification of a network node, the city may require provider to test thenetwork node's radio frequency and other functions to confirm it does not interfere with the city'soperations.
(G)
Abandonment, relocation and removal
.
(1)
Abandonment of obsolete network nodes and node support poles
. Provider shall remove network nodesand node support poles when such facilities are abandoned regardless of whether or not it receives notice fromthe city. Unless the city sends notice that removal must be completed immediately to ensure public health,safety, and welfare, the removal must be completed within the earlier of 90 days of the network nodes and nodesupport poles being abandoned or within 90 days of receipt of written notice from the city. When providerremoves or abandons permanent structures in the right-of-way, the provider shall notify the city in writing of suchremoval or abandonment and shall file with the city the location and description of each network node or nodesupport pole removed or abandoned. The city may require the provider to complete additional remedialmeasures necessary for public safety and the integrity of the right-of-way.
(2)
Relocation and removal at provider's expense
.
(a) Provider shall remove and relocate its network nodes and node support poles at its own expense toan alternative location not later than one hundred twenty (120) days after receiving written notice thatremoval, relocation, and/or alteration of the network nodes and/or node support poles is necessary due to:
1. Construction, completion, repair, widening, relocation, or maintenance of, or use in connectionwith, any city construction or maintenance project or other public improvement project;
2. Maintenance, upgrade, expansion, replacement, removal or relocation of the city's pole orstructure upon which provider's network nodes are attached;
3. The network node or node support pole, or portion thereof, is adversely affecting properoperation of traffic signals, streetlights or other city property;
4. Closure of a street or sale of city property;
5. Projects and programs undertaken to protect or preserve the public health or safety;
6. Activities undertaken to eliminate a public nuisance;
7. Provider fails to obtain all applicable licenses, permits, and certifications required by law for itsnetwork nodes or node support poles; or
8. Duty otherwise arising from applicable law.
(b) Provider's duty to remove and relocate its network nodes and node support poles at its expense isnot contingent on the availability of an alternative location acceptable for relocation. City will makereasonable efforts to provide an alternative location within the right-of-way for relocation, but regardless of
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 337/350
the availability of an alternative site acceptable to provider, provider shall comply with the notice to removeits network nodes and node support poles as instructed.
(c) The city may remove the network node and/or node support pole if provider does not remove suchwithin one hundred twenty (120) days. In such case, provider shall reimburse city for the city's actual costof removal of its network nodes and node support poles within 30 days of receiving the invoice from thecity.
(3)
Removal or relocation by provider
.
(a) If the provider removes or relocates at its own discretion, it shall notify the city in writing not less than10 business days prior to removal or relocation. Provider shall obtain all permits required for relocation orremoval of its network nodes and node support poles prior to relocation or removal.
(b) The city shall not issue any refunds for any amounts paid by provider for network nodes and nodesupport poles that have been removed.
(4)
Restoration
. Provider shall repair any damage to the right-of-way, and the property of any third partyresulting from provider's removal or relocation activities (or any other of provider's activities hereunder) within 10days following the date of such removal or relocation, at provider's sole cost and expense, including restorationof the right-of-way and such property to substantially the same condition as it was immediately before the dateprovider was granted a permit for the applicable location, including restoration or replacement of any damagedtrees, shrubs or other vegetation. All repair, restoration and replacement shall be subject to the sole, reasonableapproval of the city.
(5)
Provider responsible
. Provider shall be responsible and liable for the acts and omissions of provider'semployees, temporary employees, officers, city managers, consultants, agents, affiliates, subsidiaries, sublessees, and subcontractors in connection with the performance of activities within the city's right-of-way, as ifsuch acts or omissions were provider's acts or omissions.
(Ord. O-08-17, passed 9-11-17; Ord. O-12-17, passed 10-23-17)
Sec. 155.10. Indemnity.
(A) (1) Except as to certificated telecommunications providers as provided in Tex. Local Gov't Code, ch.283 each person placing facilities in the public rights-of-way shall agree to promptly defend, indemnify and holdthe city harmless from and against all damages, costs, losses or expenses:
(a) For the repair, replacement or restoration of the city's property, equipment, materials, structures andfacilities which are damaged, destroyed or found to be defective as a result of the person's acts oromissions;
(b) From and against any and all claims, demands, suits, causes of action and judgments for:
1. Damage to or loss of the property of any person (including yet not limited to the person, itsagents, officers, employees and subcontractors, city's agents, officers and employees and thirdparties); and/or
2. Death, bodily injury, illness, disease, loss of services, or loss of income or wages to any person(including yet not limited to the agents, officers, and employees of the person, person'ssubcontractors and city and third parties), arising out of, incident to, concerning or resulting from thenegligent or willful act or omissions of the person, their agents, employees, and/or subcontractors, inthe performance of activities pursuant to or authorized under this chapter.
(2) Upon commencement of any suit, proceeding at law or in equity against the city relating to or covering anymatter covered by this indemnity, to indemnify and hold the city harmless, or to pay said final judgment andcosts, as the case may be, the city shall give the person reasonable notice to the city, the city shall have theright to defend the same and in addition to being reimbursed for any such judgment that may be renderedagainst the city, together with all court costs incurred therein, the person shall promptly reimburse the city forattorney's fees, including those employed by the city in such case or cases, as well as all expenses incurred bythe city by reason of undertaking the defense of such suit or suits, whether such suit or suits are successfullydefended, settled, compromised or fully adjudicated against the city.
(B) This indemnity provision shall not apply to any liability resulting from the negligence of the city, its officers,employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors.
(C) The provisions of this indemnity are solely for the benefit of the city and is not intended to create or grant any rights,contractual or otherwise, to any other person or entity.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 338/350
(D) To the fullest extent permitted by law, a person shall pay all expenses incurred by the city in defending itself withregard to all damages and penalties provided in this chapter. These expenses shall include all out-of-pocket expenses suchas attorneys' fees, and shall also include the reasonable value of any services rendered by any employees of the city. In theevent the city is compelled to undertake the defense of any such suit by reason of a person's failure to perform ashereinabove provided, the city shall have the full right and authority to make or enter into any settlement or compromise ofsuch adjudication as the city council shall deem in the best interest of the city, this without the prior approval or consent ofthe person with respect to the terms of such compromise or settlement.
(Ord. O-16-05, passed 11-15-05; Ord. O-12-17, passed 10-23-17)
Sec. 155.11. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are severable. However, in the event this chapter or any procedure provided in this chapterbecomes unlawful, or is declared or determined by a judicial, administrative or legislative authority exercising itsjurisdiction to be excessive, unenforceable, void, illegal or otherwise inapplicable, in whole or in part, the remaining andlawful provisions shall be of full force and effect and the city shall promptly promulgate new or revised provisions incompliance with the authority's decision or enactment. (Ord. O-16-05, passed 11-15-05; Ord. O-12-17, passed 10-23-17)
Sec. 155.12. Governing law.
This chapter shall be construed in accordance with the city code(s) in effect on the date of passage of this chapter to theextent that such code(s) are not in conflict with or in violation of the Constitution and laws of the United States or the Stateof Texas, subject to the city's ongoing authority to adopt reasonable police power based regulations to manage its publicrights-of-way, pursuant to §§
155.06
and
155.07
, herein, or as otherwise provided by law. (Ord. O-16-05, passed 11-15-05;Ord. O-12-17, passed 10-23-17)
Sec. 155.13. Unauthorized use of public rights-of-way.
Each construction permit application to use the public rights-of-way shall contain, or have attached, the following:
(By this application for a construction permit to use the public rights-of-way, I, as the lawful representative___________________ (not the contractor but a representative of the facility owner with authority to bind theowner), hereby agree to use the city's public rights-of-way under the terms and conditions approved by the Cityof Jacksboro by city public rights-of-way management ordinance (Ordinance O-16-05).
________________________
Name
________________________
Title
________________________
Date.
(Ord. O-16-05, passed 11-15-05; Ord. O-12-17, passed 10-23-17)
Sec. 155.99. Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions or terms of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and uponconviction thereof shall be fined a sum not exceeding $2,000.00 for each violation, and each day that such violation shallcontinue to exist constitutes a separate offense. (Ord. O-16-05, passed 11-15-05; Ord. O-12-17, passed 10-23-17)
APPENDIX A: FEE APPENDIX
SCHEDULE I: MUNICIPAL COURT FINES
To determine the amount of your fine, contact the municipal court clerk at 940-567-6321, Monday through Friday, from 8:00a.m.–5:00 p.m. (Ord. 9-13-96, passed 9-24-96; Am. Ord. O-07-03, passed 7-22-03; Am. Ord. O-16-13, passed 10-8-13; Ord.O-20-18, passed 10-22-18)
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 339/350
Cross reference–
Municipal court fines, see
§ 32.09
SCHEDULE II: GARBAGE REMOVAL CHARGES
Regular service
. Solid waste, trash and/or refuse shall be removed from houses, buildings, and premises used for residential,commercial, business, and/or other non-residential purposes, and the monthly charges shall be as follows:
Residential
Residential polycarts: $22.50.
Additional polycarts: $7.56.
Bulk waste collection service trash trailer:
$100.00 per day rental.
$150.00 per day rental for residential construction waste.
Friday deliveries are picked up on Monday and require a 2 day rental fee.
Commercial
Commercial polycarts: $30.03.
2 yards (one, 2-yard commercial container):
1 day a week collection: $96.15.
2 day a week collection: $172.56.
4 yards (two, 2-yard commercial containers):
1 day a week collection: $144.52.
2 day a week collection: $258.37.
6 yards (three, 2-yard commercial containers):
1 day a week collection: $195.99.
2 day a week collection: $351.97.
8 yards (four, 2-yard commercial containers)
1 day a week collection: $242.77.
2 day a week collection: $436.20.
(‘84 Code, §§ 11-9, 17-61) (Ord. 246, passed 9-12-67; Am. Ord. 1-1-89, passed 1-24-89; Am. Ord. 5-2-92, passed 5-26-92;Am. Ord. 9-11-94, passed 9-27-94; Am. Ord. 9-5-95, passed 9-26-95; Am. Ord. 9-14-96, passed 9-24-96; Am. Ord. 9-14-97,passed 9-23-97; Am. Ord. 8-12-00, passed 8-8-00; Am. Ord. 9-16-00, passed 9-26-00; Am. Ord. 11-9-01, passed 11-13-01;Am. Ord. O-07-03, passed 7-22-03; Am. Ord. O-19-08, passed 7-8-08; Am. Ord. O-09-10, passed 7-27-10; Am. Ord. O-16-11, passed 10-11-11; Am. Ord. O-13-12, passed 9-25-12; Am. Ord. O-14-13, passed 9-24-13; Ord. O-20-18, passed 10-22-18; Ord. O-09-2020, passed 8-24-20)
Cross reference
–
Garbage and refuse, see
Ch. 50
SCHEDULE III: SEWER RATES AND CHARGES
(A)
Wastewater Rates
.
(1) The monthly wastewater rates to be charged and collected by the city from all customers within the citylimits and obtaining city services for water shall hereby be fixed as follows:
Consumption in Gallons
Current Charge Per
Charge per
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 340/350
1,000 GallonsWithin City Limits
1,000 GallonsOutside CityLimits
Base residential
Base charge
$14.25
*
0 - 7,000
$4.55
*
Over 7,000
$4.55
*
Base nonresidential (commercial,apartments, industrial, municipal)
Base charge
$23.50
*
0 - 20,000
$6.83
*
20,001 - 50,000
$6.83
*
Over 50,000
$6.83
*
* Outside city-limit customers shall be charged 200% of the inside city-limit customers.
(2) The maximum residential wastewater rates shall be based on 10,000 gallons of water consumption foreach given month.
(3) The monthly wastewater rates to be charged and collected by the city from all customers who do not havewater service and obtaining city services for wastewater shall hereby be fixed as follows:
User
Current Rate
Inside City Limits
Current Rate
Outside City Limits
Residential
$26.25
$52.50
Commercial
$145.50
$291.00
(B)
Deposits
. Deposits may be required, as further explained in
§
52.60(B)(2).
(C)
Wastewater Taps
. All service addresses require separate sewer taps. No residence or business may share acommon tap. Wastewater tap fees shall hereby be fixed as follows:
Size
Tap Fee
4 inch
$1,000.00
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 341/350
6 inch
Cost plus 15%
6+ inch
Cost plus 15%
(D)
Service Charges
. The schedule of service charges applicable to all customers shall be as set forth in
Schedule IV ofthis Fee Appendix
.
(E)
Disconnection charges
.
Reconnection (new tap): $300.00
Reconnection to system: $25.00
(‘84 Code, § 17-50) (Ord. 12-9-91, passed 12-10-91; Am. Ord. 9-3-92, passed 9-8-92; Am. Ord. 9-10-94, passed 9-27-94;Am. Ord. 9-15-96, passed 9-24-96; Am. Ord. 9-15-96 (rev.), passed 11-12-96; Am. Ord. 9-14-97, passed 9-23-97; Am. Ord.9-11-98, passed 9-22-98; Am. Ord. 9-15-00, passed 9-26-00; Am. Ord. O-07-03, passed 7-22-03; Am. Ord. O-05-07,passed 5-22-07; Am. Ord. O-34-08, passed 12-9-08; Am. Ord. O-15-010, passed 9-28-10; Am. Ord. O-13-12, passed 9-25-12; Am. Ord. O-04-16, passed 4-25-16)
Cross reference
–
Sewer regulations, see Ch. 51
SCHEDULE IV: WATER RATES AND CHARGES
(A) The monthly water rates to be charged and collected by the city from all customers within the city limits and obtainingcity services for water shall be hereby fixed as follows:
Consumption in Gallons
Charge per 1,000Gallons WithinCity Limits
Charge per1,000 GallonsOutside CityLimits
Base residential
Base Charge
$24.00
*
0 - 7,000
5.93
*
7,001 - 10,000
5.99
*
10,001 - 15,000
6.11
*
15,001 - 20,000
6.29
*
Over 20,000
6.42
*
Monthly Capital Improvement Program Fee -Residential
CIP Fee
3.00
5.00
Base non-residential (commercial,apartments, industrial, municipal)
Base Charge
32.00
*
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 342/350
0 - 10,000
7.44
*
10,001 - 15,000
7.56
*
15,001 - 20,000
7.69
*
Over 20,000
7.88
*
* Outside city-limit customers shall be charged 200% of the inside city-limit customers.
Monthly Capital Improvement Program Fee -Commercial
CIP Fee-1 (0 - 20,000)
3.00
5.00
CIP Fee-2 (20,001 - 50,000)
7.00
9.00
CIP Fee-3 (50,001 and over)
10.00
12.00
Return check charge: Maximum permitted by law
(B) The raw (non-potable) water rates to be charged and collected by the city from all customers shall be hereby fixed asfollows:
Non-commercialuse
$00.50 per barrel
ResidentialCustomer
0 - 5,000 gallons
$25.00 per 1,000 gallons or partstherefor
ResidentialCustomer
5,000 gallons and above
$35.00 per 1,000 gallons or partsthereof
CommercialCustomer
Cost based on amount “perbarrel” versus “per gallon”
.50 per barrel
Commercial use
:
Consumption inGallons
Consumption inBarrels
Charge per barrel
NON-DROUGHT CONDITION
0 - 5,000
119
$0.50
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 343/350
5,001 - 10,000
119 - 238
$0.60
Over 10,000
Over 238
$0.75
MILD DROUGHT CONDITION
0 - 5,000
119
$0.50
5,001 - 10,000
119 - 238
$0.75
Over 10,000
Over 238
$1.00
MODERATE DROUGHT CONDITION
0 - 5,000
119
$0.75
Over 5,000
Over 119
No sales
SEVERE DROUGHT CONDITION
No Sales
(C)
Water service fee and deposits
.
(1) Each new water customer shall be charged a non-refundable water service fee of $25.00
(2) Additionally, the customer may be required to make a refundable deposit with the city to guaranteepayment of water, sewer and sanitation charges. All deposits will be refunded after one year of continual servicewithout late payments or service disconnects. Deposits shall hereby be fixed as follows unless it appears that alarger deposit is reasonably necessary to protect the city from loss by non-payment, which in such cases, thecity may require such additional sum of money as may be reasonably necessary to protect the city from suchloss.
User
Deposit
Each resident and churches
$100.00
Each small business: (10 employees or less)
$100.00
Each large business: (11 or more employees)
$200.00
Each laundry, motel, hotel, car wash, multi-family complex,restaurant, or any master-metered service
$300.00
Wholesale/bulk water accounts
$100.00
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 344/350
(D)
Water Taps
. All service addresses require separate water taps, except for multi-use commercial, business or multi-family establishments. Service addresses that have a single water tap but are comprised of more than one commercial unit,or multi-family units, shall be permitted to share a common tap, if in the opinion of the city(s Engineer, Building Official ortheir designees, such common tap with multiple meters does not adversely affect the health and safety of the occupants ofthe commercial unit or multi-family residences and is consistent with applicable health, safety and water rules andregulations. Each separate meter shall constitute a separate water customer. Water tap fees, and meter charges forcommon taps, as provided herein, shall be as follows:
Size
Tap Fee
Up to 3/4 inch pipe
$800.00
1 inch pipe
1,100.00
2 inch pipe
2,300.00
Over 2 inch pipe
Cost plus 15%
Multi-use commercial (all sizes)
Cost plus 30%
Multi-use family residential (allsizes)
Cost plus 30%
(E)
Service Charge
. The schedule of service charges applicable to all customers shall hereby be fixed as follows:
Service Charge
Service calls
Normal business hours (per trip): $25.00
After hours, nights and weekends (per trip): $40.00
(Ord. 12-9-91, passed 12-10-91; Am. Ord. 9-3-92, passed 9-8-92; Am. Ord. 9-10-94, passed 9-27-94; Am. Ord. 9-15-96,passed 9-24-96; Am. Ord. 9-15-96 (rev.), passed 11-12-96; Am. Ord. 9-14-97, passed 9-23-97; Am. Ord. 9-11-98, passed9-22-98; Am. Ord. 9-15-00, passed 9-26-00; Am. Ord. O-07-03, passed 7-22-03; Am. Ord. O-05-07, passed 5-22-07; Am.Ord. O-17-08, passed 6-10-08; Am. Ord. O-34-08, passed 12-9-08; Am. Ord. O-14-09, passed 5-12-09; Am. Ord. O-15-10,passed 10-28-10; Am. Ord. O-16-11, passed 10-11-11; Am. Ord. O-13-12, passed 9-25-12; Am. Ord. O-18-13, passed 10-8-13; Am. Ord. O-04-14, passed 5-13-14; Am. Ord. O-20-18, passed 10-22-18)
Cross reference
–
Water regulations, see Ch. 52
SCHEDULE V: REGISTRATION AND IMPOUNDMENT FEES
Impoundment Fee During 12-month Period
W/Vaccination
WO/Vaccination
First impoundment
$35.00
$45.00
Second Impoundment
$45.00
$55.00
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 345/350
Third impoundment
$55.00
$65.00
Daily fee
$15.00
$15.00
Quarantine fee (10 days)
$200.00
$250.00
Impoundment fee all livestock
Initial
$50.00
Each day thereafter
$15.00 + cost of feed, hay, hauling, cost of capture and allother reasonable expenses.
Resident
Nonresident
Surrender fee
$20.00
$30.00
Microchip fee (All animals will be microchipped beforeleaving shelter)
$20.00
Adoption fee (includes microchip)
$30.00
$30.00
Euthanasia
$20.00
Disposal of deceased domestic animals on private property
Under 25 lbs
$30.00
25 lbs - 75 lbs
$60.00
Over 75 lbs
$150.00
After hours an additional charge of
$60.00
Livestock will be disposed of by owner, at owner's expense
(‘84 Code, § 3-4, 3-6) (Ord. 217, passed 3-13-62; Am. Ord. 358, passed 2-28-84; Am. Ord. 10-13-98, passed 10-27-98;Am. Ord. O-07-03, passed 7-22-03; Am. Ord. O-26-09, passed 10-13-09; Am. Ord. O-14-13, passed 9-24-13; Am. Ord. O-
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 346/350
17-15, passed 11-9-15)
Cross reference
–
Animals, see
Ch. 90
; Municipal court fees; animal violations, see
Schedule I of this Fee Appendix
SCHEDULE VI: MOWING AND CLEANING LOTS
(A)
Lots 1/2 acre or less
.
Mowing and trimming only: $150.00
Tree pruning, brush removal and the like: $35.00 per hour
Disposal fee: $30.00 per yard
(B)
Lots 1/2 acre to 1 acre
.
Mowing and trimming only: $250.00
Tree pruning, brush removal and the like: $35.00 per hour
Disposal fee: $35.00 per yard
(C)
Lots greater than 1 acre
.
Mowing and trimming only: $250.00
Tree pruning, brush removal and the like: $45.00 per hour
Disposal fee: $40.00 per yard
(D)
Administrative Fees
: $25.00
(Ord. 3-5-97, passed 3-25-97; Am. Ord. O-07-03, passed 7-22-03)
Cross reference
–
Health and sanitation; nuisances, see
Ch. 93
SCHEDULE VII: BUILDING, ELECTRICAL, GAS, IRRIGATION, MECHANICAL, PLUMBING AND PLANNING ANDZONING FEES
(A)
Building permits
.
Commercial building
.
Renovations: $50.00.
New construction 2,000 sq ft or less: $250.00.
New construction over 2,000 sq ft: $500.00.
Residential building
.
Renovations: $50.00.
New construction 2,000 sq ft or less: $250.00.
New construction over 2,000 sq ft: $500.00.
Industrialized housing
.
Building permit and site plan required: No fee.
Building official industrialized housing installation inspection fee: $50.00 (other applicable required permitsand fees may apply).
Commercial certificate of occupancy
. $55.00.
Residential commercial certificate of occupancy
. $25.00.
Demolition
. $50.00.
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 347/350
Moving
. Any building or structure: $200.00.
Roofing
. $75.00.
Sidewalk and approach
. $50.00.
Signs
.
Portable/temporary: $75.00.
Permanent: $100.00.
Storage/accessory buildings
. $50.00.
Swimming pool (residential)
. $150.00.
Water well drilling
. $50.00.
(B)
Electrical permits
. $50.00.
(C)
Gas inspection
. $40.00.
(D)
Irrigation
.
Irrigation
. $50.00.
Irrigation services; registration of persons performing
.
Registration (initial): $50.00.
Renewal (annual): $25.00.
(E)
Mechanical permits
. $50.00.
(F)
Plumbing permits
. $50.00.
(G)
Planning and zoning and board of zoning adjustments
.
Planning and zoning
.
Application: $200.00.
Conditional use: $200.00.
Special use: $200.00.
Board of zoning adjustments
.
Variance: $200.00.
Special exceptions: $200.00.
(Ord. 9-12-96, passed 9-24-96; Am. Ord. 9-13-99, passed 9-28-99; Am. Ord. O-07-03, passed 7-22-03; Am. Ord. O-05-08,passed 3-11-08; Am. Ord. O-03-15, passed 2-10-15; Am. Ord. O-09-15, passed 6-9-15; Am. Ord. O-15-16, passed 11-21-16;Am. Ordinance O-20-18, passed 10-22-18; Am. Ordinance O-15-09, passed 6-24-19; Am. Ordinance O-05-2021, passed 4-12-21)
Cross reference
–
Building regulations,
Ch. 151
; Planning and Zoning Code,
Ch. 154
SCHEDULE VIII: PARK FEES
TWIN LAKES COMMUNITY ACTIVITY CENTER MEMBERSHIP RATES
Current Annual Rates
Suggested Annual Rates
Resident
Nonresident
Resident
Nonresident
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 348/350
New Member
Renewal
NewMember
Renewal
NewMember
Renewal
NewMember
Renewal
Individual
$75.00
$65.00
$85.00
$75.00
$120.00
$120.00
$150.00
$150.00
Senior 60+ years
$50.00
$40.00
$60.00
$50.00
$90.00
$65.00
$110.00
$70.00
First responders/volunteerfire (not including familymembers)
$60.00
$60.00
$60.00
$60.00
6-month membership,individual only
$65.00
---
$75 .00
---
$105.00
$105.00
$110.00
$110.00
1-month membership,individual only
---
---
---
---
$40.00
---
$60.00
---
Daily admission fee
$6.00
---
---
---
$20.00
$20.00
---
Administration fee (initialset-up fee for newmembership)
---
---
---
---
$10.00
---
$10.00
---
BALLFIELDS
Current Rates
Suggested Rates
Hourly
Nights WithLights
Day
Hourly
Nights WithLights
Day
Baseball
$10.00
$15.00
$100.00
$10.00
$15.00
$100.00
Softball
$10.00
$15.00
$100.00
$10.00
$15.00
$100.00
Soccer
$10.00
N/A
$100.00
$10.00
N/A
$100.00
FACILITY USE
Current Rates
Suggested Rates
Security Deposit
2 hours (2-hour minimum)
$125.00
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 349/350
Each additional hour above 2
$50.00
Gym Rental
1–50
$125.00
51–150
$150.00
151–225
$200.00
226–300
$275.00
301–375
$300.00
376–450
$325.00
451–500
$350.00
501–550
$375.00
551–600
$500.00
Daily fee (up to 12 hours)
$325.00
Daily fee (above 12 hours)
$500.00
Classroom Rental
Large classroom (1 hour)
$40.00
$40.00
Additional (each additional hour)
$15.00
$15.00
Gym - team practice
$20.00
$20.00
After-hours staffing fees
$12.00
$20.00
Personal Trainer and Instructional Classes
Classes
10% commission
1/5/22, 12:11 AM https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 350/350
Personal trainer
10% commission
No facility equipment used, no additional fees
Use of facility equipment, client must have a membership
Camping Rental
Type/hookup
Daily rate
(5-night maximum)
Electrical/water
$15.00
Nonelectrical/tent
$5.00
(Ordinance O-04-2021, passed 1-25-21)
SCHEDULE IX: GARAGE OR HOME SALES
Permit
Fee
Garage, home sales and fund raisers
$5.00
(Ord. O-16-10, passed 10-12-10)
Cross reference
–
Garage or home sale regulations, see
Ch. 99
SCHEDULE X: OIL AND GAS DRILLING
Permit Fee: $5,000.00. (Ord. O-22-13, passed 10-22-13)
SCHEDULE XII: CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION FEES
(A)
All contractors/persons performing (except electricians and plumbers)
.
Registration (initial): $50.00.
Renewal (annual): $25.00.
(B)
All electricians and plumbers
.
Registration (initial): $0.00.
Renewal (annual): $0.00.
(Ordinance O-15-09, passed 6-24-19)