CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF KILLEEN, TEXAS 
____________ Published by Order of the Council 
 
CURRENT 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
KILLEEN, TEXAS 
RESERVED 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
KILLEEN, TEXAS 
AT THE TIME OF THIS PUBLICATION 
Scott Casper 
Mayor 
Elizabeth Blackstone 
Terry Clark 
Juan Rivera 
Wayne Gilmore 
Steve Harris 
Jonathan Okray 
Jose Segarra 
City Council 
____________ 
Glenn Morrison 
City Manager 
____________ 
Kathryn H. Davis 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Dianna Barker 
City Secretary 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes the first in-house publication since the 1991 recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Killeen, Texas. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1963 Code, as supplemented through October 13, 1987, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1963 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-2 and the first section of Chapter 4 is 4-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 3-1 and 3-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 3-1.5. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. 
Indices 
The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indices themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 91-27 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Killeen, Texas; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending such Code; and Providing When such Code and this Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be it Ordained by the City Council of the City of Killeen: 
Section I. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances of the City of Killeen, Texas," published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 31, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section II. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before November 27, 1990, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section III. The repeal provided for in Section II hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section IV. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), except that a fine not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) may be imposed for violation of provisions that govern fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, including the dumping of refuse. The penalty imposed for a violation shall not exceed or be less than the penalty prescribed by state law for the same offense. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section V. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the City to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section VI. Ordinances adopted after November 27, 1990, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section VII. This ordinance shall become effective after its passage and publication according to law. 
Passed and Approved at a regular meeting of the City Council of the City of Killeen, Texas, this 14thday of May, 1991, at which meeting a quorum was present, held in accordance with the provisions of Article 6252-17, V.A.T.S. 
Approved: 
/s/   
      Major E. Blair, Mayor 	
 	 
ATTEST: 
/s/   
      Doris J. Johnson, City Secretary 	
 	 
(SEAL) 
ORDINANCE 97-39 
AN ORDINANCE RATIFYING THE PREVIOUSLY ADOPTED "CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF KILLEEN, TEXAS," AND AMENDMENTS THERETO AFTER ADOPTION; AMENDING THE PUBLISHING SOURCE AND METHOD OF CODIFYING CITY ORDINANCES; PROVIDING EDITORIAL AUTHORITY FOR THE CODIFIER TO CONFORM STRUCTURE OF ORDINANCES; DECLARING CERTAIN ACTIONS AS NON-SUBSTANTIVE CHANGES TO ORDINANCES WITHOUT AFFECTING VALIDITY OF AFFECTED ORDINANCES; PROVIDING FOR ADDITIONAL CHAPTERS OF SAID CODE; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CONFLICTING PROVISIONS; PROVIDING A SEVERABILITY CLAUSE; PROVIDING A SAVINGS CLAUSE; PROVIDING FOR A PENALTY; PROVIDING FOR PUBLICATION AND EFFECTIVE DATE. 
WHEREAS, on August 26, 1963, the City of Killeen City Council duly enacted Ordinance No. 63-I which created, authorized, and adopted a code of 14 chapters for all general and permanent ordinances of the city, as published by the Municipal Code Corporation; and, 
WHEREAS, on May 14, 1991, the City of Killeen City Council duly enacted Ordinance No. 91-27 which created, authorized, and adopted a code of 31 chapters for all general and permanent ordinances of the city, as published by the Municipal Code Corporation; and, 
WHEREAS, the City of Killeen finds that it is in its best business and financial interests to now use a different method and source for publishing the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Killeen, Texas;" and, 
WHEREAS, there is a need to assure Code of Ordinances of the City of Killeen, Texas shall always be reasonably easy-to-use, well organized, and readable, to include: its order, a uniform numbering system within each chapter and portion of the code, and the availability of additional chapters as may be needed; and, 
WHEREAS, effective September 1, 1995, the City of Killeen City Secretary ceased using the services of Municipal Code Corporation and, began using current technology to amend and publish the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Killeen, Texas" in-house; 
THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF KILLEEN: 
SECTION I. That the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Killeen, Texas," as adopted in Ordinance 91-27, and as amended since that date, is in all things ratified and hereby readopted as the official codification of all permanent and general ordinances of the City of Killeen, notwithstanding any irregularity in passage of any ordinance or in the adoption process of said Code or any amendments thereto, and without regard to the identity of the person, office, or entity which published or codified any ordinance, Code provision, or amendments. 
SECTION II. That effective September 1, 1995, the City of Killeen City Secretary is, was, and shall be the official codifier and publisher of the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Killeen, Texas." 
SECTION III. The City Secretary is hereby authorized to establish a uniform numbering system for all chapters, parts, sections, divisions and paragraphs throughout the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Killeen, Texas," and may re-number as needed any or all existing portions of the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Killeen, Texas," and any current or future amendments, in order to assure uniform numbering and structure of all code provisions. 
SECTION IV. Without further action by the City Council, but upon the joint concurrence of the City Manager and the City Attorney, the City Secretary may create, combine, or delete chapters or portions thereof, as may be desirable to clarify or simplify the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Killeen, Texas," to assure an accessible, understandable, and usable codification of the permanent and general ordinances and amendments of the City of Killeen. 
SECTION V. The following single or joint acts of the City Secretary are ratified, authorized, and are and shall be valid and taken without any further action of the City Council: 
A.  Re-numbering any chapter, division, article, section, or other unit of text; 
B.  Relocating within the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Killeen, Texas" a portion or all of an existing chapter or ordinance into a new or different chapter; or 
C.  Creating, combining, deleting, titling, and re-titling chapters or portions thereof. 
When performing the above acts, the City Secretary shall not alter the sense, meaning, or effect of an ordinance, code provision, or amendments thereto. Every such single or combined act of the City Secretary from September 1, 1995, and afterward is deemed to be a non-substantive change and shall not affect the validity of any affected code provisions, ordinances, or amendments duly enacted by the City Council. 
SECTION V. The "Code of Ordinances of the City of Killeen, Texas" is and shall be prima facie proof of the content of all ordinances and amendments included therein, and of their proper enactment, without the necessity of proving enactment or compliance with formalities. 
SECTION VI: That all ordinances or resolutions or parts of ordinances or resolutions in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict. 
SECTION VII: That should any section or part of any section or paragraph of this ordinance be declared invalid or unconstitutional for any reason, it shall not invalidate or impair the validity, force or effect of any other section or sections or part of a section or paragraph of this ordinance. 
SECTION VIII: That the Code of Ordinances of the City of Killeen, Texas, as amended, shall remain in full force and effect, save and except as amended by this ordinance. 
SECTION IX: That this ordinance shall be effective after its passage and publication according to law. 
PASSED AND APPROVED at a regular meeting of the City Council of the City of Killeen, Texas, this 24 th day of June, 1997, at which meeting a quorum was present, held in accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code, Section 551.001 et seq. 
APPROVED 
/s/   
      Raúl G. Villaronga, Mayor 	
 	 
ATTEST: 
/s/   
      Paula A. Miller, City Secretary 	
 	 
APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
/s/   
      David A. Blackburn, Asst. City Manager/City Attorney 	
 	 
(SEAL)  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
CHARTER OF THE CITY OF KILLEEN 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this part is the home rule charter for the City of Killeen, Texas. The charter was adopted by the voters of the city on March 3, 1949 and amended on April 1, 1958 and May 4, 1971. This part is derived from a copy of the charter furnished by the city in which such amendments had been included in the text. The charter is printed as found in such copy, except that obvious spelling errors have been corrected. Any other change is encased in brackets. 
 
ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION: FORM OF GOVERNMENT: TERRITORY  
INCORPORATION 
Section 1. The inhabitants of the City of Killeen, within the corporate limits as now established or as hereafter established in the manner provided by this charter, shall continue to be a municipal body politic and corporate in perpetuity, under the name of the "City of Killeen."  
FORM OF GOVERNMENT 
Section 2. The municipal government provided by this charter shall be known as the "council-manager government." Pursuant to its provisions and subject only to the limitations imposed by the state constitution and by this charter, all powers of the city shall be vested in an elective council, hereinafter referred to as "the council," which shall enact local legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies, and employ the city manager, who shall execute the laws and administer the government of the city. All powers of the city shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this charter, or if the manner be not prescribed, then in such manner as may be prescribed by ordinance.  
BOUNDARIES 
Section 3. The bounds and limits of the City of Killeen shall be established and described by ordinance passed and approved by the city council.  
CREATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES 
Section 4. Until and unless changed as provided by this Charter, the City of Killeen shall be divided into four (4) districts for voting purposes. Districts 1, 2, 3, and 4 shall be single member districts, and their boundaries shall be established by ordinance passed and approved by the City Council. (Amend. of 5-3-97; Amend. of 5-7-05)  
ARTICLE II. - CORPORATE AND GENERAL POWERS  
POWERS OF THE CITY 
Section 5. The City shall have all the powers granted to municipal corporations and to cities by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, together with all the implied powers necessary to carry into execution all the powers granted. The city may acquire property within or without its corporate limits for any city purposes in fee simple or any lesser interest or estate, by purchase, gift, devise, lease, or condemnation, and may sell, lease, mortgage, hold, manage and control such property as its interests may require; and, except as prohibited by the constitution of this state or restricted by this charter, the city shall and may exercise all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities of every name and nature whatsoever. The city may use a corporate seal; may sue and be sued, may contract and be contracted with; may implead and be impleaded in all courts and places and in all matters whatever; may cooperate with the government of the State of Texas or any agency thereof, the Federal Government or any agency thereof, or any political subdivision of the State of Texas, to accomplish any lawful purpose for the advancement of the interest, welfare, health, morals, comfort, safety, and convenience of the city or its inhabitants; and may pass such ordinances as may be expedient for maintaining and promoting the peace, welfare and government of the city, and for the performance of the functions thereof. The enumeration of particular powers by this charter shall not be deemed to be exclusive, and in addition to the powers enumerated therein or implied thereby, or appropriate to the exercise of such powers, it is intended that the City of Killeen shall have, and may exercise, all powers of local self-government, and all powers enumerated in Chapter 13, Title 28, Revised Civil Statutes of the State of Texas of 1925, and the acts amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto, now or hereafter enacted, or any other powers which, under the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, it would be competent for this charter specifically to enumerate, and also such further powers as may hereafter be granted under the constitution and laws of Texas.  
EXTENSION OF CITY LIMITS UPON PETITION 
Section 6. When a majority of the inhabitants, qualified to vote for members of the Texas State Legislature, of any territory adjoining Killeen, as said territory may be designated by the City Council desire the annexation of such territory to Killeen, they may present a written petition to that effect to the City Council and shall attach to said petition the affidavit of one or more of their number to the effect that said petition is signed by a majority of such qualified voters, and thereupon, the City Council at the next regularly scheduled session held not sooner than twenty (20) days after the presentation of said petition may, by ordinance, annex such territory to Killeen. On the effective date of the ordinance, the area becomes a part of the City of Killeen and the inhabitants thereof shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges of other citizens of the City of Killeen and shall be bound by the acts, ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the city. 
Should there be no such qualified voters in said territory, the owners may petition the City Council in accordance with Texas Local Government Code, § 43.028 or any successor statute thereto, and the City Council by ordinance consistent with State law, may annex the area. (Amend. of 5-4-91)  
EXTENSION OF CITY LIMITS BY THE CITY COUNCIL 
Section 7. The City Council shall have power, by ordinance, to fix and extend the boundaries of Killeen and to exchange area with other municipalities, with or without the consent of the territory and inhabitants annexed or relinquished. Upon the introduction of such ordinance by the city council, the procedures for annexation set forth by state law shall be followed, as found in Chapter 43, Local Government Code, and as may hereafter be amended. Once annexed, the territory and inhabitants shall be a part of Killeen, entitled to all rights and privileges and shall be bounds by the acts, ordinances, resolutions and regulations of Killeen. (Amend. of 5-3-97; Amend. of 5-5-01)  
CHANGE OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES 
Section 8. The City Council may, by ordinance, alter or change the district boundaries of the City of Killeen, and resubdivide the City into districts, designating and describing same by metes and bounds or other adequate means, provided there shall at all times be four districts within the city. Each district now existing or that may hereafter be established shall be designated so that each district shall contain as nearly as possible the same number of qualified electors. The City Council shall review such districts for possible boundary changes within two (2) years after the federal decennial census has been conducted and reported; and the City Council, at its discretion, may review and change such districts at any time deemed necessary. All amendments of existing district boundaries shall be effective only after preclearance approval under Section 5, Federal Voting Rights Act, 42 U.S.C. Section 1973c and the acts amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto, now or hereafter enacted. If district boundaries are altered or changed and a councilmember no longer lives in the district for which he was elected, he shall remain in office until the end of his term. (Amend. of 5-4-91; Amend. of 5-7-05; Amend. of 5-11-13)  
EMINENT DOMAIN 
Section 9. The City shall have the full right, power and authority to exercise the power of eminent domain when necessary and desirable to carry out any of the powers conferred upon it by this charter, or by the constitution or laws of the state of Texas. (The City shall have and possess this power of condemnation of property within or without the corporate limits for any municipal or public purpose, even though not specifically enumerated herein or in this charter.) (Amend. of 5-3-97)  
ESTABLISHMENT AND CONTROL OF STREETS 
Section 10. The City of Killeen, shall have the power to lay out, establish, open, alter, widen, lower, extend, grade, abandon, discontinue, abolish, close, care for, pave, supervise, maintain and improve streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks, squares, public places and bridges; and regulate the use thereof and require the removal from streets, sidewalks, alleys and other public property or places of all obstructions and encroachments of every nature or character.  
STREET IMPROVEMENTS 
Section 11. The City of Killeen shall have exclusive dominion, control and jurisdiction in, upon, and over and under the public streets, avenues, alleys and highways of the city, and may provide for the improvement thereof by paving, re-paving, raising, draining, or otherwise. Such exclusive dominion, control and jurisdiction in, upon, over and under the public streets, avenues, alleys and highways of the city shall also include, but not be limited to, the right to regulate, locate, relocate, remove or prohibit the location of, all utility pipes, lines, wires, or other property.  
GARBAGE DISPOSAL 
Section 12. The city council shall have the right by ordinance to adopt and prescribe rules and regulations for the handling and disposition of all garbage, trash, refuse and rubbish within the City of Killeen, and shall further have the right to fix charges and compensation to be charged by the city for the removal of garbage, trash, refuse and rubbish, providing rules and regulations for the collection thereof.  
MUNICIPAL COURT 
Section 13. There shall be a court for the trial of misdemeanor offenses known as the Municipal Court of Record of the City of Killeen, with such powers and duties as are given and prescribed by the laws of the State of Texas, with a Municipal Court judge and a Municipal Court clerk whose duties shall be in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas.  
HOSPITAL: OPERATION 
Section 14. Deleted from the Charter. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
HOSPITAL: FINANCES 
Section 15. Deleted from the Charter. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM 
Section 16. The City of Killeen shall have the power to provide for a sanitary sewer system and to require property owners to connect their premises with such sewer system; to provide for fixing penalties for failure to make sanitary sewer connections; and shall further have the right to fix charges and compensation to be charged by the City for sewerage services, providing rules and regulations for the collection thereof. In the event any property owner fails or refuses to connect his property with the sanitary sewer system in accord with the requirements of the City then the city may itself connect such premises to the sewer system and the cost thereof shall be assessed and levied against the property so connected and the City of Killeen shall have a lien against such property for such cost plus interest and such lien shall be paramount and prior to any and all other liens against such property except State, County, City and School taxes and any prior assessment made against such property by the City of Killeen.  
POLICE FORCE 
Section 17. There shall be a police department for the City of Killeen, the head of which shall be the Chief of Police. The officers of the police department are vested with the powers and authorities given to them as peace officers under the laws of the State of Texas, the laws of the United States, and the ordinances of the City of Killeen. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
NUISANCES 
Section 18. The City of Killeen shall have the power to define and regulate any nuisance which may be created or occur in the city limits of Killeen or within five thousand feet of the city limits of the City of Killeen, except on the Military Reservation of Fort Hood, Texas.  
OCCUPATION AND LICENSE TAXES 
Section 19. Deleted from the Charter. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
REMOVAL OF DANGEROUS STRUCTURES 
Section 20. The City of Killeen shall have power to condemn and cause to be torn down and removed any dangerous or dilapidated building or structure as authorized in the constitution and state law. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
ADOPTING STATE LAWS 
Section 21. The City of Killeen adopts and shall have all the benefits conferred by and powers extended by state law. (Amend. of 5-3-97)  
ARTICLE III. - THE COUNCIL  
NUMBER, SELECTION, TERM MAYOR AND THE COUNCIL 
Section 22. The members of the City Council of the City of Killeen shall be composed of a mayor and seven councilmembers. Four (4) of the councilmembers shall represent "single member districts," such districts being numbered and designated 1, 2, 3, and 4, and defined in this charter or by ordinance hereafter passed. The mayor and three (3) of the councilmembers shall represent the city at large. Such council shall be elected in the following manner: 
At an election held on a uniform election date in even-numbered years, a mayor and three councilmembers shall be elected by a plurality vote of the city at large for a term of two (2) years. At an election held on a uniform election date in odd-numbered years, there shall be elected one councilmember from each of the single member districts 1, 2, 3, and 4, by a plurality vote of the registered voters residing within each district, to serve a term of two (2) years. All elections are to be held in a manner provided in Article IX of this charter and in accordance with state law. 
The members of the City Council shall serve not more than three (3) terms in succession, in whole or in part, whether appointed (to fill an unexpired portion of a term) or elected, and until their successors shall have been elected and qualified and they shall be ineligible to succeed themselves or another councilmember for an additional successive term; except if any member of the City Council holding office desires to run for a different office than that which the member holds, at the next election, the member must resign and vacate their present office at least forty (40) days prior to such election and his resignation shall be effective on the date of such resignation. For the purposes of this provision there shall be only two offices: the office of the mayor and the office of the councilmember. (Amend. of 5-3-97; Amend. of 5-7-05; Amend. of 5-11-13)  
QUALIFICATIONS 
Section 23. Candidates for mayor and councilmember shall meet the qualifications for elective office as established in the Texas Elections Code. In addition to the foregoing, candidates for the four district councilmembers herein above provided shall be bona fide residents of the district from which they seek election. A member of the council ceasing to possess any of the qualifications specified in this section or any other section of this charter, failing to attend three (3) consecutive regular meetings of the council without being excused by the council, or convicted of a felony while in office shall immediately forfeit his office. (Amend. of 5-4-91; Amend. of 5-11-13)  
COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS 
Section 24. The compensation for the councilmembers shall not exceed $100.00 per month and compensation for the mayor shall not exceed $200.00 per month. Said compensation shall be fixed by the city council. (Amend. of 5-5-01; Amend. of 5-11-13)  
PRESIDING OFFICER: MAYOR 
Section 25. The mayor shall preside at the meetings of the council and shall be recognized as head of the City of Killeen government for all ceremonial purposes, and by the governor for purposes of military Law; but he shall have no regular administrative duties. The mayor shall only be entitled to vote upon matters considered by the council in the event there is a tie vote resulting from absence of a member or members or failure or refusal of a member to vote. However the mayor shall have no veto power. The council shall elect a mayor protem from their number, who shall act as mayor during the absence or disability of the mayor, and, if a vacancy should occur, shall become mayor until the next regular election.  
VACANCIES 
Section 26. A vacancy in the council of the City of Killeen, except the office of Mayor, shall be filled by a majority vote of the remaining members of the council, by the selecting of a person possessing all the qualifications prescribed by Section 23 of this Article, and who shall be a bona fide resident of the district in which the vacancy occurs; unless the vacancy in office is that of a councilmember at large, in which case the person selected to fill the vacancy shall be a bona fide resident of the City of Killeen without regard to the district in which he resides. However, if the vacancy occurs within 90 days before a regular municipal election, the vacancy is not required to be filled. Where more than one vacancy shall develop at any one time, then a special election shall be called on the first authorized uniform election date prescribed by the Election Code that allows sufficient time to comply with the other requirements of law, and that occurs on or after the 30th day after the date the ordinance calling the election is adopted, and any vacancy shall be filled in the same manner as herein provided for general election. If the Mayor protem succeeds to the office of Mayor under the provisions of Section 25 of this Article, then his office of councilmember shall be considered vacant within the meaning of this Section. (Amend. of 5-4-91; Amend. of 5-7-05; Amend. of 5-11-13)  
POWERS 
Section 27. All powers of the City of Killeen and the determination of all matters of policy shall be vested in the City council. Except where in conflict with and otherwise expressly provided by this charter the city council shall have all powers authorized to be exercised by the city council by Chapter 4 of Title 28, Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes, and acts amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto, now or hereafter enacted. Without limitation of the foregoing and among the other powers that may be exercised by the council, the following are hereby enumerated for greater certainty: 
(1)  Appoint and remove the city manager. 
(2)  Establish other administrative departments and distribute the work of divisions. 
(3)  Adopt the budget of the city. 
(4)  Authorize the issuance of bonds by a bond ordinance. 
(5)  Inquire into the conduct of any office, department or agency of the city and make investigations as to municipal affairs. 
(6)  Provide for a planning commission, a zoning commission and a zoning board of adjustment, and appoint the members of all such commissions and boards, and as well the members of the hospital board, if a hospital is established. The planning [and] zoning commissions may be combined. Such boards and commissions shall have all powers and duties now and hereafter conferred and created by this charter, by city ordinance or by law. 
(7)  Adopt plats. 
(8)  Adopt and modify the official map of the city. 
(9)  Adopt, modify and carry out plans proposed by the planning commission for the clearance of slum districts and rehabilitation of blighted areas. 
(10)  Adopt, modify and carry out plans proposed by the planning commission for the replanning, improvement, and redevelopment of neighborhoods and for the replanning, reconstruction or redevelopment of any area or district which may have been destroyed in whole or in part by disaster. 
(11)  Regulate, license and fix the charges or fares made by any person owning, operating or controlling any vehicle of any character used for the carrying of passengers for hire or the transportation of freight for hire on the public streets and alleys of the city. 
(12)  Provide for the establishment and designation of fire limits and to prescribe the kind and character of buildings or structures or improvements to be erected therein, and to provide for the erection of fireproof buildings within certain limits, and to provide for the condemnation of dangerous structures or buildings or dilapidated buildings or buildings calculated to increase the fire hazard, and the manner of their removal or destruction. 
(13)  Provide for creation of the following departments: Finance, Police, Fire, and Public Works, and such other departments as may be established by the council as hereinafter provided. The council may create, change, and abolish offices, departments and agencies other than those established by this charter.  
APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL OF CITY MANAGER 
Section 28. The Council shall appoint a City Manager who shall have the powers and perform the duties in this charter provided. No councilmember shall receive such appointment during the term for which he shall have been elected, nor within one year after he leaves office. 
The salary of the City Manager shall be fixed by the City Council, and he shall hold office at its will; but if removed at any time after six months from his appointment, he may demand written charges and a public hearing thereon before the City Council prior to the date on which his final removal shall take effect, but during such hearing the Council may suspend him from office. The action of the Council in suspending or removing the City Manager shall be final, it being the intention of this charter to vest all authority and fix all responsibility for such suspension or removal in the City Council. During the absence or disability of the City Manager, the Council shall designate some properly qualified person to perform the duties of the office; except in case of his temporary absence or disability. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
COUNCIL NOT TO INTERFERE IN APPOINTMENTS OR REMOVALS 
Section 29. Neither the council nor any of its members shall direct the appointment of any person to, or his removal from office, by the city manager or by any of his subordinates; provided, however, that the appointment of assistant city managers, department heads and the city secretary shall be subject to the approval of the council. Except for the purpose of inquiry the council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the city manager and neither the council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the city manager, either publicly or privately. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
RIGHTS OF THE CITY MANAGER AND OTHER OFFICERS IN COUNCIL 
Section 30. The City manager, and such other officers of the city as may be designated by vote of the council, shall be entitled to seats in the council, but shall have no vote therein. The city manager shall have the right to take part in the discussion of all matters coming before the council, and other officers shall be entitled to take part in all discussions of the council relating to their respective offices, departments or agencies.  
CITY SECRETARY 
Section 31. There shall be a city secretary who shall be the city clerk. He shall give notices of council meetings, shall keep the journal of its proceedings, shall authenticate by his signature and record in full in a book kept and indexed for the purpose all ordinances and resolutions, and shall perform such other duties assigned to him, and those elsewhere provided for in this Charter, by city ordinance or in state law. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
MUNICIPAL JUDGE 
Section 32. There shall be a Municipal Court of Record for Killeen. The City Council shall appoint a magistrate as a presiding judge for the court, and associates judges, as deemed necessary for the benefit and conduct of the court. Each judge shall be a competent and duly-licensed attorney. The initial appointments of the presiding judge and associate judges shall be by resolution of the City Council at their first regular meeting in June, following the May 3, 1997 election and their initial terms shall be staggered, not to exceed 4 years, as may be decided by the City Council. Thereafter, all judges shall serve terms of 4 years and may serve successive terms, but may be removed by the city council at any time for incompetency, misconduct, malfeasance, or disability. Judges shall receive such salary as may be fixed by the council. 
When the municipal judge and the associate judge(s) are absent at the same time, the Mayor shall appoint a temporary municipal judge. All costs and fines imposed by the Municipal Court, or by any court in cases appealed from judgments of the Municipal Court, shall be paid into the City treasury for the use and benefit of the city. (Amend. of 5-3-97; Amend. of 5-7-05)  
LEGAL DEPARTMENT 
Section 33. There shall be Legal Department, the head of which shall be the City Attorney. The City Attorney shall be a competent and duly-licensed attorney and shall represent the city in all litigation. He shall be the legal advisor of and attorney and counsel for the city and all offices and departments thereof. There shall be such deputy or assistant city attorneys as may be authorized by the council and appointed by the City Attorney, who shall be authorized to act for and on behalf of the City Attorney. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
INDUCTION INTO OFFICE: MEETINGS 
Section 34. On the next regular meeting following each regular municipal election held under this Charter, or any special election for the purpose of filling vacancies in the council, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the council shall meet at the usual time and place for holding meetings, and the newly elected members shall qualify and assume the duties of office. Thereafter, the council shall meet regularly at such times as may be prescribed by its rules but not less frequently than twice each month. All meetings shall be open to the public, in accordance with the Texas Government Code; special meetings shall be called by the city clerk upon request of the mayor, or a majority of the members of the council. (Amend. of 1-15-94)  
COUNCIL TO BE JUDGE OF QUALIFICATIONS OF ITS MEMBERS 
Section 35. Deleted from the Charter. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
RULES OF PROCEDURE: JOURNAL 
Section 36. The council shall determine its own rules and order of business. It shall keep an indexed journal of its proceedings and the journal shall be open to the public inspection.  
ORDINANCES 
Section 37. In addition to such acts of the council as are required by statute or by this charter to be by ordinance, every act of the council establishing a fine or other penalty or providing for the expenditure of funds or for the contracting of indebtedness shall be by ordinance. The enacting clause of the ordinances shall be "BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF KILLEEN."  
PROCEDURE FOR PASSAGE OF ORDINANCES 
Section 38. Every ordinance shall be introduced in written or printed form and, upon passage, shall take effect at the time indicated therein; provided that any ordinance imposing a penalty, fine or forfeiture for a violation of its provisions shall become effective not less than ten days from the date of its passage; subject to the provisions of Article X of this charter. The city clerk shall give notice of the passage of every ordinance imposing a penalty, fine or forfeiture for a violation of the provisions thereof, by causing the caption or title, including the penalty, of any such ordinance to be published in accordance with state law. He shall note on every ordinance, the caption of which is hereby required to be published, and on the record thereof, the fact that same has been published as required by the charter, and the date of such publication, which shall be prima facie evidence of the legal publication and promulgation of such ordinance; provided that the provisions of this correction, amendment, revision and codification of the ordinances of the city for publication in book or pamphlet form. Except as otherwise provided by Article XI of this charter, it shall not be necessary to the validity of any ordinance that it shall be read more than one time or considered at more than one session of the City Council. Every ordinance shall be authenticated by the signature of the mayor and city clerk and shall be systematically recorded and indexed in an ordinance book in a manner approved by the council. It shall only be necessary to record the caption or title of ordinances in the minutes or journal of council meetings. The city council shall have power to cause the ordinances of the city to be corrected, amended, revised, codified and printed in code form as often as the council deems advisable, and such printed code, when adopted by the council, shall be in full force and effect without the necessity of publishing the same or any part thereof in a newspaper. Such printed code shall be admitted in evidence in all courts and places without further proof. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
INVESTIGATION BY COUNCIL 
Section 39. The council shall have power to inquire into the conduct of any office, department, agency, or officer of the city and to make investigations as to municipal affairs, and for that purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and compel the production of books, papers and other evidence. Failure to obey such subpoena or to produce books, papers or other evidence as ordered under the provisions of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by fine not to exceed the maximum amount allowed by law. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
AUDITORS 
Section 40. Prior to the end of each fiscal year the council shall designate qualified Certified Public Accountants who, as of the end of the fiscal year, shall make an independent audit of accounts and other evidences of financial transactions of the city government and shall submit their report to the council. Such accountant shall have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the city government. They shall not maintain any accounts or record of the city business, but, within specifications approved by the council, shall post-audit the books and documents kept by the department of finance and any separate or subordinate accounts kept by any other office, department or agency of the city government. 
The city council may appoint a city auditor. The city auditor shall carry out the internal audit functions, shall perform such other duties as the city council shall assign to him and shall be a Certified Public Accountant. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
PUBLIC LIBRARY 
Section 41. The City Council shall have the authority to establish and maintain a free public library within the City and to cooperate with any person, firm, association or corporation under such terms as the City Council may prescribe for the establishment or maintenance of such public library. For the budget purposes, the library shall be considered as a division of the City and the appropriations therefor shall comply with all the budgetary requirements as outlined in this charter and as may be prescribed from time to time by the City Council. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
HOUSING AUTHORITY 
Section 42. The City Council may create a housing authority of such number and terms of members as the Council may determine and may delegate to the housing authority such powers relating to the planning, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, maintenance or operation of housing projects and housing accommodations as the Council may determine. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
DISABLED EMPLOYEES' PENSIONS AND INSURANCE 
Section 43. Deleted from the Charter. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
ARTICLE IV. - THE CITY MANAGER  
QUALIFICATIONS 
Section 44. The city manager shall be chosen by the city council solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his actual experience in, or his knowledge of, accepted practice in respect to the duties of his office as hereinafter set forth. At the time of his appointment, he need not be a resident of the city or state, but during his tenure of office he shall reside within the city.  
POWERS AND DUTIES 
Section 45. The city manager shall be the chief executive officer and the head of the administrative branch of the city government. He shall be responsible to the council for the proper administration of all affairs of the city and to that end he shall have power and shall be required to: 
(1)  Appoint and, when necessary for the good of the service, remove all officers and employees of the city except as otherwise provided by this charter and except as he may authorize the head of a department to appoint and remove subordinates in such department. 
(2)  Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the council and be responsible for its administration after adoption. 
(3)  Prepare and submit to the council at the end of the fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year. 
(4)  Keep the council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations as may seem to him desirable. 
(5)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this charter or required of him by the council, not inconsistent with this charter.  
ABSENCE OF CITY MANAGER 
Section 46. To perform his duties during his temporary absence or disability, the manager may designate by letter filed with the city clerk a qualified administrative officer of the city.  
DIRECTORS OF DEPARTMENTS 
Section 47. At the head of each administrative department there shall be a director, who shall be an officer of the city and shall have supervision and control of the department subject to the city manager. 
Two or more departments may be headed by the same individual, the manager or assistant city manager may head one or more departments, and directors of departments may also serve as chiefs of divisions. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
DEPARTMENTAL DIVISIONS 
Section 48. The work of each administrative department may be distributed among such divisions thereof as may be established by ordinance upon the recommendation of the manager. Pending the passage of an ordinance or ordinances distributing the work of departments under the supervision and control of the manager among specific divisions thereof, the manager may establish temporary divisions.  
ARTICLE V. - THE BUDGET  
FISCAL YEAR 
Section 49. The fiscal year of the City of Killeen shall begin the 1 st day of October and shall end on the last day of September of each calendar year. Such fiscal year shall also constitute the budget and accounting year.  
PREPARATION AND SUBMISSION OF BUDGET 
Section 50. Not less than forty-five (45) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the council a proposed budget, which budget shall provide a complete financial plan for the fiscal year, and shall contain the following: 
(1)  A budget message, explanatory of the budget, which message shall contain an outline of the proposed financial policies of the city for the fiscal year, shall set forth the reasons for salient changes from the previous fiscal year in expenditures and revenue items, and shall explain any major changes in financial policy. 
(2)  A consolidated statement of receipts and expenditures of all funds. 
(3)  An analysis of property valuations. 
(4)  An analysis of tax rate. 
(5)  Tax levies and tax collections by years for at least five years or, if records for five years are not available, then for as many years as are available. 
(6)  General fund resources in detail. 
(7)  Summary of proposed expenditures by function, department, and activity. 
(8)  Summary of proposed expenditures by character and subject. 
(9)  Detailed estimates of expenditures shown separately for each activity to support the summaries No. 7 and 8 above. Such estimates of expenditures are to include an itemization of positions showing the number of persons having each title and the rate of pay. 
(10)  A revenue and expense statement for all types of bonds. 
(11)  A description of all bond issues outstanding, showing rate of interest, date of issue, maturity date, amount and authorized, amount issued, and amount outstanding. 
(12)  A schedule of requirements for the principal and interest of each issue of bonds. 
(13)  A special funds section. 
(14)  The appropriation ordinance. 
(15)  The tax levying ordinance. 
(Amend. of 5-11-13)  
ANTICIPATED REVENUES COMPARED WITH OTHER YEARS IN BUDGET 
Section 51. In preparing the budget, the City Manager shall in the preparation of the budget place in parallel columns opposite the several items of revenue the actual amount of each item for the last completed fiscal year, the estimated amount for the current fiscal year, and the proposed amount for the ensuing fiscal year.  
PROPOSED EXPENDITURES COMPARED WITH OTHER YEARS 
Section 52. The City Manager in the preparation of the budget shall in parallel columns opposite the various items of expenditures place the actual amount of such items of expenditures for the last completed fiscal year, the estimated amount for the current fiscal year, and the proposed amount for the ensuing fiscal year.  
BUDGET A PUBLIC RECORD 
Section 53. The budget and all supporting schedules shall be filed with the City Clerk when submitted to the Council and shall be a public record for inspection by anyone. The City Manager shall cause copies to be made for inspection by all interested persons. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING ON BUDGET 
Section 54. At the meeting of the Council at which the budget is submitted, the Council shall fix the time and place of a public hearing on the budget and shall cause to be published a notice of the hearing setting forth the time and place thereof at least five days before the date of hearing.  
PUBLIC HEARING ON BUDGET 
Section 55. At the time and place set forth in the notice required by Section 54, or at any time and place to which such public hearing shall from time to time be adjourned, the council shall hold a public hearing on the budget submitted and all interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard for or against any item or the amount of any item therein contained.  
PROCEEDINGS ON BUDGET AFTER PUBLIC HEARING AMENDING OR SUPPLEMENTING BUDGET 
Section 56. After the conclusion of such public hearing, the Council may insert new items or may increase or decrease the items of the Budget, except items in proposed expenditures fixed by law. Before inserting any additional item or increasing any item of appropriation, it must cause to be published a notice setting forth the nature of the proposed increases and fixing a place and time, not less than five days after publication, at which the Council will hold a public hearing thereon.  
PROCEEDINGS ON ADOPTION OF BUDGET 
Section 57. After such further hearing, the Council may insert the additional item or items, and make the increase or increases, to the amount in each case indicated by the published notice, or to a lesser amount, but where it shall increase the total proposed expenditures, it shall also provide for an increase in the total anticipated revenue to at least equal such total proposed expenditures.  
VOTE REQUIRED FOR ADOPTION 
Section 58. The budget shall be adopted by the favorable vote of a majority of the members of the whole Council.  
DATE OF FINAL ADOPTION: FAILURE TO ADOPT 
Section 59. The budget shall be finally adopted not later than the twentieth day of the last month of the fiscal year. Should the council take no action on or prior to such day, the budget as submitted by the city manager shall be deemed to have been finally adopted by the council.  
EFFECTIVE DATE OF BUDGET: CERTIFICATION: COPIES MADE AVAILABLE 
Section 60. Upon final adoption, the budget shall be in effect for the fiscal year. A copy of the budget, as finally adopted, shall be filed with the City Clerk, the County Clerk of Bell County, and the State Comptroller of Public Accounts at Austin. The final budget shall be made available for the use of all offices, departments and agencies, and for the use of interested persons and civic organizations. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
BUDGET ESTABLISHES APPROPRIATIONS 
Section 61. From the effective date of the budget, the several amounts stated therein as proposed expenditures shall be and become appropriated to the several objects and purposes therein named.  
BUDGET ESTABLISHES AMOUNT TO BE RAISED BY PROPERTY TAX 
Section 62. From the effective date of the budget, the amount stated therein as the amount to be raised by property tax shall constitute a determination of the amount of the levy for the purposes of the City in the corresponding tax year.  
CONTINGENT APPROPRIATION 
Section 63. Deleted from the Charter. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
ESTIMATED EXPENDITURES SHALL NOT EXCEED ESTIMATED RESOURCES 
Section 64. The total estimated expenditures of the general fund and debt service fund shall not exceed the total estimated resources of each fund (Prospective income plus cash on hand.) The classification of revenue and expenditure accounts shall conform as nearly as local conditions will permit to the uniform classification as promulgated by the National Committee on Municipal Accounting, or some other nationally accepted classification.  
EMERGENCY APPROPRIATIONS 
Section 65. Deleted from the Charter. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
ARTICLE VI. - ISSUANCE AND SALE OF BONDS  
POWER TO BORROW 
Section 66. The City of Killeen shall have the right and power to issue its general obligation bonds on the full faith and credit of the City, payable from ad valorem taxes not to exceed the maximum rate permitted by the Texas Constitution, for the purpose of providing permanent public improvements or for any other public purpose. The City also shall have the right and power to issue its revenue bonds payable from the revenues of any municipally owned utility or utilities, and may secure such revenue bonds by a mortgage or deed of trust on the physical properties of such utility or utilities. The City also shall have the right and power to issue interest bearing time warrants pursuant to state law. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
ISSUANCE OF BONDS AND TIME WARRANTS 
Section 67. All bonds and warrants of the City of Killeen shall be issued pursuant to the procedures and requirements established by the general laws of the State of Texas.  
ARTICLE VII. - FINANCE ADMINISTRATION  
DIRECTOR OF FINANCE: APPOINTMENT 
Section 68. There shall be a department of finance, the head of which shall be the director of finance. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
DIRECTOR OF FINANCE: QUALIFICATIONS 
Section 69. The director of finance shall have the proper knowledge of municipal accounting and sufficient experience in budgeting and financial control to properly perform the duties of the office, and shall be a Certified Public Accountant. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
DIRECTOR OF FINANCE: POWER AND DUTIES 
Section 70. Under the direction of the city manager, the director of finance shall have charge of the administration of the financial affairs of the city and to that end he shall have authority and shall be required to: 
(1)  Supervise and be responsible for the disbursement of all monies and have control over all expenditures to ensure that budget appropriations are not exceeded; 
(2)  Maintain a general accounting system for the city government and each of its offices, departments, and agencies, keep books for and exercise financial budgetary control over each office, department and agency; keep separate accounts for the items of appropriation contained in the city budget, each of which accounts shall show the amount of the appropriation, the amounts paid therefrom, the unpaid obligations against it and the unencumbered balance; require reports of receipts and disbursements from each receiving and spending agency of the city government to be made daily or at such intervals as may be deemed expedient; 
(3)  Submit to the council through the city manager a monthly statement of all receipts and disbursements in sufficient detail to show the exact financial condition of the city; 
(4)  Prepare, as of the end of each fiscal year, a complete financial statement and report; 
(5)  Collect license fees and other revenues of the city or for whose collection the city is responsible and receive all money receivable by the city from state or federal government, or from any court, or from any office, department or agency of this city; 
(6)  Have custody of all public funds belonging to or under the control of the city, or any office, department or agency of the city government, and deposit all funds coming into his hands in such depository or depositories as may be designated by the city council, subject to the requirements of law in force from time to time as to the furnishing of bond or the deposit of securities and the payment of interest on deposits. All such interest shall be the property of the city and shall be accounted for and credited to the proper account; 
(7)  Have custody of all investments and invested funds of the city government, or in possession of such government in a fiduciary capacity, and have the safekeeping of all bonds and notes of the city and the receipt and delivery of city bonds and notes for transfer, registration or exchange; 
(8)  Supervise and be responsible for the purchase, storage and distribution of all supplies, materials, equipment and other articles used by any office, department or agency of the city government; 
(9)  Approve all proposed expenditures; unless he shall certify that there is an unencumbered balance of appropriation and available funds, no expenditure shall be made.  
TRANSFERS OF APPROPRIATIONS 
Section 71. The city manager may at any time transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof between general classifications of expenditures within an office, department or agency. At the request of the city manager, the council may by ordinance transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof from one office, department or agency to another. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
ACCOUNTING SUPERVISION AND CONTROL 
Section 72. Deleted from the Charter. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
LAPSE OF APPROPRIATIONS 
Section 73. Except for an appropriation approved as part of the Capital Improvement Program, all appropriations shall lapse at the end of the fiscal year to the extent that they shall not have been expended or lawfully encumbered. An appropriation approved as part of the Capital Improvement Program shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made has been accomplished or abandoned. The purpose of any such appropriation shall be deemed abandoned if three years pass without any disbursement from the appropriation. 
( Amend. of 5-15-18 )  
FEES SHALL BE PAID TO CITY 
Section 74. All fees received by any officer or employee shall belong to the city government and shall be paid to the department of finance at such times as required by the director of finance.  
SALE OF CITY PROPERTY 
Section 75. Any sale or contract for the sale of any property belonging to the City, either in the form of land, real estate or other real or personal properties, shall be in accordance with the Texas Constitution, Texas Local Government Code, Chapters 252, 253, 271, 272, 273, and 280, and the acts amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto, now or hereafter enacted, and all other applicable State law. (Amend. of 5-4-91)  
PURCHASE PROCEDURE 
Section 76. The Director of Finance shall have authority to make expenditures from one or more municipal funds without the approval of the City Council for all budgeted items up to that amount which, under State law, triggers the competitive Procurement process. All contracts or purchases requiring expenditures from one or more municipal funds in the amount involving more than the dollar amount which, according to Section 252.021 of the Local Government Code, or any successor statute thereto, triggers the competitive procurement process, shall be let in compliance with the procedures prescribed by Chapter 252 of the Local Government Code and the acts amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto, now or hereafter enacted. (Amend. of 5-4-91; Amend. of 5-5-01; Amend. of 5-7-05)  
CONTRACTS FOR IMPROVEMENTS 
Section 77. Any city contract requiring an expenditure by, or imposing an obligation or liability on the City of more than the amount provided in Section 271.054 of the Texas Local Government Code and the acts amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto, must comply with the competitive bidding process of the Local Government Code. These contracts shall include contracts for the construction of public works or the purchase of materials, equipment, supplies, or machinery for which competitive bidding is required by the Local Government Code. (Amend. of 5-4-91; Amend. of 5-5-01; Amend. of 5-11-13)  
DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS 
Section 78. All checks, vouchers or warrants for the withdrawal of money from the city depository shall be signed by the director of finance, or his deputy, and countersigned by the city manager. In the event the city manager is the director of finance, all checks signed by him shall be countersigned by the assistant city manager or the city clerk. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
ACCOUNTING CONTROL OF PURCHASES 
Section 79. All purchases made shall be pursuant to a written requisition from the head of the office, department or agency whose appropriation will be charged, and no contract or order shall be issued to any seller unless and until the director of finance certifies that there is to the credit of such office, department or agency a sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance to pay for the supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services for which the contract or order is to be issued.  
BORROWING IN ANTICIPATION OF PROPERTY TAXES 
Section 80. For the purpose of temporary borrowing, the City Council shall have the power by ordinance to raise money on the credit of the city by the issuance of warrants and notes in anticipation of the collection of taxes and of special assessments.  
SALE OF NOTES: REPORT OF SALE 
Section 81. All notes issued pursuant to this article may be sold at not less than par and accrued interest at private sale by the director of finance without previous advertisement, but such sale shall be authorized by the Council.  
SURETY BONDS 
Section 82. Deleted from the Charter. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
ARTICLE VIII. - TAX ADMINISTRATION  
DIRECTOR OF TAXATION: APPOINTMENT 
Section 83. Deleted from the Charter. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
POWER TO TAX 
Section 84. The City Council shall have the power under the provisions of State Law to levy, assess and collect an annual tax upon taxable property within the city to the maximum provided by the Constitution and general laws of the State of Texas.  
PROPERTY SUBJECT TO TAX: METHOD OF ASSESSMENT 
Section 85. Deleted from the Charter. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
BOARD OF EQUALIZATION: APPOINTMENT: QUALIFICATIONS 
Section 86. Deleted from the Charter. (Amend. of 5-11-13  
BOARD OF EQUALIZATION: PUBLIC HEARINGS: NOTICE TO OWNER 
Section 87. Deleted from the Charter. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
BOARD OF EQUALIZATION: POWER AND DUTIES 
Section 88. Deleted from the Charter. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
BOARD OF EQUALIZATION: RECORDS: APPROVAL OF ROLLS 
Section 89. Deleted from the Charter. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
TAXES: WHEN DUE AND PAYABLE 
Section 90. Deleted from the Charter. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
SEIZURE AND SALE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY 
Section 91. Deleted from the Charter. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
TAX LIENS 
Section 92. The tax levied by the city is hereby declared to be a lien, charge, or encumbrance upon the property upon which the tax is due, which lien, charge, or encumbrance the city is entitled to enforce and foreclose in any court having jurisdiction over the same, and the lien, charge and encumbrance on the property in favor of the city, for the amount of the taxes due on such property is such as to give the state courts jurisdiction to enforce and foreclose said lien on the property on which the tax is due, not only as against any resident of this state or person whose residence is unknown, but also as against non-residents. All taxes upon real estate shall especially be a lien and a charge upon the property upon which the taxes are due, which lien may be foreclosed in any court having jurisdiction. The city's tax lien shall exist from January 1 in each year until the taxes are paid. Such lien shall be prior to all other claims, and no gift, sale, assignment or transfer of any kind, or judicial writ of any kind, can defeat such lien. 
All persons or corporations owning or holding personal property or real estate in the City of Killeen on the first day of January of each year shall be liable for all municipal taxes levied thereon for such year. 
The personal property of all persons owing any taxes to the City of Killeen is hereby made liable for all of said taxes, whether the same be due upon personal or real property, or upon both.  
ARTICLE IX. - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS  
MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS 
Section 93. The regular election for the choice of members of the council as provided in Section 22 of Article III of this Charter, shall be held each year on an authorized uniform Election Date provided for in the Texas Election Code. The council may, by resolution, order a special election on the first authorized uniform election date prescribed by the Election Code that allows sufficient time to comply with other requirements of law as may be authorized by law. The Council shall set the date of all other elections in accordance with applicable provisions of the Election Code, Local Government Code, Constitution and other general laws of the State of Texas. (Amend. of 5-4-91; Amend. of 5-11-13)  
REGULATIONS OF ELECTIONS 
Section 94. The council shall make all regulations which it considers needful or desirable, not inconsistent with this charter or the laws of the State of Texas, for the conduct of municipal elections, for the prevention of fraud in such elections and for the recount of ballots in case of doubt or fraud. Municipal elections shall be conducted by the appointed election authorities, who shall also have power to make such regulations not inconsistent with this charter, with any regulations made by the council or the laws of the State of Texas.  
HOW TO GET NAME ON BALLOT 
Section 95. Any qualified person may have his or her name placed on the official ballot as a candidate for Mayor or Councilmember at any election held for the purpose of electing a Mayor or Councilmember by filing with the City Secretary, in accordance with the Texas Election Code, a sworn application on a form prepared by the City Secretary in conformance with Section 141.031 of the Texas Election Code or any successor statute thereto. (Amend. of 5-4-91)  
COUNCIL BALLOTS 
Section 96. The full names of all candidates for the council as hereinbefore provided, except such as may have withdrawn, died, or become ineligible, shall be printed on the official ballots without party designations. If two candidates with the same surnames or with names so similar as to be likely to cause confusion are nominated, the addresses of their places of residence shall be placed with their names on the ballot. The order of the names on the ballot shall be determined by lot. The official ballots shall be printed not less than twenty (20) days before the date of the election.  
ELECTION OF MAYOR & COUNCILMEMBERS BY PLURALITY 
Section 97. At the regular municipal election (or any special election held to fill vacancies on the City Council) the candidates for the office of mayor or councilmember, to the number to be elected, who shall have received the highest number of votes cast in such election for each office to be filled shall be declared elected. 
In case of a tie vote a new election shall be ordered and held conformably to the following section of this charter; at which the only persons eligible to have their names printed on the ballot shall be those whose votes were tied in the election at which they were candidates. (Amend. of 5-3-97)  
LAWS GOVERNING CITY ELECTIONS 
Section 98. All city elections shall be governed by the laws of the State of Texas governing general and municipal elections, so far as same may be applicable thereto; and in event there should be any failure of the general laws or this charter to provide for some feature of the city elections, then the city council shall have the power to provide for such deficiency, and no informalities in conducting a city election shall invalidate the same, if it be conducted fairly and in substantial compliance with the general laws, where applicable, and the charter and ordinances of the city. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
CANVASSING ELECTIONS 
Section 99. Returns of elections following general or special elections shall be made in accordance with state law. (Amend. of 5-3-97)  
ARTICLE X. - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL  
POWER OF INITIATIVE 
Section 100. The electors shall have power to propose any ordinance except an ordinance appropriating money or authorizing the levy of taxes, and to adopt or reject the same at its polls, such power being known as the initiative. Any initiative ordinance may be submitted to the council by a petition signed by qualified electors of the city equal in number to at least twenty-five per cent of the number of voters in the last regular municipal election of the mayor and at-large councilmembers. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
POWER OF REFERENDUM 
Section 101. The electors shall have power to approve or reject at the polls any ordinance passed by the council, or submitted by the council to a vote of the electors, such power being known as the referendum, except in cases of bond ordinances and ordinances making the annual tax levy. Ordinances submitted to the council by initiative petition and passed by the council without change shall be subject to the referendum in the same manner as other ordinances. Within twenty days after the enactment by the council of any ordinance which is subject to a referendum, a petition signed by qualified electors of the city equal in number to at least twenty-five per centum of the number of voters at the last preceding regular municipal election of the mayor and at-large councilmembers may be filed with the city clerk requesting that any such ordinance be either repealed or submitted to a vote of the electors. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
FORM OF PETITIONS: COMMITTEE OF PETITIONERS 
Section 102. Initiative petition papers shall contain the full text of the proposed ordinance. The signatures to initiative or referendum petitions need not be appended to one paper, but to each separate petition there shall be attached a statement of the circulator thereof as provided by this section. Each signer of any petition paper shall sign his name in ink and shall indicate after his name his place of residence by street and number, or other description sufficient to identify the place. There shall appear on each petition the names and addresses of five electors, who, as a committee of the petitioners, shall be regarded as responsible for the circulation and filing of the petition. Attached to each separate petition paper there shall be an affidavit of the circulator thereof that he and he only, personally circulated the foregoing paper, that it bears a stated number of signatures, that all signatures appended thereto were made in his presence, and that he believes them to be the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
FILING, EXAMINATION AND CERTIFICATION OF PETITIONS 
Section 103. All petition papers comprising an initiative or referendum petition shall be assembled and filed with the city clerk as one instrument. Within ten days after the petition is filed, the city clerk shall determine whether each paper of the petition has a proper statement of the circulator and whether the petition is signed by a sufficient number of qualified electors. The city clerk shall declare any petition paper entirely invalid which does not have attached thereto an affidavit signed by the circulator thereof. If a petition paper is found to be signed by more persons than the number of signatures certified by the circulator, the last signatures in excess of the number certified shall be disregarded. If a petition paper is found to be signed by fewer persons than the number certified, the signatures shall be accepted unless void on other grounds. After completing his examination of the petition, the city clerk shall certify the result thereof to the council at its regular meeting. If he shall certify that the petition is insufficient he shall set forth in his certification the particulars in which it is defective and shall at once notify the committee of the petitioners of his findings.  
AMENDMENT OF PETITIONS 
Section 104. An initiative or referendum petition may be amended at any time within ten days after the notification of insufficiency has been sent by the city clerk, by filing a supplementary petition upon additional papers and filed as provided in case of an original petition. The city clerk shall, within five days after such an amendment is filed, make examination of the amended petition and, if the petition is still insufficient, he shall file his certificate to that effect in his office and notify the committee of petitioners of his findings and no further action shall be had on such insufficient petition. The finding of the insufficiency of a petition shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose.  
EFFECT OF CERTIFICATION OF REFERENDUM PETITION 
Section 105. When a referendum petition, or amended petition as defined in Section 104 of this article, has been certified as sufficient by the city clerk, the ordinance specified in the petition shall not go into effect, or further action thereunder shall be suspended if it shall have gone into effect, until and unless approved by the electors, as hereinafter provided.  
CONSIDERATION BY COUNCIL 
Section 106. Whenever the council receives a certified initiative or referendum petition from the city clerk, it shall proceed at once to consider such petition. A proposed initiative ordinance shall be read and provision shall be made for a public hearing upon the proposed ordinance. The council shall take final action on the ordinance not later than sixty days after the date on which such ordinance was submitted to the council by the city clerk. A referred ordinance shall be reconsidered by the council and its final vote upon such reconsideration shall be upon the question, "Shall the ordinance specified in the referendum petition be repealed?"  
SUBMISSION TO ELECTORS 
Section 107. If the council shall fail to pass an ordinance proposed by the initiative petition, or shall pass it in a form different from that set forth in the petition sthereof, or if the council fails to repeal a referred ordinance, the proposed or referred ordinance shall be submitted to the electors on the first authorized uniform election date prescribed by the Election Code that allows sufficient time to comply with the other requirements of law. The council may, in its discretion, and if no regular election is to be held within such period shall, provide for a special election. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
FORM OF BALLOT FOR INITIATED AND REFERRED ORDINANCES 
Section 108. Ordinances submitted to vote of the electors in accordance with the initiative and referendum provisions of this charter shall be submitted by ballot title, which shall be prepared in all cases by the city attorney. The ballot title may be different from the legal title of any such initiated or referred ordinance and shall be a clear, concise statement, without argument or prejudice, descriptive of the substance of such ordinance, if a paper ballot, shall have below the ballot title the following propositions, one above the other in the order indicated: "FOR THE ORDINANCE" and "AGAINST THE ORDINANCE." Any number of ordinances may be voted on at the same election and may be submitted on the same ballot, but any paper ballot used for voting thereon, shall be for that purpose only. If voting machines are used, the ballot title of any ordinance shall have below it the same two propositions, one above the other or one preceding the other in the order indicated, and the elector shall be given an opportunity to vote for either of the two propositions and thereby to vote for or against the ordinance.  
RESULTS OF ELECTION 
Section 109. If a majority of the electors voting on a proposed initiative ordinance shall vote in favor thereof, it shall thereupon be an ordinance of the city. A referred ordinance which is not approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon shall thereupon be deemed repealed. If conflicting ordinances are approved by the electors at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict.  
REPEALING ORDINANCES: PUBLICATION 
Section 110. Initiative and referendum ordinances adopted or approved by the electors shall be published, and may be amended or repealed by the council, as in the case of other ordinances.  
RECALL: GENERAL 
Section 111. Any member of the City Council, including the mayor, may be removed from office by recall.  
RECALL PROCEDURE 
Section 112. Any elector of the City of Killeen may make and file with the city clerk an affidavit containing the name or names of the officer or officers whose removal is sought and a statement of the grounds for removal. By the close of business on the first business day following receipt of the affidavit, the clerk shall deliver to the elector making such affidavit copies of petition blanks demanding such removal. Such blanks when issued by the city clerk shall bear the signature of that officer and be addressed to the city council, and shall be numbered, dated, and indicate the name of the person to whom issued. The petition blanks when issued shall also indicate the number of such blanks issued and the name of the officer whose removal is sought. The city clerk shall enter in a record to be kept in his office the name of the elector to whom the petition blanks were issued and the number issued to said person.  
RECALL PETITIONS 
Section 113. The recall petition to be effective must be returned and filed with the city clerk within thirty days after the date on which the petition blanks are provided by the city clerk. A recall petition for the mayor or an at-large councilmember must be signed by qualified electors of this city equal in number to more than fifty percent (50%) of the total number of voters in the last municipal election at which three at-large councilmembers and the mayor were elected. A recall petition for a district councilmember must be signed by qualified electors of the district represented by the councilmember in number equal to more than fifty percent (50%) of the total number of voters for that district in the last municipal election where the district seat was filled. Each signer of any petition blank shall sign his name in ink and shall indicate after his name his place of residence by street and number, or other description sufficient to identify the place. 
The elector may allow others to circulate a petition. Upon submitting the petition, the elector must submit a list to the city clerk of the names and addresses of all circulators that were authorized by him to collect signatures for the petition, and a list of the pages of the petition upon which each circulator obtained signatures. Attached to each petition, there shall be an affidavit of the circulator(s) thereof that he/they and he/they only, personally circulated the foregoing paper, that it bears a stated number of signatures, that all signatures appended thereto were made in his/their presence, and that he/they believes them to be the genuine signatures of those persons whose names they purport to be. No petition papers shall be accepted as part of a petition unless it bears the signature of the city clerk as required in Section 112 of this Article.  
RECALL ELECTION 
Section 114. The city clerk shall at once examine the recall petition and if he finds it sufficient and in compliance with the provisions of this article of the charter, he shall within ten (10) days submit it to the city council with his certificate to that effect and notify the officer sought to be recalled of such action. If the officer whose removal is sought does not resign within five (5) days after such notice the city council shall order and fix a date for holding a recall election. Any such election shall be held on the first authorized uniform election date prescribed by the Election Code that allows sufficient time to comply with the other requirements of law. 
Only a resident qualified to vote in an election for a candidate may vote in a recall election for that candidate.  
BALLOTS IN RECALL ELECTION 
Section 115. Ballots used at recall elections shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  With respect to each person whose removal is sought the question shall be submitted "Shall (name of person) be removed from the office of councilman by recall?" 
(2)  Immediately below each question there shall be printed the two following propositions, one above the other, in the order indicated: 
"For the recall of (name of person)" 
"Against the recall of (name of person)"  
RESULTS OF RECALL ELECTION 
Section 116. If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election shall be against the recall of the officer named on the ballot, he shall continue in office for the remainder of his unexpired term, subject to recall as before, if a majority of the votes cast at such an election be for the recall of the officer named on the ballot, he shall, regardless of any technical defects in the recall petition, be deemed removed from office and the vacancy shall be filled by the City Council as in other vacancies.  
LIMITATIONS OF RECALLS 
Section 117. No recall petition shall be filed against a councilmember within six months after he begins a term nor in respect to an officer subjected to a recall election and not removed thereby, until at least six months after such election. If a councilmember is subject to recall pursuant to the provisions of this Article but is re-elected before the recall election takes place, the recall petition is negated and the councilmember retains his seat.  
DISTRICT JUDGE MAY ORDER ELECTION 
Section 118. Should the city council fail or refuse to order any of the elections as provided for in this charter, an elector may seek recourse in a court of competent jurisdiction.  
ARTICLE XI. - FRANCHISES AND PUBLIC UTILITIES  
CONTROL OVER AND POWERS WITH REFERENCE TO CITY PROPERTY 
Section 119. The ownership, right of control and use of streets, highways, alleys, parks, public places and all other real property of the City of Killeen is hereby declared to be inalienable to said City, except by ordinances passed by vote of the majority of the governing body of the city, as hereinafter provided; and no franchise or easement involving the right to use same, either along, across, over or under the same, shall ever be valid unless expressly granted and exercised in compliance with the terms hereof, and of the ordinances granting the same. No act or omission of the city, its governing body, officers or agents shall be construed to confer or extend by estoppel or indirection, any right, franchise or easement not expressly granted by ordinance. 
The City of Killeen shall have the power, subject to the terms and provisions hereof, by ordinance to confer upon any person or corporation the franchise or right to use the property of the City, as defined in the preceding paragraph, for the purpose of furnishing to the public any general public service.  
LIMITATIONS 
Section 120. No exclusive franchise or privilege shall ever be granted and no franchise shall be directly or indirectly extended beyond the term originally fixed by the ordinance granting the same, except as provided by the terms of the City Charter.  
PROCEDURE 
Section 121. The City of Killeen shall have the power by ordinance to grant any franchise or right mentioned in the preceding sections hereof, which ordinances shall not be passed finally until its third and final reading shall be at three separate regular meetings of the City Council of the City of Killeen, the last of which shall take place not less than thirty days from the first. No ordinance granting a franchise shall pass any reading except by a vote of the City Council, and such ordinance shall not take effect until sixty days after its adoption on its third and final reading.  
TERMS AND CONDITIONS 
Section 122. No determinate or fixed term franchise shall ever be granted for a longer term than twenty-five years; nor shall any right, privilege or franchise now in existence be extended beyond the period now fixed for its termination, directly or indirectly, or through any means whatsoever, and any ordinance in violation or evasion of this prohibition shall be absolutely void; provided, however, that any corporation, person or association of persons now holding any franchise under any charter or charters or ordinances of the City of Killeen may, with the consent of the City Council of the City surrender such franchise or franchises, subject to the provisions of the City Charter then in force, and take a new franchise under such charter or a new franchise may be granted to a new company or another person with the privilege of acquiring the properties of such franchise holder upon the surrender of the franchise rights then held. 
No holder of a franchise heretofore or hereafter granted shall have a right (unless such right is granted in the franchise) to transfer or assign its properties and franchise to any other person, firm or corporation without the consent of the city, and such consent when given shall not operate as the granting of a franchise or as a new franchise. 
The City Council shall have the power to compel all persons, firms or corporations operating any public utilities in this City, whether operating under existing franchises, or franchises that may be hereafter granted, to extend their service, lines, pipes, etc., if the person to be benefitted by such extension will pay the costs thereof, or if it can be shown that the revenue resulting from such extension will, within a reasonable time after same is made, pay a reasonable return on the investment, after making the customary allowance for depreciation. 
All public utility franchises in the City of Killeen shall be held whether expressed in the ordinance or not, subject to the right of the City (each of the following being a condition): 
(1)  To repeal the same by ordinance at any time for failure to begin construction or operation within the time prescribed or otherwise to comply with the terms of the franchise, such power to be exercised only after due notice and hearing. 
(2)  To require an adequate extension of plant and service, and the maintenance of the plant and fixture at the highest reasonable standard of efficiency. 
(3)  To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates. 
(4)  To collect from every public utility operating in the city such proportion of the expense of excavating, grading, paving, repaving, constructing, reconstructing, draining, repairing, maintaining, lighting, sweeping and sprinkling the streets, alleys, bridges, culverts, viaducts and other public places of the city as represents the increased cost of such operating resulting from the occupancy of such public places by such public utilities, and such proportion of the costs of such operations as results from the damage to or disturbance of such public places caused by such public utility; or to compel such public utility to perform at its own expense, such operations as above listed which are made necessary by the occupancy of such public places by such utility or by damage to or disturbance of such public places caused by such public utility. 
(5)  At any time to examine and audit the accounts and other records of any such utility and to require annual and other reports, including on local operations by each such public utility. 
(6)  To impose such reasonable regulations and restrictions as may be deemed desirable or conducive to the safety, welfare, and accommodation of the public. 
Every public utility franchise hereafter granted shall be subject to the terms and conditions of this Charter, whether such terms and conditions are specifically mentioned in the franchise or not.  
UTILITY RATES AND CHANGES 
Section 123. The City Council shall have the power by ordinance to fix and regulate the rates, charges and fares of every franchise holder operating in the city to the fullest extent allowed by law.  
APPLICABLE TO STREETS AND HIGHWAYS 
Section 124. Deleted from the Charter. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
PUBLIC SERVICE CORPORATIONS TO FILE ANNUAL REPORTS 
Section 125. It shall be the duty of the City Council to pass an ordinance requiring all public service corporations operating within the corporate limits of the city to file a sworn annual report of the receipts from the operation of the said business for the current year, how expended, how much therefor for betterments or improvements, the rate of tolls and charges for services rendered to the public, and any other facts or information that the council may deem pertinent for its use in intelligently passing upon any question that may arise between the City and the said public service corporations; and reports to be filed with the City Clerk, and preserved for the use of the City Council.  
OPTION TO PURCHASE 
Section 126. Deleted from the Charter. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
CONSENT OF PROPERTY OWNERS 
Section 127. Deleted from the Charter. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
EXTENSIONS 
Section 128. Deleted from the Charter. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
OTHER CONDITIONS 
Section 129. Deleted from the Charter. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
FRANCHISE RECORDS 
Section 130. Deleted from the Charter. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
ARTICLE XII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS  
PUBLICITY OF RECORDS 
Section 131. All records and accounts of every office, department or agency of the city shall be open for inspection, pursuant to state law, to any citizen. (Amend. of 5-3-97)  
PERSONAL INTEREST 
Section 132. The City of Killeen hereby adopts chapter 171 of the Texas Local Government Code, as currently written and as may be amended in the future. Any violation of such state law shall constitute malfeasance in office and any officer or employee guilty thereof shall thereby forfeit the office or position. Any violation of such state law with the knowledge express or implied of the person or corporation contracting with the governing body of the city shall render the contract voidable by the City Manager or Council. (Amend. of 5-7-05)  
NO OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE TO ACCEPT GIFTS 
Section 133. No officer or employee of the City of Killeen shall ever accept, directly or indirectly, any gift, favor, privilege or employment from any public utility corporation enjoying the grant of any franchise, privilege or easement from the city during the term of office of such officer, or during such employment of such employee except as may be authorized by law or ordinance; provided, however, that policemen and firemen in uniform or wearing their official badges may accept such free service where the same is permitted by ordinance. Any officer or employee of the city who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished by any fine that may be prescribed by ordinance for this offense, and shall forthwith be removed from office.  
RELATIVES OF OFFICERS SHALL NOT BE APPOINTED OR EMPLOYED 
Section 134. No person related within the second degree of affinity, or within the third degree of consanguinity, to members of the city council or city manager shall be appointed to any office, position or service in the city, but this provision shall not affect officers or employees who are already employed by the city at the time when any officer who may be related within the named degree takes office.  
PERSONS INDEBTED TO THE CITY SHALL NOT HOLD OFFICE OR EMPLOYMENT 
Section 135. Deleted from the Charter. (Amend. of 5-5-01)  
OATH OF OFFICE 
Section 136. Every elected and appointed officer of the city shall take and subscribe to the oaths or affirmations prescribed by Article XVI, Section 1, of the Texas Constitution, as it may be amended. Such oaths or affirmations shall be filed as required by the Constitution and with the City Secretary. (Amend. of 5-4-91)  
DAMAGE SUITS 
Section 137. Deleted from the Charter. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
POWER TO SETTLE CLAIMS 
Section 138. The city council shall have the power to compromise and settle any and all claims and lawsuits of every kind and character in favor of or against the city, including suits by the city to recover delinquent taxes.  
SERVICE OF PROCESS AGAINST THE CITY 
Section 139. All legal process against the city shall be served upon the Mayor, or Mayor pro-tem.  
CITY NOT REQUIRED TO GIVE SECURITY OR EXECUTE BOND 
Section 140. Deleted from the Charter. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
LIENS AGAINST CITY PROPERTY 
Section 141. Deleted from the Charter. (Amend. of 5-4-91; Amend. Of 5-11-13)  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO ASSIGNMENT, EXECUTION AND GARNISHMENT 
Section 142. Deleted from the Charter. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
POWER TO REMIT PENALTIES 
Section 143. Deleted from the Charter. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
CHURCH AND SCHOOL PROPERTY NOT EXEMPT FROM SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS 
Section 144. No property of any kind, church, school, or otherwise, in the city of Killeen, shall be exempt from any of the special taxes and assessments authorized by this charter for local improvements unless the exemption is required by State law.  
SALE OR LEASE OF PROPERTY OTHER THAN PUBLIC UTILITIES OR ACQUIRED BY TAX SALE 
Section 145. Any real property owned by the City of Killeen may be sold or leased by the City Council when in its judgment such sale or lease will be for the best interests of the city; provided, however, a sale or a lease for more than five (5) years shall never become effective until thirty (30) days after passage of the ordinance of [or] resolution affecting same. If, during such thirty day period, a referendum petition is presented to the City Clerk which in all respects conforms to the referendum provisions of Article X of this charter, and same is found sufficient, then the clerk shall certify the sufficiency of same to the City Council, and an election shall be called submitting the question of whether or not the sale or lease shall be consummated. Provided, further, however, the provisions of this section shall not apply to public utilities, nor to property purchased by the city at tax sales.  
EFFECT OF THIS CHARTER ON EXISTING LAW 
Section 146. All ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations, rights, claims actions, orders contracts and legal administrative proceedings shall continue except as modified pursuant to the provisions of this charter and in each case shall be maintained, carried on or dealt with by the city department, office or agency appropriate under this charter.  
CONTINUANCE OF CONTRACTS AND SUCCESSION OF RIGHTS 
Section 147. Deleted from the Charter. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
CONSTRUCTION AND SEPARABILITY CLAUSE 
Section 148. The charter shall be liberally construed to carry out its intents and purposes. If any section or part of section of this charter shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction such holding shall not affect the remainder of this charter nor the context in which such section or part of section so held invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire section or part of section may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the section or part of section to which such holding shall directly apply.  
AMENDING THE CHARTER 
Section 149. Amendments to this Charter may be framed and submitted to the qualified electors of the city by a Charter commission in the manner provided by law for framing and submitting a new Charter. Amendments may also be proposed and submitted by ordinance, passed by a majority vote of the full membership of the council, or by a petition signed by not less than a number equal to at least five percent (5%) of the number of qualified voters of the municipality or 20,000, whichever is the smaller. When a Charter amendment petition shall have been filed with the council in conformity with the provisions of this Charter as to petitions for initiated ordinances, the council shall forthwith provide by ordinance for submitting such proposed amendment to a vote of the qualified electors. Any ordinance for submitting a Charter amendment to the qualified electors shall provide that such amendment be submitted at the next authorized uniform election date prescribed by the Election Code, or on the earlier of the date of the next municipal general election or presidential general election. The election date must allow sufficient time to comply with other requirements of law and must occur on or after the 30 th day after the date the ordinance is adopted. Notice of the election for the submission of said amendment or amendments shall be given by publication thereof, in some newspaper of general circulation published in said city, on the same day in each of two (2) successive weeks; the date of the first publication to be not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the date set for said election. If a proposed amendment be approved by a majority of the qualified electors voting thereon it shall become a part of the Charter at the time fixed therein. Each amendment shall be confined to one subject; and when more than one amendment shall be submitted at the same time, they shall be so submitted as to enable the qualified electors to vote on each amendment separately. (Amend. of 5-5-01)  
EFFECTIVE DATE AND INTERIM GOVERNMENT 
Section 150. Deleted from the Charter. (Amend. of 5-11-13)  
DEFINITIONS 
Section 151. 
(A)  The term "City of Killeen," "City," or "said City" as used in this charter shall in all cases mean and refer to the City of Killeen, Bell County, Texas. 
(B)  The term "Mayor" or "said Mayor" as used in this charter shall in all cases mean and refer to the duly elected and qualified mayor of the City of Killeen, Bell County, Texas. 
(C)  The terms "Councilman," "Councilmember," "Council," and "City Council" as used in this charter shall in all cases mean and refer to the city council of the City of Killeen, Bell County, Texas, and the duly elected and qualified members thereof. 
(D)  The term "City Manager" or "Manager" as used in this charter shall in all cases mean and refer to the duly appointed City Manager of the City of Killeen, Bell County, Texas. 
(E)  Wherever the term "man," "men," "him," or "he" is used shall be construed as gender neutral. (Amend. of 5-3-97)  
CORRECTIONS: NUMBERING SECTION 
Section 152. The City Council shall have the power to have corrected typographical errors and have the sections of this Charter numbered consecutively; provided such corrections shall have no effect on the meaning and intent of this Charter.  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the amendments to the city Charter adopted after May 8, 1990. 
Amendment 
Date 	Section 	Section 
this Charter 
03-03-49 	1—152 	1—152 
05-04-91 		6, 8, 23, 26, 75-77, 93, 95, 136, 141 
01-15-94 		34 
05-03-97 		4, 7, 9, 21, 22, 32, 97, 99, 131, 151 
05-05-01 		7, 24, 76, 77, 135, 149 
05-07-05 		4, 8, 22, 26, 32, 76, 132 
05-11-13 		8, 14, 15, 17, 19, 20, 22, 23, 24, 26, 28, 29, 31, 33, 35, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 47, 50, 53, 60, 63, 65, 66, 68, 69, 71, 72, 77, 78, 82, 83, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 93, 98, 100, 101, 102, 107, 124, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 137, 140, 141, 142, 143, 147, 150 
 5-15-18 
	73 
  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "Code of Ordinances of the city of Killeen, Texas," and may be so cited. Such code may also be cited as the "Killeen city code of 1991." 
State Law reference— Ordinance codification, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.001 et seq.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
(a)  In the construction of this code, and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following definitions and rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
City. The term "city" shall mean the city of Killeen, Bell County, Texas. 
Code. The word "code" shall mean the "code of ordinances of the city of Killeen, Texas," as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. In computing a period of days, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. If the last day of any period is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the period is extended to include the next day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. If a number of months is to be computed by counting the months from a particular day, the period ends on the same numerical day in the concluding month as the day of the month from which the computation is begun, unless there are not that many days in the concluding month, in which case the period ends on the last day of that month. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.014. 
Council, city council. Whenever the term "council" or "city council" is used, it shall mean the city council of the city of Killeen, Texas. 
County. The term "county," shall mean Bell County, Texas. 
Day. A day is the period of time between any 12:00 midnight and 12:00 midnight following. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring a city officer or employee to do some act or make certain inspections it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Highway. The term "highway" shall include any street, alley, highway, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass and causeway in the city dedicated or devoted to public use. 
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be constructed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
May. The word "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
May not. The words "may not" shall have a prohibitory effect. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Must. The word "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Officers, boards, etc. Whenever reference is made to any officer, board or commission, the same shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the city of Killeen." Reference to any specific officer shall also be deemed to include his duly authorized assistants and representatives. 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Personal property. The words "personal property" include every species of property, except real property as defined in this section. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. The word "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. A public place shall mean any public street, alley, square, highway, grounds, house or premises; or any hotel, restaurant, boardinghouse, grocery, saloon, garden, workshop or other place, or part of the same, to which people usually resort, or have a right to resort for business or pleasure. 
Real property. The words "real property" include land, tenements and hereditaments. 
Roadway. The word "roadway" shall mean that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
Shall. The word "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when a person cannot write. 
State. The word "state" shall mean the State of Texas. 
Street. The term "street" shall include any highway, alley, street, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, underpass, overpass, tunnel or causeway in the city dedicated or devoted to public use. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(b)  The provisions of Titles 1, 2 and 3 of the Penal Code shall apply in the interpretation of all penal provisions of this code to the extent that the Penal Code mandates that they shall apply. 
State Law reference— Application of Titles 1, 2 and 3 of Penal Code, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 1.03.  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes, etc.; references to code. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Cross references and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles or sections are to the chapters, articles and sections of this code unless otherwise specified.  
Sec. 1-4. - Burden of proof of exceptions; mental culpability. 
(a)  In any prosecution for the violation of any provision of this code, it shall not be necessary for the complaint to negate or for the state to prove any exception contained in this code concerning any prohibited act; provided, that any such exception made therein may be urged as a defense by the person charged by such complaint. 
(b)  Requirement of culpability. 
(1)  The definition of an offense may prescribe as a culpable mental state either intent, knowledge, recklessness or criminal negligence, with intent being the highest culpable mental state and negligence being the lowest. 
(2)  If the definition of an offense does not prescribe a culpable mental state, a culpable mental state is nevertheless required unless the definition plainly dispenses with any mental element. In those instances, intent, knowledge or recklessness suffices to establish mental responsibility. 
(3)  Proof of a higher degree of culpability than that charged constitutes proof of the culpability charged. 
(Ord. No. 98-64, § I, 9-22-98) 
State Law reference— Proof of exception, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 2.02.  
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal of an ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed.  
Sec. 1-6. - Amendments or additions to code. 
(a)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this code in the following language: "That section ________ of the code of ordinances, city of Killeen, Texas, is hereby amended to read as follows: ...." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(b)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the code of ordinances, city of Killeen, Texas, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered ________, which said section reads as follows:...." The new section may then be set out in full as desired.  
Sec. 1-7. - Supplementation of code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ________ to ________" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.  
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty; continuing violations; citation authority. 
(a)  In this section "violation of this code" means: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section "violation of this code" does not include the failure of a city officer or employee to perform an official duty unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided, a person convicted of a violation of this code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), except that a fine not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) may be imposed for violation of provisions that govern fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse. The penalty imposed for a violation of this code shall not exceed or be less than the penalty prescribed by state law for the same offense. With respect to violations of this code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(d)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise. 
(e)  Violations of this code that are continuous with respect to time may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief or civil or quasi-judicial enforcement of a violation of this code. 
(f)  All persons duly designated to be code enforcement officers are hereby authorized to enforce all provisions of this code by prescribed administrative procedures for relief, or to issue and serve citations for violations of this code, save and except violations of chapter 4, ambulances; chapter 9, cemeteries; section 16-108 and articles V, VI, and VII of chapter 16, miscellaneous provisions and offenses; and chapter 28, traffic, save and except sections 28-132, 28-134, 28-135, and 28-241. The citation authority granted by this section shall be in addition to, and not to the exclusion of, all other remedies, methods, or proceedings provided by law for enforcement of this code. Moreover, unless specifically stated elsewhere in this code, the enforcement and citation authority granted herein to code enforcement officers shall not be construed to limit or impinge upon the authority or actions of police officers, firefighters, fire marshals, or inspectors of any department, to discharge their respective duties in the enforcement of this code. 
(Ord. No. 94-22, § I, 4-12-94; Ord. No. 06-116, § I, 10-17-06) 
State Law reference— Penalties for ordinance violations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.001 et seq.  
Sec. 1-9. - Severability of parts of code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.  
Sec. 1-10. - Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this and the following chapters and sections, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of this code shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments.  
Sec. 1-11. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
(a)  Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this code. 
(b)  The adoption of this code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance of the city in effect on the date of adoption of this code.  
Sec. 1-12. - Certain ordinances not affected by code. 
Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(2)  Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for the levy of taxes or for an annual budget; 
(3)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the city or discontinuing territory as a part of the city; 
(4)  Any ordinance granting any franchise, permit or other right; 
(5)  Any ordinance approving, prescribing or otherwise relating to rates to be charged by utility companies; 
(6)  Any ordinance approving, authorizing or otherwise relating to any contract or agreement; 
(7)  Any ordinance accepting, dedicating, improving, vacating or otherwise relating to any specific street or easement; 
(8)  Any ordinance accepting any plat of a subdivision; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Emergency management, Ch. 10. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Corporate seal. 
There shall be a seal of the corporation of Killeen, which shall be kept by the mayor of said corporation, to be by him and under his instructions used as the law directs. The seal shall be a star of five points, encircled by olive and live-oak branches, and with the words, "The City of Killeen, a Municipal Corporation." 
(Code 1963, Ch. 1, art. 2, § 1)  
Sec. 2-2. - Execution of bonds, contracts, etc. 
Whenever it shall be necessary by the law or ordinances of the city to execute any bond or other instrument in any suit or action at law, begun or about to be instituted or for any other purpose or whenever the city shall be a party to any contract or agreement, the same shall be signed and executed by the mayor in the name of the city and such signing, execution and attestation shall be valid and binding to all intents and purposes as to the city. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 1, art. 2, § 2)  
Sec. 2-3. - Extraterritorial jurisdiction of cities of Killeen and Harker Heights. 
On or after the effective date of this ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the City of Killeen and the City of Harker Heights shall have extraterritorial jurisdiction of the areas between such cities as hereinafter provided, to wit: 
(1)  Harker Heights to have jurisdiction east of Moores Crossing Road, beginning at the intersection of the north right-of-way of the Santa Fe Railroad and the east right-of-way of Moores Crossing Road and extending N 19° 00' east for a distance of one-half mile. Killeen to have jurisdiction of all other territory lying east of Moores Crossing Road and more than one-half mile north of the Santa Fe right-of-way. 
(2)  Harker Heights to have jurisdiction east of a line from a point on the north right-of-way of FM 2410 (such point being S 19° 00' W from the Southwest corner of the J.J. Tomlinson Survey, Abstract No. 831) and running S 19° 00' W for a distance of one-half mile. Killeen to have jurisdiction to the west of such line for the stated one-half mile and to both west and east of the line projected beyond one-half mile. 
(3)  Jurisdiction of single owner tracts of less than one hundred sixty (160) acres which are divided for jurisdictional purposes by this agreement will rest with the planning commission in which the major portion of the tract is located. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 1, art. 7, § 1 [Ord. No. 66-6, § 1, 8-8-66]) 
State Law reference— Extraterritorial jurisdiction, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 42.001 et seq.; apportionment of extraterritorial jurisdiction, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 42.901.  
Sec. 2-4. - Disclosure of social security number in applications. 
(a)  All applicants for employment shall disclose in a legible manner his/her Social Security number on an application form prescribed by the city's human resources department. The application shall: state the disclosure is mandatory; cite this section as authority; and indicate the information will be used for payroll purposes, identification of the employee, criminal background checks, and fraud prevention. 
(b)  All applicants for a city service shall fully and legibly complete any form prescribed by the city department administering the service. Further, if the applicant is a natural person and the service sought is rate-based or one for which there is the potential for the assessment of a fee, fine, or other monetary assessment other than library services, then the applicant shall also disclose his or her Social Security number. All service application forms, other than a library borrower card application, shall, along with other necessary information: require the disclosure of the person's Social Security number; refer to this section of the Code of Ordinances as the authority for requiring the disclosure; and, state that the information will be used only for the purpose of preventing fraud and tracing persons who become subject to a fee, fine, or other monetary assessment of any kind. 
(c)  Pursuant to the Texas Public Information Act (§ 552.101 and 552.117), a Social Security number provided pursuant to either subsections (a) or (b) is not public information and shall be kept in a confidential manner. When the records retention schedule permits removal of the information from the records of the city, care shall be taken to shred or burn records containing the mandatory disclosure of Social Security numbers. 
(d)  Penalty: the failure or refusal of an applicant for a city service to comply with this section may result in denial of service. 
(Ord. No. 99-10, § I, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 05-92, § I, 9-27-05)  
Secs. 2-5—2-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Officers and employees, § 132 et seq.; disabled employees' pensions and insurance, § 43; miscellaneous provisions relating to officers and employees, § 132 et seq. 
Cross reference— Fire marshal, § 11-31; building and development services department, § 8-21 et seq.; police department, § 22-26. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-31. - Emergency actions. 
(a)  Authorization. Every officer, agent or employee of the city, while responding to emergency situations, is hereby authorized to act in such a manner as to most effectively deal with the emergency. 
(b)  Liability. Neither the city nor the employee shall be liable for any failure to use ordinary care in such emergency. 
(c)  Prevailing effect. This section shall prevail over every other provision of this code or ordinance of the city and, to the extent to which the city has the authority to so authorize, over any other law establishing a standard of care in conflict with this section. 
(Ord. No. 90-12, § I (1-12-1—1-12-3), 2-13-90) 
Cross reference— Emergency management, Ch. 10. 
State Law reference— Liability for emergency action, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code § 101.55.  
Sec. 2-32. - Personnel rules and regulations. 
The city manager, with approval of the city council, is hereby authorized to promulgate rules and regulations regarding the personnel policy of the city. Such rules may include, but shall not be limited to, the following: recruitment, examinations, discipline and appeals, conditions of employment, employee benefits, termination rules and appeals and salary plan administration. The city manager, with approval of the city council, is also authorized to change, supplement and amend such rules and regulations from time to time. The interpretation of any ambiguity in any personnel rule or regulation shall be the exclusive right of the city manager. Any act in such rules and regulations which appears to be permissive or imply a choice of action shall give such choice or permission to act or not to act exclusively and solely to the city manager. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 1, art. 8, § 1 [Ord. No. 83-22 § 1, 4-12-83])  
Sec. 2-33. - City residents to have preference in hiring. 
Persons living within the city shall be given a preference in the hiring procedures of the city. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 1, art. 8, § 2 [Ord. No. 83-22 § 1, 4-12-83])  
Secs. 2-34—2-45. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Texas Tort Claims Act, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code ch. 101; payment of tort claims by local governments, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code ch. 102. 
 
Sec. 2-46. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Arising out of the course and scope of employment shall mean arising out of the performance for the city of the duties of an employee's office or employment and includes being in or about the performance of a task lawfully assigned to an employee by competent authority and shall not include any action which occurs during a period of time in which the employee is engaged in outside employment or is rendering contractual services to someone other than the city. The term shall not include the operation of a city vehicle for an unauthorized use. 
Conflict of interest shall mean such a juxtaposition of interests, claims, defenses or issues between the city or its employees, which, under known or probable facts, would cause an ethical violation in the event of dual representation by a single attorney. 
Employee shall mean a person in the paid or unpaid service of the city by competent authority and includes: 
(1)  An officer, agent, volunteer or employee; 
(2)  A former officer, agent, volunteer or employee; and 
(3)  The estate of an officer, agent, volunteer, or employee or former officer, agent, volunteer or employee of the city. 
The term "employee" does not include an independent contractor, an agent or employee of an independent contractor or a person who performs tasks the details of which the city does not have legal right to control. 
Expenses shall mean, without limitation, attorney's fees, court costs, expert witness fees, judgments, damages, fines, penalties and reasonable costs actually incurred by the employee in connection with the proceeding. 
Officer shall mean any elected or appointed official of the city, including any member of the city council or any board or commission of the city who exercises responsibilities beyond those that are advisory in nature. 
(Ord. No. 90-11, § I (1-11-1), 2-13-90) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 2-47. - Indemnification. 
(a)  Any employee who is threatened to be made, becomes, or is liable for the payment of any claims or damages as a result of being named a defendant or respondent in a proceeding, whether civil, criminal, administrative, arbitrative or investigative, including all appeals, arising out of the course and scope of employment shall be entitled to indemnification of all expenses by the city, provided that the acts or omissions resulting in such liability: 
(1)  Were done in good faith; 
(2)  Were done without malicious or felonious intent; 
(3)  Did not constitute official misconduct; 
(4)  Were not willful or wrongful acts or omission committed intentionally with knowledge of wrongdoing; 
(5)  Did not constitute gross negligence; and 
(6)  Were not for personal benefit improperly obtained or received. 
(b)  Entitlement to indemnification shall be presumed unless the city manager, upon advice of the city attorney, determines that the employee is not entitled for reasons stated in (1) through (6) above. Such determination shall be final for the purposes of the representation and indemnity afforded by this section; provided, however, that in the event such representation and indemnity have been denied, if after a trial on the merits the city manager, upon advice of the city attorney, determines that the employee was entitled to indemnification, the indemnification under this section shall be granted, and expenses incurred in the defense of the claim or suit shall be reimbursed. 
(c)  Efforts shall be made by the city attorney to determine whether a conflict of interest exists at the time notice of claim or suit is received as provided in section 2-50. If it is determined that a conflict or potential conflict exists, the city attorney shall so advise the city manager who shall authorize the use of outside counsel for the employee. 
(d)  The city shall not be liable for any settlement of any such claim or suit effected without its consent, and the city reserves the right to assert any defense and make any settlement of any claim or suit that it deems expedient. 
(e)  For any suit or claim arising under the Texas Tort Claims Act [V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code ch. 101], the indemnity provided by this section shall be limited to the statutory limits applicable to the city provided in such act, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 90-11, § I (1-11-2), 2-13-90) 
State Law reference— Indemnification authorized, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code § 102.002.  
Sec. 2-48. - Representation in actions. 
The city shall have the right and duty to provide legal representation through the city attorney, outside legal counsel, or insurance-selected counsel, to any employee sued in connection with any claim for damages or other civil action against such person arising out of the course and scope of employment, provided that such employee is entitled to indemnification as set forth in this section. Such legal representation shall be provided at no cost to the employee, and any employee may have his own counsel assist in the defense at the sole expense of the employee. The employee shall cooperate fully with the city in preparation and presentation of the case, including attendance at hearings and trials, securing and giving evidence, and obtaining attendance of witnesses; the failure to cooperate shall waive such employee's right to representation and indemnity under this section. 
(Ord. No. 90-11, § I (1-11-3), 2-13-90) 
State Law reference— Legal defense authorized, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code § 102.004.  
Sec. 2-49. - Prohibited acts. 
No employee shall, except upon advice of the city attorney's office or when questioned by a police officer at the scene of an accident, give any oral or written statement or enter into any stipulation or agreement concerning a claim or lawsuit; nor, except at his own cost, voluntarily make any payment, assume any obligation, or incur any expense with respect to a claim or lawsuit without the consent of the city. 
(Ord. No. 90-11, § I (1-11-4), 2-13-90)  
Sec. 2-50. - City's defenses. 
Nothing in this division shall be construed as waiving the city's defense of governmental immunity to it or to its employee in any action brought against the city or such employee. 
(Ord. No. 90-11, § I (1-11-5), 2-13-90)  
Sec. 2-51. - Notice by employee required. 
The provisions of this division shall apply only where the city attorney has been given written notice of the action brought against the employee within seven (7) calendar days of service of process upon the employee. 
(Ord. No. 90-11, § I (1-11-6), 2-13-90)  
Sec. 2-52. - Disciplinary actions. 
Nothing in this division shall prevent the city from taking any disciplinary action against any employee for conduct defended or indemnified by the city under this division, either before or after conclusion of the suit. 
(Ord. No. 90-11, § I (1-11-7), 2-13-90)  
Sec. 2-53. - Suit in behalf of city. 
Nothing in this division shall require the city to indemnify any employee for recoveries made against him in suits brought by or on behalf of the city. The city manager may, however, authorize representation and indemnification of any employee in a suit brought by a taxpayer in behalf of the city against the employee. 
(Ord. No. 90-11, § I (1-11-8), 2-13-90)  
Sec. 2-54. - Subrogation. 
If payment or legal representation is provided under this division, the city is subrogated to the employee's rights for recovery against any person or organization to the extent of the city's liability and payments, and the employee must execute and deliver to the city attorney whatever documents are necessary to secure those rights. The employee must not do anything after a loss to prejudice those rights. 
(Ord. No. 90-11, § I (1-11-9), 2-13-90)  
Sec. 2-55. - No creation of cause of action. 
Nothing contained in this division shall be construed as creating a right or cause of action against an employee nor as giving a right to a third party to institute or maintain a suit which would not otherwise exist under law as a legal claim against an employee. 
(Ord. No. 90-11, § I (1-11-10), 2-13-90)  
Secs. 2-56—2-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FINANCE[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal finance, §§ 49-82. 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous regulations, Ch. 15; taxation, Ch. 27. 
State Law reference— Municipal finances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §101.001 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-76—2-85. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DISPOSITION OF OBSOLETE AND SURPLUS PERSONAL PROPERTY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference— Disposal of certain city property, § 75. 
 
Sec. 2-86. - Limit of application. 
The provisions of this division shall not apply if real property is involved. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 1, art. 9, § 7 [Ord. No. 76-44, §1, 7-27-76]; Ord. No. 97-30, § I, 5-13-97; Ord. No. 07-088, § I, 9-25-07)  
Sec. 2-87. - Selection and valuation of property; notice to city manager. 
When a department head of the city has property to dispose of, the city manager's office, or his designee, shall be notified, by "deletions - fixed asset register" form, of that fact. The information on the form shall fairly describe each item of personal property by make, model, year, size or other appropriate identifier, along with the department head's estimate of the present market value of the property, and the basis of that estimate. The form shall also state the proposed method of disposition (public sale, sealed bids, auction (live or Internet), exchange, donation, or other). If the property is to be exchanged, then the notice shall fully describe the property to be acquired in the exchange. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 1, art. 9, § 1 [Ord. No. 76-44, §1, 7-27-76]; Ord. No. 97-30, § I, 5-13-97; Ord. No. 07-088, § I, 9-25-07)  
Sec. 2-88. - Disposition approval. 
(1)  If the estimated present market value of the property is between zero and two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), then the purchasing division may proceed to dispose of the personal property, in accordance with the procedures stated below, no sooner than the third business day after giving notice to the city manager, unless the manager objects to the disposition during that time period. 
(2)  If the estimated present market value is more than two thousand ($2,000.00), then the manager must approve of the disposal of the property, in writing, before the purchasing division may proceed in accordance with the procedures stated below. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 1, art. 9, § 2 [Ord. No. 76-44, §1, 7-27-76]; Ord. No. 97-30, § I, 5-13-97; Ord. No. 07-088, § I, 9-25-07)  
Sec. 2-89. - Method of disposal. 
The method of disposal shall be by public sale, sealed bid, auction, exchange, donation, or other as approved by the city manager or his designee. 
There is no requirement to advertise the disposition of city-owned surplus property prior to disposal other than advertisement mechanisms provided by auctioneer and/or local newspaper for a minimum of two weeks. However, before disposing of abandoned or confiscated property seized by the police department, the notice requirements of article 18.17 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedures must be complied with. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 1, art. 9, § 4 [Ord. No. 76-44, §1, 7-27-76]; Ord. No. 97-30, § I, 5-13-97; Ord. No. 07-088, § I, 9-25-07)  
Sec. 2-90. - Acceptance or rejection of bids and award thereof. 
In a disposition based on sealed bids or auction, at the department head's discretion, all bids may be rejected, if they do not represent adequate compensation to the city for the property involved. If the purchasing division desires to award the bid, it shall be awarded to the highest and best bid. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 1, art. 9, § 5 [Ord. No. 76-44, §1, 7-27-76]; Ord. No. 97-30, § I, 5-13-97; Ord. No. 07-088, § I, 9-25-07)  
Sec. 2-91. - Disposal of surplus library books. 
(1)  When the library director has complied with sections 2-87 and 2-88, the city manager shall declare that any books designated as "surplus" and of no further value, due to their condition, infrequency of use, or availability of other copies, be made available for sale by the "Killeen Friends of the Library." The proceeds of the public sale shall be reported to the city manager. 
(2)  The city manager shall provide the city council an annual report of all benefits realized as a result of the work of the Killeen Friends of the Library. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 1, art. 9, § 8 [Ord. No. 87-11, §1, 2-24-87]; Ord. No. 97-30, § I, 5-13-97)  
DIVISION 3. - CREDIT CARD AND CHECK PAYMENTS 
 
Sec. 2-92. - Payment of fees and costs by credit cards. 
All city officers, officials, and employees who collect or receive payment for fees, court costs, fines, and other charges owed to the city are authorized to accept payment of such by credit card, as may be authorized by the director of finance. Provided however, ad valorem taxes shall not be payable by any medium other than currency of the United States of America or by a check or money order or other method consistent with the Texas Property Tax Code, nor shall credit card payment be authorized if it is otherwise prohibited by law. 
(Ord. No. 97-59, § I, 10-28-97)  
Sec. 2-93. - Administration of credit card payments. 
(1)  There is hereby established a service charge which shall be the same as the fee charged by the city for the collection of a check dishonored for insufficient funds, which shall be collected from the person owing the fee, fine, court costs, or other charge, if the credit card payment tendered is not honored for any reason by the credit card company. This service charge shall be added to the original fine, fee, court costs, or other charge and is for the collection of the original amount. 
(2)  There is hereby authorized a processing fee to be assessed the user of the credit card, in an amount as may be negotiated between the finance director and credit card companies or financial institutions (not to exceed the statutory maximum), on each credit card transaction for the reasonable cost incurred by the city in processing such payment. This fee shall be added to the original amount of the fee, fine, court costs, or other charge owed. 
(3)  Upon consultation with the finance director and city attorney, the city manager is authorized to enter into agreements with companies and financial institutions that issue credit cards, necessary to authorize the city to accept and process credit card payments and further, to contract with such companies and institutions to receive a fee from them for seizing lost, stolen, or otherwise unauthorized credit cards that might be presented to the city for payment. 
(4)  All additional processing fees and service charges collected pursuant to paragraphs (1)—(3) inclusive shall be deposited into the general fund. 
(5)  Not later than the thirtieth (30 th ) day after the effective date of this ordinance, the director of finance shall establish written procedures which shall be distributed to and followed by all city employees who receive credit card payments. Those procedures shall include but not be limited to: instructions on processing a credit card payment; daily accounting and turn-in; security of credit card receipts; deposits; administration of the above service charge, processing fee, and seizure fee provisions; and security of consumer credit information given to the city. The finance director shall periodically review these standard procedures and amend as necessary to assure sound administration and accountability of credit card information and payments in all city departments that receive credit card payments. 
(Ord. No. 97-59, § I, 10-28-97)  
Sec. 2-94. - Fee for returned checks. 
There is hereby established a returned check fee on all checks issued to the city or any of its departments, which are returned by the bank upon which they are drawn for insufficient funds, account closed, payment withheld, or invalid signature. The fee shall be the maximum allowed by law and shall be added to the original fine, fee, court cost, or other charge. 
(Ord. No. 06-17, § I, 2-14-06)  
Sec. 2-95. - Credit card processing fee. 
(a)  There shall be a Processing Fee, which shall initially be $2.00, added to each credit card transaction collected by a city employee for the payment of a fee, fine, court cost, or other charge. However, if the fee, fine, court cost or other charge is less than $40.00, the processing fee shall only be 5% of the original fee, fine, court cost, or other charge amount. 
(b)  The processing fee authorized by this section shall be deposited into the general fund. 
(Ord. No. 11-014, § I, 2-22-11)  
Sec. 2-96. - Service charge for dishonored credit card. 
(a)  If, for any reason, a payment by credit card is not honored by the credit card company on which the funds are drawn, a service charge shall be assessed against the person who owes the fee, fine, court cost, or other charge, and is in addition to the original fee, fine, court cost, or other charge. The service charge is for the collection of that original amount. The amount of the service charge is the same amount as the fee charged for the collection of a check drawn on an account with insufficient funds, as established in Section 2-94. 
(b)  The service charge authorized by this section shall be deposited into the general fund. 
(Ord. No. 11-014, § I, 2-22-11)  
Secs. 2-97—2-115. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Animal advisory committee, § 6-35; airport zoning board of adjustment, § 7-59; construction board of adjustments and appeals, § 8-36 et seq.; board of electrical examiners, § 8-121 et seq.; hospital authority, § 13-26 et seq.; planning and zoning commission, § 21-26 et seq.; zoning board of adjustment, § 31-66 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-116. - Time of appointment. 
All appointments of members of boards, commissions and committees of the city appointed by the city council shall be made by the city council prior to October 1 of each year for all positions to be filled that year. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 1, art. 10, § 1 [Ord. No. 76-21, § 1, 4-27-76]; Ord. No. 91-33, § I, 6-11-91)  
Sec. 2-117. - Terms of appointment. 
(a)  Appointees shall take office October 1 of the year in which appointed and hold office until September 30 of the year their term expires, or until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
(b)  To encourage broad citizen participation, no person may be appointed to serve more than six consecutive years, excluding unexpired terms, on a particular board, commission, or committee. This limitation does not apply if a particular position requires specialized knowledge, licenses, or certifications and no other qualified and interested person is available, or for other good cause found by the Council. [Effective 05-01-2012] 
(Code 1963, Ch. 1, art. 10, § 3 [Ord. No. 76-21, § 1, 4-27-76]; Ord. No. 91-33, § I, 6-11-91; Ord. No. 11-092, § I, 10-11-11)  
Sec. 2-118. - Declaration of position vacancy due to excessive absence. 
(a)  Persons appointed to city boards, commissions or committees can be effective members only if they attend the groups' meetings regularly. In case of excessive absences, a board, commission, or committee member can be removed from office. Missing three (3) consecutive meetings or more than twenty-five (25) percent of the meetings in a twelve-month period where the board, commission, or committee meets more than four (4) times per year shall constitute excessive absences. "Missing a meeting" shall be construed to include stating to a city staff member or other person seeking information about the member's availability for a regularly scheduled meeting that the member will not be available to attend such meeting. This provision shall apply even if such meeting is subsequently canceled or postponed due to lack of a quorum. "Missing a meeting" shall not be construed to include an excused absence as determined by the president or chair. 
(b)  The procedure for removal of a member is as follows: Immediately after a member has missed three (3) consecutive meetings or more than twenty-five (25) percent of the meetings in a twelve-month period where the board, commission, or committee meets more than four (4) times per year and the absences are not determined to be excused by the president or chair, the secretary of the board, commission, or committee shall notify the president or chair in writing. The president or chair shall notify the city manager's office with recommendations in writing within five (5) days of receiving notification. The city manager shall place the matter on the agenda for the next regularly scheduled council meeting. At that meeting, the council may declare the position vacant. If a vacancy is declared, the council shall then appoint someone to fill the vacancy as soon as sufficient time has passed to receive applications for the position. If there are applications from qualified candidates already on file, the council may appoint a new member to fill the vacancy during the same meeting. 
(c)  In this section, the term "board, commission or committee member" also includes the mayor and councilmembers appointed to boards and commissions, and citizens appointed to council committees, including alternates, but it does not include those members who do not have voting rights and do not count towards a quorum. 
(Ord. No. 91-47, § I, 8-27-91; Ord. No. 94-15, § I, 3-22-94; Ord. No. 98-48, § I, 7-28-98; Ord. No. 08-030, § I, 5-13-08; Ord. No. 08-082, § I, 9-23-08)  
Secs. 2-119—2-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ARTS COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-131. - Established; membership. 
(a)  There is hereby established a board to be called the arts commission of the city, which shall consist of nine (9) regular members appointed by the city council as follows: 
(1)  A representative of instrumental and vocal music/radio/television/tape and sound recording; 
(2)  A representative of dance/drama/motion pictures/creative writing; 
(3)  A representative of folk art/painting/sculpture/photography/graphic and craft arts/ architecture/design and allied fields; 
(4)  An educator with a background in the arts; and 
(5)  Five (5) members of the public-at-large. 
(b)  In appointing members, every effort shall be made by the city council to broadly represent all elements of the community, including but not limited to consideration for race, color, religion (creed), national origin, sex, and age. 
(c)  Members shall serve for terms of three (3) years, or until their successors are appointed, or until their positions are declared vacant due to excessive absences; except that members of the board, as well as those formerly appointed as alternates, who are first appointed upon creation of the commission shall hold office three (3) for one-year terms, three (3) for two-year terms, and three (3) for three-year terms as determined at the time of the making of said appointments. 
(Ord. No. 90-21, § I (12-2.5-1), 3-13-90; Ord. No. 91-46, § I, 8-27-91; Ord. No. 00-71, § I, 9-12-00; Ord. No. 04-83, § I, 10-12-04; Ord. No. 05-108, § I, 11-8-05; Ord. No. 06-103, § I, 9-12-06; Ord. No. 18-021 , § I, 8-14-18)  
Sec. 2-132. - Hotel/motel tax revenue allocation. 
(a)  The arts commission shall solicit applications for projects from arts groups eligible for funding under authority of V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 351, as amended, regarding the use of municipal hotel occupancy tax revenue. Solicitation shall be made through public releases given through the conventional methods of newspaper, radio, or television announcements and by bulletin board postings at city hall, as well as by direct mailings to arts groups as deemed appropriate by the arts commission. 
(b)  The arts commission shall review and hear requests for funding, scheduling interviews as needed, to evaluate applications received for eligibility under V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 351. 
(c)  The arts commission shall adopt guidelines and criteria for applicants requesting funding, such guidelines and criteria to be approved by city council. The arts commission shall design application forms and similar documents consistent with the guidelines and criteria adopted. 
(d)  The arts commission's primary objective in evaluating applicants' projects will be the promotion of tourism and the convention and hotel industry based on, but not limited to, the following considerations: 
(1)  The project's involvement inside the city; 
(2)  The number of citizens benefitting from the project; 
(3)  The project's ability to promote tourism; 
(4)  The applicant's administrative and fiscal responsibility, including the applicant's willingness and ability to invest additional money and volunteer effort in the project; 
(5)  The "multiplier effect" of the project, including the return on the city's investment, the return on the applicant's investment, and the dedication of that return to future promotion or improvement of tourism and the convention and hotel industry; and 
(6)  The quality or artistic merit of the project. 
(e)  The arts commission shall submit to the city council its recommendations for the allocation of funding for the arts under V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 351, as amended, regarding the use of municipal hotel occupancy tax revenue. 
(f)  Additionally, the arts commission shall make recommendations to the city council on long-range goals for the development of tourism and the convention and hotel industry through use of funding for the arts under V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 351. 
Cross reference— Hotel and motel tax, § 27-71 et seq.  
Sec. 2-133. - Community encouragement of the arts and producing of activities. 
(a)  Recognizing that the arts play a vital role in the development of a community, the arts commission shall explore and encourage development of community resources for the support of the arts and cultural enrichment in the city. The arts commission shall solicit ideas and suggestions for resources and projects from all elements of the community. 
(b)  The arts commission shall submit an annual advisory report to the city council prior to the council's budget consideration, recommending actions to be taken by the community and the city council to advance art and culture within the city. 
(c)  In addition to and apart from the tasks of administering hotel/motel tax revenue allocation grants to community groups and making recommendations to the city council, the commission is also authorized to produce and promote cultural or arts activities itself. Such activities must be both responsive to the unmet cultural/art needs of the community and of artistic quality as determined by the commission. 
(d)  Activities produced and promoted by the commission shall not be funded, in whole or in part, by any hotel/motel tax revenue allocations, though other state, federal, or private grants, gifts, donations and admission fees for the activities may be sought and used to finance such activities. In the event there is a surplus of revenues over expenditures resulting from a commission produced activity, then the surplus shall be used either to fund other art/cultural activities of the commission, or at the discretion of the commission, transferred for use as supplemental funds for grants to community groups under the hotel/motel tax revenue allocation grant rules. 
(Ord. No. 90-21, § I (12-2.5-2), 3-13-90; Ord. No. 96-1, § I, 1-23-96)  
Sec. 2-134. - Quorum. 
A quorum shall consist of a majority of the number of members then in office eligible to vote on any given matter. "Eligible" shall mean that the member is not disqualified from voting for any reason under the rules and procedures adopted by the arts commission, under state law, or under common law. 
(Ord. No. 90-21, § I (12-2.5-3), 3-13-90; Ord. No. 94-7, § I, 1-25-94)  
Sec. 2-135. - Procedure. 
The arts commission shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure consistent with V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 351, and the provisions of this division. Such rules and regulations shall include the provision for the annual election of a chairman and a vice-chairman from among the commission's membership. 
(Ord. No. 90-21, § I (12-2.5-4), 3-13-90)  
ARTICLE V. - MUNICIPAL COURT  
DIVISION 1. - CITY MARSHAL 
 
Sec. 2-136. - City marshal. 
There is hereby created the position of city marshal. The city marshal shall be a Texas peace officer, appointed by the court administrator. The city marshal may appoint qualified persons as deputy city marshals, with the consent of the court administrator and as authorized by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 96-31, § I, 4-23-96)  
Sec. 2-137. - Authority and responsibilities. 
The city marshal, and duly authorized deputies, shall serve as peace officers for the municipal court and shall be accorded all the privileges, duties, responsibilities, and immunities as state and local law may afford to peace officers. It is expressly provided that, for purposes of Title 6, Texas Government Code, as amended, the city marshal, and duly authorized deputies, are paid law enforcement officers. In addition, the city marshal, and duly authorized deputy city marshals, shall perform the following duties: 
(a)  Execute warrants of arrest, subpoenas, and other legal process issuing out of the municipal court. 
(b)  Execute other warrants of arrest, subpoenas, and legal process as determined by the court administrator. 
(c)  Serve as court bailiffs in the municipal court. 
(d)  Perform such other duties necessary to the proper functioning of the municipal court as the court administrator may assign. 
(Ord. No. 96-31, § I, 4-23-96)  
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 19-052 , § II, adopted Nov. 12, 2019, repealed div. 2, § 2-138, which pertained to municipal court building security fees and derived from Ord. No. 95-102, § I, adopted Dec. 19, 1995. 
 
Secs. 2-138, 2-139. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 19-052 , § III, adopted Nov. 12, 2019, repealed div. 3, § 2-140 which pertained to juvenile case manager fees and derived from Ord. No. 06-08, § I, adopted Jan. 10, 2006. 
 
Secs. 2-140—2-149. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - RESERVED 
 
Sec. 2-150. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-047, § I, adopted Sept. 17, 2019, repealed § 2-150 which pertained to administrative fees and derived from Ord. No. 98-63, § I, adopted Sept. 22, 1998; Ord. No. 99-63, § I, adopted Aug. 24, 1999; Ord. No. 00-62, § I, adopted Aug. 22, 2000; Ord. No. 00-65, § I, adopted Aug. 29, 2000; Ord. No. 00-66, § I, adopted Aug. 29, 2000; Ord. No. 01-44, § I, adopted Aug. 28, 2001; Ord. No. 02-23, § I, adopted May 28, 2002; Ord. No. 02-38, § I, adopted Aug. 27, 2002; Ord. No. 02-39, § I, II, adopted Aug. 27, 2002; Ord. No. 03-43, § I, adopted Aug. 26, 2003; Ord. No. 04-56, § I, adopted July 13, 2004; Ord. No. 04-63, § I, adopted Aug. 24, 2004; Ord. No. 04-73, § I, adopted Aug. 24, 2004; Ord. No. 05-71, § I, adopted Sept. 13, 2005; Ord. No. 05-75, § I, adopted Sept. 13, 2005; Ord. No. 06-17, § II, adopted Feb. 14, 2006; Ord. No. 06-100, § I, adopted Sept. 12, 2006; Ord. No. 06-122, § I, adopted Nov. 14, 2006; Ord. No. 06-129, § I, adopted Nov. 28, 2006; Ord. No. 07-045, § I, adopted May 22, 2007; Ord. No. 076, § I, adopted Sept. 11, 2007; Ord. No. 07-094, § I, adopted Oct. 16, 2007; Ord. No. 08-018, § I, adopted April 8, 2008; Ord. No. 08-039, § I, adopted May 27, 2008; Ord. No. 08-043, § I, adopted June 10, 2008; Ord. No. 08-070, § I, adopted Sept. 9, 2008; Ord. No. 09-021, § I, adopted March 10, 2009; Ord. No. 09-022, § I, adopted March 10, 2009; Ord. No. 09-048, § I, adopted Aug. 11, 2009; Ord. No. 09-056, § I, adopted Sept. 15, 2009; Ord. No. 10-039, § I, adopted July 27, 2010; Ord. No. 11-070, § I, adopted Aug. 9, 2011; Ord. No. 11-083, § I, adopted Sept. 13, 2011; Ord. No. 12-046, § II, adopted Aug. 7, 2012; Ord. No. 12-066, § I, adopted Sept. 11, 2012; Ord. No. 12-067, § I, adopted Sept. 11, 2012; Ord. No. 12-068, § I, adopted Sept. 11, 2012; Ord. No. 13-066, § I, adopted Sept. 10, 2013; Ord. No. 14-038, § VI (p), adopted May 13, 2014; Ord. No. 14-064 , § I, adopted Aug. 26, 2014; Ord. No. 15-020 , § I, adopted March 31, 2015; Ord. No. 15-043 , § I, adopted Sept. 8, 2015; Ord. No. 16-019 , § I, adopted April 12, 2016; Ord. No. 16-025 , § I, adopted June 14, 2016; and Ord. No. 16-042 , § I, adopted Sept. 13, 2016.  
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Health and human services, Ch. 13; licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 15; alcoholic beverage zoning districts, §§ 31-351 et seq., 31-366 et seq., 31-381 et seq. 
 
Sec. 3-1. - Penalty. 
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-8.  
Sec. 3-2. - Permit fee imposed. 
Each holder of a Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission issued permit(s) or license(s) located within the corporate limits of the city shall be required to pay a bi-annual fee for the privilege of operating under the same at a rate of one-half of the bi-annual state fee for each permit or license issued for such premises located within the city, unless statutorily exempt, as provided in V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code and the rules and regulations promulgated by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission, all of which are adopted hereby and made a part of this chapter for all purposes. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 19, § 1 [Ord. No. 86-71, § 1, 9-23-86]; Ord. No. 10-082, § I, 12-28-10) 
State Law reference— State law reference(s)—Permit fee authorized, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 11.38; License fee authorized, V.T.C.A, Alcoholic Beverage Code § 61.36.  
Sec. 3-3. - Payment of fee. 
The fee provided for in section 3-2 is due and payable to the city not later than thirty (30) days following the issuance of the state permit or license or following renewal in each applicable subsequent year wherein the permit must be renewed with the state. Holders of permits or licenses existing as of the date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall pay, within thirty (30) days from the effective date of the same, a pro-rated fee equivalent to one-half of the bi-annual state fee multiplied by the percentage of remaining months left before the permit or license needs to be renewed with the state and shall pay thereafter as provided for in this section. However, the portion of the fee allowed to be assessed under the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code for the holder of a mixed beverage or late hours permit is due and payable to the city the day immediately following the day of the third anniversary of the initially issued mixed beverage permit and thereafter not later than thirty (30) days after renewal in each applicable subsequent year wherein the permit must be renewed with the state. The City Secretary shall be empowered to administer and collect the fees imposed.  
Sec. 3-4. - Late Hours. 
Pursuant to the authority granted by Chapters 33 and 105 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended, the city does hereby adopt the extended hours prescribed for the sale or offering of any mixed beverage, beer, wine and other alcoholic beverage by a holder of a Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission late hours permit or license. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 19, § 2 [Ord. No. 86-71, § 1, 9-23-86]; Ord. No. 10-082, § I, 12-28-10; Ord. No. 14-006, § 3-3, 3-4, 1-28-14)  
Chapter 4 - AMBULANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Health and human services, Ch. 13; licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 15; traffic, Ch. 28. 
State Law reference— Emergency medical services, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 773.001 et. seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 4-1—4-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL AMBULANCE SERVICE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 4-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Advanced life support (ALS) ambulance shall mean an emergency medical service vehicle that has complex, specialized, life-sustaining equipment and, ordinarily, equipped for radiotelephone contact with a physician or hospital. Typical of this type of ambulance would be mobile intensive care units and other ambulance vehicles that are appropriately equipped and staffed by personnel trained and authorized to administer IVs, establish and maintain a patient's airway, defibrillate the heart, relieve pneumothorax conditions and perform other advanced life support procedures or services such as cardiac (EKG) monitoring. 
(a)  Advanced life support, level 1 shall mean transportation by ground ambulance, medically necessary supplies and services and an ALS assessment by ALS personnel or the provision of at least one ALS intervention. 
(b)  Advanced life support, level 2 shall mean emergency transport by ground ambulance with administration of three or more medications by intravenous push/bolus or by continuous infusion excluding crystalloid, hypotonic, isotonic, and hypertonic solutions, or transportation, medically necessary supplies and services and the provision of at least one of the following ALS procedures: 
Manual defibrillation/cardioversion, endotracheal intubation, central venous line, cardiac pacing, chest decompression, surgical airway, and intraosseous line. 
Ambulance shall mean any motor vehicle used, designed, redesigned or constructed and equipped for emergencies and used for the purpose of transporting a person who may be sick or injured. 
Ambulance service shall mean emergency care of and/or transportation of a person in need of medical care by persons using equipment designed for the purpose. 
Basic life support (BLS) ambulance shall mean an emergency vehicle that provides transportation plus the equipment and staff needed for such basic services as control of bleeding, splinting fractures, treatment for shock, cardio-pulmonary resuscitation (CPR). 
Call shall mean the response to a request for services by City of Killeen EMS personnel. 
Emergency shall mean any circumstance that calls for an immediate action and which the element of time in transporting the sick, wounded or injured for medical treatment is essential to the health or life of any person. Such circumstances include, but are not limited to, accidents generally, traffic accidents, acts of violence resulting in personal injury, and sudden illness. 
Emergency medical service personnel shall mean emergency care attendant; basic emergency medical technician; intermediate emergency medical technician; or paramedic emergency medical technician. 
Emergency medical service (EMS) personnel shall mean emergency care attendant; basic emergency medical technician; advanced emergency medical technician; or paramedic emergency medical technician. 
Medical facility shall mean any building or place of business established for the purpose of examination and/or treatment by licensed physicians of individuals that are sick or injured. 
Mileage shall mean total miles traveled from point of patient pickup to a medical facility. 
No transport call shall mean service which may include the administration of BLS or ALS treatment and/or patient evaluation by City of Killeen EMS personnel, but no transportation of the individual is made in a City of Killeen ambulance. 
Person shall mean any firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or individual. 
Transport shall mean the transportation of a person, who may be sick, injured, or otherwise incapacitated, from place to place under other than emergency circumstances. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 6, art. 13, § 2 [Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, 9-26-78; Ord. No. 81-39, § 1, 8-25-81; Ord. No. 85-49, § 1(2), 9-24-85; Ord. No. 86-72, § 1, 9-23-86]; Ord. No. 96-67, § I, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 00-19, § I, 3-28-00; Ord. No. 02-37, § I, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 04-72, § I, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 19-003 , § I, 1-29-19) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Definitions applicable to emergency medical services, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 773.003.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 4-27. - Creation; operation by fire department; officer in charge. 
There shall be, and it is hereby created, a service to the people to be called the City of Killeen Emergency Medical Service, which service shall be operated within the city fire department and under the authority of the fire chief or his designated representative. The primary purpose of said service shall be for the care and transportation of persons with moderate to life threatening trauma or illness. The fire chief is authorized to allocate or withhold equipment and personnel as he deems necessary to assure that adequate emergency care and transportation is available at all times for legitimate emergency medical needs in the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-67, § I, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 19-003 , § I, 1-29-19)  
Sec. 4-28. - Persons to whom available. 
The emergency medical service shall be available to all persons within the city limits of the City of Killeen. The service shall also be available to persons: 
(a)  In the portions of Bell or other counties which are included within any interlocal mutual aid agreement between the city and the commissioner's court of a county; 
(b)  In any area covered by mutual aid agreement between the city and another municipality; or 
(c)  At the request of any governmental entity during a bona fide emergency, as approved by the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 96-67, § I, 8-27-96)  
Sec. 4-29. - Operation of emergency medical service. 
Unless merely in transit through the city en route to a medical facility by the most direct route, it shall be unlawful for any person, other than the City of Killeen EMS, or an agency of the United States, to furnish, operate, conduct, maintain, advertise for, or otherwise be engaged in the operation of an emergency ambulance or the providing of emergency service upon the streets of the city, except it be at the request of: 
(a)  The city manager or his duly authorized representative; 
(b)  The fire chief or his designee; 
(c)  The director of emergency management in the event of a temporary emergency or a major disaster or other occurrence resulting in emergency calls exceeding the capacity of Killeen EMS vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 96-67, § I, 8-27-96)  
Sec. 4-30. - Destinations of emergency trips. 
(a)  The destination of all emergency trips shall be to the closest and most appropriate medical facility. EMS personnel shall have discretion to choose the facility according to the EMS standard operating procedures. 
(b)  In the event of mutual aid assistance, the city's EMS unit shall deliver emergency trip patients as directed by the authorized person in charge of the jurisdiction requesting mutual aid, or in the event no such orders are given, the city EMS personnel shall deliver patients to the nearest appropriate facility. 
(Ord. No. 96-67, § I, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 19-003 , § I, 1-29-19)  
Secs. 4-31—4-41. - Reserved.  
Sec. 4-42. - Assignment of insurance. 
The City of Killeen shall accept assignments as method of payment from all insurance carriers for emergency medical services performed. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 6, art. 13, § 4 [Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, 9-26-78; Ord. No. 81-39, § I, 8-25-81; Ord. No. 85-49, § I(2), 9-24-85; Ord. No. 86-72, § I, 9-23-86]; Ord. No. 96-67, § I, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 02-37, § II, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 04-72, § II, 8-24-04)  
Sec. 4-43. - Presumption. 
(a)  It shall be prima facie evidence that the person utilizing such emergency medical service did so with the intent to defraud the city, upon showing that such person was notified in writing of the indebtedness due for such service, and upon failure of such person to either: pay for such indebtedness within sixty (60) days after receipt of notice, or during that time, to make arrangements with the finance department or any designated billing agent for periodic installment payments on the debt. 
(b)  If an account is delinquent more than one hundred twenty (120) days, the account shall be turned over to a collection agency for collection process, or sued upon, or such other remedy provided by law for the collection of unpaid debt may be used. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 6, art. 13, § 5 [Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, 9-26-78; Ord. No. 81-39, § 1, 8-25-81; Ord. No. 85-49, § 1(2), 9-24-85; Ord. No. 86-72, § 1, 9-23-86]; Ord. No. 96-67, § I, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 19-003 , § I, 1-29-19)  
Sec. 4-44. - Right of refusal of service. 
The city emergency medical service shall reserve unto itself the right to refuse service to the following persons: 
(a)  Persons who are in confinement of, under control of, or have been placed under arrest by any law enforcement officer or agency, or persons who, in the opinion of ambulance attendants, are unruly, disorderly, intoxicated or under the influence of alcohol or other substance to a degree that they cannot be transported in a safe manner, taking into consideration the safety and welfare of all occupants of the vehicle. A person described in this section shall be refused unless accompanied by a peace officer in such ambulance. 
(b)  Persons who, in the judgment of a paramedic on the scene, exhibit only normal health or a mild medical condition and not a medical emergency, not warranting use of the city's mobile intensive care units for immediate transportation (thereby assuring availability of such for legitimate medical emergencies). In such instances, the paramedic shall render any appropriate care or first aid, and inform the person that there are alternative methods of non-emergency transportation available (e.g., private vehicle, private ambulance transfer service, taxi, or public transportation). No city employee shall ever endorse or indicate favoritism for one transportation provider over another. 
(Ord. No. 96-67, § I, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 19-003 , § I, 1-29-19)  
Sec. 4-45. - No transport calls. 
When a call is received from a scene of an accident and/or event and treatment is provided but transport is unnecessary, a bill for services performed and supplies used will be charged if the cost exceeds twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
If a call is received from the patient's residence and no treatment is provided to the sick or injured, and transportation to a medical facility is refused by the patient or family member, then a fee as provided in the adopted fee schedule may be charged. 
When treatment is provided to the sick or injured in response to a call for EMS, but transportation to a medical facility is refused by either the patient or a paramedic on the scene, then a fee as provided in the adopted fee schedule may be charged, if the call is to a location within the city limits. Fees for no-transport calls outside of the city limits shall be determined by contract with other governmental entities requesting the service. 
(Ord. No. 96-67, § I, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 00-19, § II, 3-28-00; Ord. No. 02-37, § III, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 04-72, § III, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 19-003 , § I, 1-29-19; Ord. No. 19-047 , § II, 9-17-19)  
DIVISION 3. - FEES 
 
Sec. 4-46. - Fees. 
(a)  Any person who uses the emergency medical services of the city, whether such person requested the same or not, shall pay for the service in accordance with the adopted fee schedule. Fees for services in addition to the ambulance service rate will be charged according to the adopted fee schedule when additional services and supplies are needed by the person. The adopted fee schedule shall apply to each person transported whether one or more persons are picked up in the same ambulance at the same time. 
(b)  In the event a hospital, nursing home or other entity or individual is responsible for the transport, transfer or other transportation of a person using the ambulance service of the city, that responsible hospital, nursing home or other entity or individual shall pay for such service according to the adopted fee schedule. 
Standing time. Every emergency trip or transfer to any hospital, clinic, doctor's office or other place will include a waiting period of not more than fifteen (15) minutes without additional charge. An additional charge as provided in the adopted fee schedule will be made for each fifteen (15) minutes or fraction thereof, that the ambulance unit and its equipment must wait at any hospital, clinic, doctor's office or other place prior to discharge. 
Emergency service outside of city. Fees for emergency ambulance services provided by the City of Killeen Emergency Medical Service to locations outside of the Killeen city limits but within Bell County shall be made in accordance with an EMS service contract between the City of Killeen and Bell County. Fees for emergency ambulance service provided by the City of Killeen Emergency Medical Service to locations out of county shall be charged in accordance with the adopted fee schedule. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 6, art. 13, § 2 [Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, 9-26-78; Ord. No. 81-39, § 1, 8-25-81; Ord. No. 85-49, § 1(2), 9-24-85; Ord. No. 86-72, § 1, 9-23-86]; Ord. No. 96-67, § I, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 98-35, § I, 6-9-98; Ord. No. 00-19, § III, 3-28-00; Ord. No. 02-37, § IV, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 04-72, § IV, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 15-043 , § II, 9-8-15; Ord. No. 19-003 , § I, 1-29-19; Ord. No. 19-047 , § II, 9-17-19)  
Sec. 4-47. - Amending fees. 
The fees in this chapter and the adopted fee schedule shall be charged to all customers. This does not affect the discretion or authority of either the finance department or legal department to reduce a bill to avoid an inequitable charge, or in the course of reasonably settling a dispute or claim. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 6, art. 13, § 2 [Ord. No. 78-65, § 1, 9-26-78; Ord. No. 81-39, § 1, 8-25-81; Ord. No. 85-49, § 1(2), 9-24-85; Ord. No. 86-72, § 1, 9-23-86]; Ord. No. 96-67, § I, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 19-047 , § II, 9-17-19)  
Chapter 5 - AMUSEMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 15. 
State Law reference— Authority of home rule municipality to regulate amusements, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.074. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 5-1—5-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - POOL AND BILLIARD TABLES 
 
Sec. 5-26. - Penalty. 
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-8.  
Sec. 5-27. - Minors not allowed. 
Any person engaged in running pool or billiard table or tables in a public place for profit or any agent of such person who shall knowingly permit any minor without the written consent of the minor's parent or guardian in such place of business shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 3, § 1)  
Secs. 5-28—5-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SHOOTING GALLERIES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 5-51. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this article, the term "shooting gallery" shall mean a room, place or enclosure wherein the firing of firearms is permitted to practice marksmanship. Each shooting gallery shall consist of only one (1) target area. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 17, § 1 [Ord. No. 72-4, § 1, 1-24-72]) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 5-52. - Penalty. 
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-8.  
Sec. 5-53. - Operating time. 
The operation of any shooting gallery between the hours of 12:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. is hereby prohibited and declared unlawful. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 17, § 8 [Ord. No. 72-4, § 1, 1-24-72])  
Sec. 5-54. - Targets and firearms allowed. 
Targets used at shooting galleries shall be of the stationary bull's-eye type. All moving targets are prohibited. No firearms shall be used, kept or discharged within a shooting gallery other than twenty-two (22) caliber rifles or pistols, and no ammunition larger than twenty-two (22) caliber short rim fire cartridges shall be used. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 17, § 6 [Ord. No. 72-4, § 1, 1-24-72])  
Sec. 5-55. - Firearms to be chained. 
All firearms shall be chained to the counter or fixed structure over which such firearms are discharged. Such chain shall not exceed three (3) feet in length and shall be of the gauge determined by the chief of police. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 17, § 7 [Ord. No. 72-4, § 1, 1-24-72])  
Sec. 5-56. - Periodic inspections. 
Every shooting gallery for which a license has been issued under this article may be periodically inspected by the chief of police or his duly appointed representative, and such inspections may be made and conducted at any time the same shall be deemed advisable in the opinion of the chief of police and every shooting gallery shall be at all times open for inspection. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 17, § 9 [Ord. No. 72-4, § 1, 1-24-72])  
Sec. 5-57. - General regulations for firing rooms at shooting galleries. 
(a)  The room, place or enclosure wherein the firing of firearms is to take place at a shooting gallery shall comply with all provisions of this section and shall not be used for any other purpose whatsoever during the progress of firing. 
(b)  The rear wall and side walls to a point on a line with the firing position shall be of bulletproof construction in accordance with the following specifications: 
(1)  Not less than six-inch masonry or solid concrete. 
(2)  Wood stud and plaster walls or equivalent construction, faced with one-inch boards backed with one-quarter-inch steel plate. Floors of joist construction shall be considered bulletproof. 
(3)  Ceilings of joist construction shall be faced with one-inch boards up to a maximum distance of fifteen (15) feet from target area in firing direction. 
(c)  All openings of any nature in the rear and side walls shall be protected with one-inch board backed by a one-quarter-inch steel plate. 
(d)  Open steel truss ceilings shall be protected by a one-quarter-inch steel baffle plate inclined toward the firing position. The plate shall be as wide as the total width of the target and not less than five (5) feet in depth, and shall be suspended from the bottom cord of the trusses to a point on a line parallel to the floor and eighteen (18) inches above the intersection of two (2) sight lines drawn from the elevation of the firearm, at the prone firing position to the bottom of the furthest truss, and from the elevation of the firearm at the off-hand firing position to a point five (5) feet above the floor at the target. Baffle plates less than fifteen (15) feet from the firing position shall be protected with one-inch boards. 
(e)  Exposed steel girders less than fifteen (15) feet (horizontal or vertical) from the firing position shall be protected with one-inch boards. 
(f)  In addition to the above protection, there shall be provided a one-quarter-inch steel stop plate, directly in the rear of targets, extending not less than eight (8) inches beyond the outer ring of the bull's-eye, and inclined towards the firing position at an angle of forty-five (45) degrees. The stop plate shall be housed, on sides and top, with corrugated sheet metal extending not less than one (1) foot beyond the top edge of the plate. At the base of the inclined stop plate there shall be provided a sand box with not less than six (6) inches of sand and of sufficient width so as to absorb all the bullets ricocheted by the stop plate as fired from the firing position. 
(g)  Entrance to that part of the licensed area situated between the firing position and targets shall be protected with thirty-six-inch guard rails or equivalent protection. No person except the person in charge shall be permitted within the above-described area during the progress of firing. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 17, § 10 [Ord. No. 72-4, § 1, 1-24-72])  
Secs. 5-58—5-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 5-71. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain or operate, within the corporate limits of the city, a shooting gallery without having first secured a license to do so from the chief of police, such license to be for one (1) year and to be renewed yearly after inspection by the chief of police. Such license shall not be assignable or transferable. The license fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 17, § 2 [Ord. No. 72-4, § 1, 1-24-72])  
Sec. 5-72. - Application. 
Any person desiring a license required by this division shall make written application therefor to the chief of police on forms to be provided by the chief of police. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 17, § 3 [Ord. No. 72-4, § 1, 1-24-72])  
Sec. 5-73. - Applicant and employees. 
No license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of a felony or who employs a person convicted of a felony or crime. Such license shall be revoked upon the conviction of the owner or any of his employees for a felony or a crime of violence. The chief of police shall investigate and determine that the applicant and his employees are of good moral character. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 17, § 4 [Ord. No. 72-4, § 1, 1-24-72])  
Sec. 5-74. - Bond. 
Any person desiring a license shall provide a bond with two (2) or more good and sufficient sureties payable to the city in a sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the protection of the city and the general public with respect to all damage resulting from conducting and maintaining such shooting gallery. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 17, § 5 [Ord. No. 72-4, § 1, 1-24-72])  
Sec. 5-75. - Revocation. 
The chief of police may revoke the permit to operate any shooting gallery upon which there is a violation of this division. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 17, § 11 [Ord. No. 72-4, § 1, 1-24-72])  
Secs. 5-76—5-95. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SHOWS, ETC. 
 
Sec. 5-96. - Penalty. 
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-8.  
Sec. 5-97. - Scope. 
This article shall apply to all shows, performances, exhibitions, medicine shows, panoramic or view shows, menageries, carnivals, circuses, wild west shows, or rodeo shows, acrobatic performances, wax shows, moving picture shows, dramatic or theatrical productions or skating rinks, held in or exhibited upon the streets or under any tent, or in any airdrome, hall or building, within the city. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 7, § 2)  
Sec. 5-98. - Exceptions. 
(a)  This article shall not apply to events, street fairs, shows or the like composed entirely of local people banded together for purely civic or charitable purposes and without personal profit to themselves, individually. 
(b)  Neither shall the provisions of this law apply to an organization duly incorporated under the laws of the state, composed of local stockholders, holding a non-profit-sharing charter, for the purpose of holding intermittent events whose purpose is advancement of better living conditions, better agriculture, more and better livestock, more efficient farm and home equipment in the county, and the advancement of the potential possibilities of the city industrially, commercially and financially. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 7, § 4)  
Sec. 5-99. - License, permit required. 
A.  Any person giving, conducting, exhibiting or maintaining a show, performance, exhibition or place of amusement, shall first pay to the city a license fee equal to the maximum license fee or occupation tax allowed cities or towns under the laws of the state and secure a permit in writing from the city manager upon such terms and conditions as shall be deemed advisable by the city manager for the protection of the public from fire and traffic hazards, diseases, loud, unusual noises, unsanitary conditions and public inconveniences. 
B.  Application for a permit is made by filing with the city secretary a form, provided by that office, not less than twenty-one (21) days prior to the proposed set-up date for the event. 
C.  Upon receipt of an application, the city secretary shall immediately acquire comments from affected city departments concerning the proposed activity (e.g., fire, police, animal control, streets, etc.). The secretary shall forward the application and department comments to the city manager within 5 days. 
D.  The following standards shall be considered by the city manager in evaluating an application: whether the conduct of the proposed event or its location will: 
1.  substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic; 
2.  adversely affect the safety and health of those situated adjacent to the location of the event; 
3.  require such a substantial number of police, ambulance, animal control, or other city personnel to adequately service the event, that necessary services must be substantially curtailed in other areas of the city; 
4.  pose a high degree of probability or likelihood to cause or tend to cause injury or damage to persons or property or to provoke disorderly conduct; 
5.  be so close to a school, church, hospital, or other place at which a specific lawful activity normally requires for its accomplishment quiet and orderly deliberation or consideration or freedom from loud noises or crowds of persons or traffic; 
6.  be issued to a person or party who has within the preceding 12 months obtained a permit for the same or substantially same activity at that location, such that issuance of another permit would unfairly, unreasonably, or inequitably prevent another from obtaining a permit; or a permit for another show, carnival, circus, rodeo, etc. has previously been lawfully issued to another scheduled for the same date(s) sought by applicant. 
E.  The city manager shall, within seven (7) days after receipt of an application, approve, modify and approve, or deny it. If modified or denied, the reasons shall be clearly stated in writing by the city manager. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 7, § 1; Ord. No. 00-2, § I, 1-11-00)  
Sec. 5-100. - Location restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to give, conduct, exhibit or maintain any show, performance, exhibition or place of amusement of any character whatsoever, within the corporate limits of the city, save and except in a regularly constructed and conducted auditorium, opera or theater building, unless such person shall obtain the written consent of the owner of the lot, tract, or parcel of land, on which such show, performance, exhibition or place of amusement is located. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 7, § 1)  
Sec. 5-101. - Bond. 
The city manager shall have the right as a prerequisite to the issuance of a license under this article, to demand and receive of such person desiring to give, conduct, exhibit or maintain a show, performance, exhibition or place of amusement, a bond with two (2) or more good and sufficient sureties payable to the city in such sum or sums as in the discretion of the city manager shall be deemed sufficient for the protection of the city and the general public, conditioned that such person shall pay off and discharge all damages of any kind or character assessed against them by reason of their giving, conducting, exhibiting or maintaining such show, performance, exhibition or place of amusement. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 7, § 1; Ord. No. 00-2, § II, 1-11-00)  
Sec. 5-102. - Revocation of license. 
The city manager shall have the power to revoke any license issued under this article and prohibit the further giving, conducting, exhibiting or maintaining of a show, performance, exhibition or place of amusement for failure to pay the required license fees or occupation taxes, the violation of a city ordinance or gaming law of the state, or the creating, maintenance or permitting the creation or maintenance of any fire or traffic hazards, unsanitary conditions, loud and undue noises or the doing of any act contrary to the public convenience, necessity or welfare. The reasons and circumstances giving rise to a revocation shall be stated by the city manager in writing. The licensee shall not be entitled to the refund of any sum or sums of money paid as such license fee. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 7, § 1; Ord. No. 00-2, § III, 1-11-00)  
Sec. 5-103. - Appeal of denial or revocation of license. 
In the event the city manager modifies an application, denies an application, or revokes a permit, the affected party may appeal the manager's decision to the city council by filing a written letter with the city manager within 2 business days after receiving notice of the city manager's decision. The appeal letter must specifically state each and all points of contention with the city manager's determination. The city manager shall immediately cause the appeal to be placed on the next regular meeting agenda of the city council for discussion and action. At that meeting, the city council shall consider the standards contained in this chapter, the city manager's reasons for denying or revoking a permit, the points raised in the letter of appeal, and relevant surrounding facts. 
(Ord. No. 00-2, § IV, 1-11-00)  
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Health and human services, Ch. 13; nuisances, Ch. 18. 
State Law reference— Authority to enforce ordinances necessary to protect and preserve, health, property, good government and order, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.004. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Purpose. 
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to provide a safe and healthy environment within the city for both animals and people. While a person may own and keep animals within the city, the conduct of those animals and the conditions in which the animals are kept should not infringe on the surrounding homes and their inhabitants. 
(Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02)  
Sec. 6-2. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm, or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with, or who resists enforcement of any of the provisions of the chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. Each violation of this chapter shall be deemed a separate offense and each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. This penalty should not be construed as exclusive, and the city shall be authorized to pursue all other criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled to under the authority of other ordinances or state law. 
(Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02)  
Sec. 6-3. - Culpable mental state not required. 
Unless specifically provided in this chapter, an offense under this chapter shall not require a culpable mental state. It is the intent of this chapter to impose strict liability for any violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02)  
Sec. 6-4. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned animal shall mean an animal that has been left on or about an unoccupied public or private property, premises, or location and/or occupied public property, with the intent to no longer claim ownership or provide humane care of such animal(s), or leave an animal in the care of another person without their consent. 
Advisory committee shall mean the advisory committee composed of at least one (1) licensed veterinarian, one (1) city official, one (1) person whose duties include the daily operation of an animal shelter, one (1) representative from an animal welfare organization or humane society, two (2) city councilmembers, and three (3) citizens. 
Aggravated at large shall mean: 
A.  Any dog that is in violation of section 6-36 Restraint; and 
B.  Without clear provocation, attacks or bites a person or approaches a person causing them to reasonably believe the animal will attack or cause bodily injury to them or another person. 
Aggressive dog shall mean a dog that exhibits behavior indicating that it represents a potential danger. An example of potentially aggressive behavior could be, but is not limited to: 
A.  When unprovoked, chases or approaches a person upon the streets, sidewalks or any public or private property in a menacing fashion or displaying an apparent attitude of attack; or 
B.  Has a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise threaten the safety of human beings or domestic animals. 
Animal shall mean any live, vertebrate creature, domestic or wild. 
Animal control officer shall mean any person certified by a certifying agency in this state as an animal control officer and whose primary responsibility is the enforcement of this chapter and animal laws of this state. 
Animal shelter shall mean any facility operated by the city or its authorized agents for the purposes of impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of this article or state law. 
At large shall mean: 
A.  Off-premises: any animal that is not under the complete control of the owner or caretaker by means of a leash, cord or chain to control the actions of such animal while off the owner's or caretaker's property. 
B.  On-premises: any animal not confined on the premises of the owner or caretaker by one of the following methods: 
1.  A substantial fence of sufficient strength and height to prevent the animal from escaping therefrom; 
2.  Secured on the premises by a leash, cord or chain of sufficient strength to prevent the animal from escaping the premises. 
Auctions shall mean any place or facility, at a location properly zoned for that activity, where animals are regularly bought, sold or traded, except for those facilities otherwise defined in this article. This section does not apply to individual sales of animals by owners. 
Cat colony means a colony of feral, homeless, stray, wild or untamed cats that has been registered with the department and is maintained by a cat colony manager. 
Cat colony manager means a person who provides food and water to a cat colony. 
Circus shall mean a commercial variety show, at a location properly zoned for that activity, featuring animal acts for public entertainment. 
Clear provocation shall mean a hit, kick, or strike to an animal by a person with any object or part of a person's body; or the pulling, pinching, or squeezing of any part of an animal's body by a person; or entry by a person into a pen or other similar enclosure in which the animal was being kept that was specifically designed and reasonably certain to prevent the animal from leaving the pen or enclosure on its own. 
Dangerous dog shall mean: 
A.  A dog that makes an unprovoked attack on a person that causes bodily injury and the attack occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own; or 
B.  A dog that commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and those acts cause a person to reasonably believe that the dog will attack and cause bodily injury to any person. 
Exception: A dog maintained by law enforcement and in the performance of official duties while confined or under the physical or verbal control of its handler, shall not be included in the definition of "dangerous animal." 
Fowl shall mean all animals belonging to the class of Aves including members of all game birds such as, but not limited to, chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks, pheasants, quail, guinea hens, peacocks, pigeons, dove, emus, ostriches and other domestic feathered creatures and non-domestic feathered creatures, regardless of age or sex EXCEPT this definition shall not include pet birds such as, but not limited to, parakeets, parrots, canaries, love birds, finches, and cockatiels. This definition shall not include hawks or falcons kept in compliance with federal and state permitting regulations. 
Guard dog or attack dog shall mean any dog trained to attack intruders that has completed such professional training and is so certified, such that its attack can be stopped on command and is registered with the city as such. 
Harboring shall mean to give shelter, food or water. 
High-risk animal shall mean an animal that has a high probability of transmitting rabies such as, but not limited to, bats, skunks, raccoons, coyotes and foxes. 
Kennel shall mean any premises, at a location properly zoned for that activity, wherein any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire or selling dogs and cats. 
Licensing authority shall mean the city acting through its licensing authority or permit department and the animal services unit. 
Livestock shall mean domestic animals raised for food and fiber such as hogs, sheep, cattle and horses. 
Livestock management facility shall mean any on-farm breeding operation, on-farm animal feeding operation, on-farm livestock shelter, or on-farm milking and accompanying milk handling operation. 
Local rabies control authority shall mean any state certified animal control officer employed by the City of Killeen. 
Low-risk animal shall mean an animal that has a low probability of transmitting rabies such as, but not limited to, rats, mice, squirrels and other members of the Rodentia family, rabbits, armadillos, opossums, beaver, nutria, snakes, shrews and moles. 
Microchip means a small radio frequency identification device that is inserted between the shoulder blades of an animal and is inert until activated by a scanner. The microchip provides specific tracking information to determine an animal's identity and the owners contact information. 
Order of non-possession shall mean a written or verbal notice issued by a court to a person prohibiting them from possessing animals within the corporate city limits of Killeen. 
Owner shall mean any person, firm, partnership, or corporation that owns, has title to, has, has possession of, who harbors, keeps, causes, or permits to be harbored or kept, any animal in his care, or permits or allows an animal to remain on/or about his property for (5) five or more consecutive days. A registered cat colony manager of a cat colony shall not be considered an owner of any cat in any cat colony for which the cat colony manager holds a permit found off of the property that the cat colony manager owns. 
Performing animal exhibition shall mean any spectacle, display, act or event other than a circus, at a location properly zoned for that activity, in which performing animals are used. 
Person shall mean any individual, corporation, partnership, trust, estate, joint stock company, foundation, organization, association of individuals, or institution commonly recognized by law as a unit. 
Pet shall mean any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility. 
Pet shop shall mean a commercial establishment such as, but not limited to, pet stores, pet grooming services, pet boarding, and animal training at a location properly zoned for that activity, operated by a person, whether operated separately or in connection with another business enterprise except for a kennel. 
Public nuisance shall mean any animal which: 
A.  Molests passing vehicles. 
B.  Trespasses on school grounds. 
C.  Is repeatedly at large. 
D.  Barks, whines or howls in an excessive, continuous or untimely fashion. 
Riding school or stable shall mean any place, at a location properly zoned for that activity, which has available for hire, boarding and/or riding instruction, any horse, pony, donkey, mule or burro. 
Secure enclosure shall mean any structure used to immediately restrict or confine an animal to a limited amount of space, including, but not limited to, a cage, pen, run, room, hutch, and approved by the animal services unit. 
Steel jaw trap shall mean any steel, spring setting, mechanical jaw, leghold trap or bar device trap designed for the capture of animals. 
Substandard fence shall mean that an animal is capable of reaching a part of its body over, under or through the fence. 
Swine shall mean any of the ungulate mammals of the family Suidae, including the pig, hog, boar and the Vietnamese pot-bellied pig. 
Veterinary clinic shall mean any establishment, at a location properly zoned for that activity, maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis and treatment of diseases and injuries of animals. 
Wild animal shall mean any non-domestic creature (mammal, amphibian, reptile, arachnid, or fowl) which is of a specie that is wild by nature and which can normally be found in the wild state and which is not naturally tame or gentle, but is of a wild nature or disposition; or which, because of its size, vicious nature and other characteristics, would constitute a danger to human life or property, if not kept or maintained in a safe and secure manner. Such creatures include but are not limited to all forms of poisonous reptiles and nonpoisonous snakes which will exceed a length of six feet when mature and nonhuman primates. Excluded from this definition are hamsters, gerbils, ferrets, domesticated breeds of rabbits, guinea pigs, rats, mice, newts and salamanders. 
Zoological park shall mean any facility, at a location properly zoned for that activity, other than a pet shop or kennel, displaying or exhibiting one (1) or more species of non-domesticated animals, operated by a person. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 2, art. 1, § 1 [Ord. No. 81-47, § 1, 9-22-81; Ord. No. 87-33, § 1, 5-26-87]; Ord. No. 94-61, § I, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 03-48, § I, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 04-15, § I, 3-16-04; Ord. No. 04-97, § I, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 06-121, § I, 11-14-06; Ord. No. 08-026, § I, 4-22-08; Ord. No. 09-008, § II, 2-10-09; Ord. No. 09-077, § I, 11-24-09; Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 6-5. - Fees. 
Fees shall be charged as set out in the adopted fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14; Ord. No. 19-047 , § III, 9-17-19)  
Sec. 6-6. - Exemptions. 
The following sections, or portions of sections, do not apply to the keeping of livestock: 
1.  Subsections 6-38(g), (h), Cruelty. Food and water are not required to be served to livestock in containers. 
2.  Subsection 6-38(j), Cruelty (shelter). 
(Ord. No. 04-15, § I, 3-16-04; Ord. No. 04-97, § I, 12-14-04)  
Secs. 6-7—6-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL SERVICES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Formerly entitled "Animal Control", which was amended by Ord. No. 14-083 . 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 6-31. - Restrictions on agricultural projects. 
A.  In this section "agricultural project" shall mean a teaching mechanism offered by a public or private school wherein animals are raised for show or sale. 
B.  The sponsor of any agricultural project carried on within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction shall apply for approval by the city manager by filing an application with the city secretary at least 21 days prior to the start of any such project. 
C.  Upon receipt of an application, the city secretary shall immediately acquire comments from city departments concerning the proposed activity. The secretary shall forward the application and department comments to the city manager within 5 days. 
D.  The following standards shall be considered by the city manager in evaluating an application: whether the conduct of the proposed event or its location will: 
1.  Substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic; 
2.  Adversely affect the safety and health of those situated adjacent to the location of the event; 
3.  Pose a high degree of probability or likelihood to cause or tend to cause injury or damage to persons or property; 
4.  Be so close to a school, church, hospital, or other place at which a specific lawful activity normally requires for its accomplishment quiet and orderly deliberation or consideration or freedom from loud noises associated with the project. 
E.  The city manager shall, within seven (7) days after receipt of an application, approve, modify and approve, or deny it. If modified or denied, the reasons shall be clearly stated in writing by the city manager. 
F.  For violation of the City of Killeen Code of Ordinances, applicable state laws, or requirements of this permit, the city manager may revoke a permit previously issued under this chapter, by written order stating the reasons for the action. 
G.  In the event the city manager modifies an application, denies an application, or revokes a permit, the affected party may appeal the manager's decision to the city council by filing a written letter with the city manager within 3 business days after receiving notice of the city manager's decision. The appeal letter must specifically state each and all points of contention with the city manager's determination. The city manager shall immediately cause the appeal to be placed on the next regular meeting agenda of the city council for discussion and action. At that meeting, the city council shall consider the standards contained in this chapter, the city manager's reasons for modifying, denying, or revoking a permit, the points raised in the letter of appeal, and relevant surrounding facts. 
H.  An agricultural project, approved by the city manager shall not be required to adhere to any of the provisions of this chapter not specifically enumerated in the approval of the project. 
I.  Any approved agricultural project which violates the terms and conditions of its approval shall at that time forfeit its waiver of the provisions of this chapter, and the permit is subject to revocation. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 2, art. 2, §§ 1—4 [Ord. No. 77-45, § 1, 8-23-77]; Ord. No. 00-1, § I, 1-11-00; Ord. No. 04-97, § I, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Sec. 6-32. - Disposition of fees and penalties. 
It shall be the duty of anyone collecting any fees or penalties under this article to pay all such monies to the director of finance. 
(Ord. No. 04-97, § I, 12-14-04)  
Sec. 6-33. - Enforcement. 
A.  Enforcement of this chapter shall be the primary responsibility of the animal services unit; however, city police officers, code enforcement officers, and such other persons as are designated by the city may also enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  It is a violation of this chapter to interfere with, obstruct, resist, or oppose any officer while such person is apprehending an animal or performing any other duties. 
C.  Any animal services' officer or police officer has a right to pursue and apprehend animals running at large onto private property while enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  It is a violation of this chapter for a person who has received a written notice of non-possession or who has been convicted of animal cruelty, as defined by this chapter or state statute, to be in possession of an animal whether the animal is personally owned or is under the individual's care, custody or control. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 2, art. 2, §§ 1—4 [Ord. No. 77-45, § 1, 8-23-77]; Ord. No. 00-1, § I, 1-11-00; Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Sec. 6-34. - Animal advisory committee. 
An animal advisory committee shall be appointed by the city council and shall be composed of at least one (1) licensed veterinarian, one (1) city official, one (1) person whose duties include the daily operation of an animal shelter, one (1) representative from an animal welfare organization or humane society, seven (7) citizens, and two (2) ex-officio voting members. The animal advisory committee shall advise and make recommendations to the city council pertaining to animals and this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 04-97, § I, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 16-046 , § I, 9-13-16; 18-025 , § I, 8-28-18) 
Cross reference— Boards and commissions generally, § 2-116 et seq.  
Sec. 6-35. - Public nuisances; abatement. 
A.  No owner shall fail to exercise proper care and control of his animals to prevent them from becoming a public nuisance. Public nuisance shall mean any animal which: 
1.  Molests passing vehicles; 
2.  Trespasses on schoolgrounds; 
3.  Is repeatedly at large; or 
4.  Barks, cries or howls, in an excessive, continuous or untimely fashion without cause. Without cause shall mean that a reasonable person would believe that it was justifiable for the animal to bark, cry, or howl under the circumstances. 
B.  If any animal is shown to be a public nuisance, as defined herein, based upon a written and sworn affidavit of a resident who has personal knowledge of the public nuisance animal, the city shall notify the owner of the animal that the owner has forty-eight (48) hours in which to abate the nuisance. Should the owner fail to abate the nuisance within forty-eight (48) hours, or should subsequent affidavits for the same nuisance be filed within thirty (30) days after the giving of the original notice to abate. Animal services shall have the authority to forward the complaint and/or affidavits to the municipal court. 
C.  If any animal is shown to be a public nuisance as defined herein, and an animal services' officer observes the nuisance behavior, an animal control officer may issue a citation or file with the municipal court a charge of maintaining a nuisance or impound the animal as authorized in this chapter. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 2, art. 1, §§ 3(b), 4(b) [Ord. No. 81-47, §§ 3,4, 9-22-81]; Ord. No. 92-60, § I(A), 8-25-92; Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 04-97, § I, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 06-121, § I, 11-14-06; Ord. No. 07-027, § I, 3-13-07; Ord. No. 11-022, § I, 3-22-11; Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Sec. 6-36. - Restraint. 
A.  All animals, including but not limited to, dogs, cats, horses, fowls, sheep, goats, cattle and hogs, shall be kept under restraint. For the purposes of this chapter, restraint shall mean that the animal is: 
1.  Confined to the premises of the owner within a house, building, cage or other enclosure. If the premises are enclosed with a fence, then the animal should not be able to reach any part of its body over, under or through the fence. If the animal is confined outside in a crate or cage, the enclosure should be ventilated, large enough for the animal to stand up freely with extended tail and raise its head comfortably, be at least 100 square feet per dog that is six months or older, and contain food and water containers that are securely positioned to avoid spillage or soiling with fecal matter; 
2.  Restrained by a tether, where: 
a.  A person responsible for the animal is outside with the animal and is in visual contact of the animal at all times; and 
b.  The tether is at least 10 feet long, swivels at each end, is attached to a pulley or trolley mounted cable that is mounted no more than seven feet above ground level, is attached to a properly fitted collar or harness worn by the animal, does not unreasonably hinder the animal's movement, and does not become entangled around trees, poles, or other obstacles; 
c.  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this subsection that the animal is tethered temporarily for purposes of exercise. 
3.  During travel, confined within an automobile or restrained by a leash of a length to preclude the animal from getting out of the vehicle. No animal will be unrestrained in the back of an open pickup or truck bed. In addition, the owner/caretaker must be present or within the immediate vicinity of the animal to insure that the animal is not left unattended for an extended period of time and to prevent undue suffering and/or possible death during the hot and cold periods of the year; or 
4.  Held or controlled by some person by means of a rope, leash or chain. 
B.  Upon conviction of any subsequent offense under this subsection, the minimum fine assessed shall be $200.00. Upon conviction of a third or subsequent offense under this subsection, the minimum fine assessed shall be $500.00. 
C.  The owner/caretaker of any dog or cat in heat shall be required to confine such animal in a building or secure enclosure in a manner that such animal cannot come into contact with another animal except for planned breeding. 
D.  Animal control officers and police officers are hereby authorized to trap animals at large by means of live traps and to issue live traps to citizens for trapping animals at large. Any person tampering with a live trap or releasing an animal confined in a live trap is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
E.  It shall be unlawful for any person to in any manner tease, annoy, disturb, molest, or irritate an animal that is confined to the owner's property. 
F.  It shall be unlawful for an animal owner to have a substandard fence to enclose or contain an animal, if the substandard fence results in a subsequent violation of this section 6-36, Restraint. 
G.  Aggravated at large. If the owner of an animal is found in violation of this section, and during the course of said violation, without clear provocation, the dog attacks or bites a person or approaches a person causing them to reasonably believe the animal will attack or cause bodily injury, the penalty may be enhanced in the interest of public health and safety. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 2, art. 1, § 4(a), (b)—(g) [Ord. No. 81-47, § 4, 9-22-81]; Ord. No. 97-3, § I, 1-14-97; Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 04-97, § I, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 06-121, § I, 11-14-06; Ord. No. 07-027, § I, 3-13-07; Ord. No. 09-032, § I, 5-26-09; Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14) 
State Law reference— Certain dogs prohibited from running at large, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.011; municipal authority to restrain dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.033.  
Sec. 6-37. - Destruction. 
A.  When any dog, cat or other animal displays fierce, dangerous or vicious propensities or has bitten, scratched or otherwise attacked any person and such dog or other animal is at large and is unable to be caught and impounded, such dog or other animal may be destroyed by an animal control officer or any police officer without notice to the owner. 
B.  Any dog or other animal which is found to be injured to the extent that it is past recovery, in the opinion of an animal control officer or police officer, may be destroyed by such official if the owner thereof is unable to be determined, or if the owner cannot be located after reasonable inquiry in the neighborhood where the dog or other animal was located. 
C.  Any dog or other animal which, in the medical opinion of a licensed veterinarian, should be euthanized for humane reasons may be destroyed by the animal services unit. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 2, art. 1, § 7 [Ord. No. 81-47, § 7, 9-22-81]; Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 04-97, § I, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 08-038, § I, 5-27-08; Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Sec. 6-38. - Cruelty to animals. 
A.  No person shall cause, instigate or permit any combat between animals and humans. 
B.  No person shall crop a dog's ears, or dock an animal's tail, except a licensed veterinarian. All cosmetic surgery on an animal shall be done by a licensed veterinarian. 
C.  Chickens or ducklings younger than eight (8) weeks of age may be sold within the city; provided however, that no chickens or ducklings younger than eight (8) weeks of age may be sold if the natural coloring has been altered. 
D.  No person shall give away any live animal, fish, reptile or bird as a prize for, or as an inducement to enter, any contest, game or other competition, or as an inducement to enter a place of amusement; or offer such animal, fish, reptile or bird as an incentive to enter into any business agreement whereby the offer was for the purpose of attracting trade. 
E.  Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic animal shall immediately report such injury or death to the police or animal services unit. 
F.  No person shall expose, leave, or spread any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that the poisonous substance may be ingested or absorbed by an animal. However, it shall be lawful for a person to expose on his own property common rat poison mixed only with vegetable substances. This subsection does not prohibit the city from participating in a city or county-wide animal eradication program. 
G.  No owner shall fail to provide his animal with sufficient nutritious and wholesome food, served to the animal in clean containers, and such wholesome and nutritious food shall be available to the animal daily in order to maintain the animal in good health. 
H.  No owner shall fail to provide his animal with clean and wholesome water served to the animal in a clean container, such water to be available to the animal at all times in order to maintain the animal in good health. 
I.  No owner shall fail to provide his animal with veterinary care as may be necessary for diseased or injured animals. 
J.  No owner of an animal (other than livestock) shall fail to provide his animal, whether indoors or outdoors, with proper and adequate shelter. Adequate shelter shall conform to the following: 
1.  All animals kept outdoors shall have access to shelter that provides protection from the weather; i.e., sun, wind, precipitation, or other inclement weather conditions. 
2.  The shelter for an animal shall have a roof, enclosed sides, a doorway, and a solid, level floor except that plastic and metal barrels are allowed for shelter. The entrance to the shelter shall allow the animal's entry and exit. The structure shall be structurally sound and in good repair. 
3.  If there are no artificial heat sources, the structure shall be small enough to allow the animal to warm the interior of the structure and maintain his or her body heat, but large enough to permit standing and normal postural adjustments. 
K.  No person having charge or custody of an animal shall place or confine an animal in a motor vehicle or trailer under such conditions for such a period of time as may endanger the health, safety or well-being of such animal including, but not limited to, heat, cold, lack of food and/or water, or other circumstances that may cause heat distress, heat exhaustion, heat stroke, disability, or possible death. 
1.  Any police officer or animal control officer finding an animal in violation of this section may obtain a locksmith or break and enter the vehicle or trailer if necessary to remove the animal, said animal shall be transported to the animal shelter and held for a period of not less than 10 days unless sooner reclaimed by the owner. The officer shall upon removal of the animal, leave a written notice attached to the vehicle or trailer with date, time, impounding officers' name, and the address and telephone number of the animal shelter where said animal is located. 
2.  An owner may claim his or her animal upon full payment of all charges and fees for the removal, maintenance, veterinary treatment and impoundment. 
L.  No person shall beat, hit, strike, or punch an animal nor shall a person bully, harass, intimidate, or mentally abuse any animal. 
M.  No person shall place a chain around the neck or attach a chain to any collar of an animal that would hamper or hinder the animal's movement. 
N.  No person shall tie, chain, tether or stake a dog under such conditions, or for such period of time, as may endanger the health, safety or well-being of such animal, including, but not limited to, heat, cold, lack of food and/or water, or susceptibility to attack or harassment, or other circumstances that may cause distress, disability, or possible injury and/or death. 
O.  If a person has a final conviction for cruelty to animals, he cannot own, possess, harbor, keep, or have custody of any animal within the corporate limits of the city. Said person is further prohibited from allowing, causing or permitting any animal to be harbored or kept on his property within the corporate limits of the city. If any animal is found on the premises of an individual that has been convicted of cruelty to animals, an animal services' officer shall remove said animal and take it to the city's animal shelter to be held for a period of ten (10) days. If the animal is not reclaimed by its owner, who has not been convicted of cruelty to animals or who does not reside in the same household as the person convicted of cruelty to animals, within ten (10) days, the animal shall become the property of the city and shall be placed for adoption in a suitable home or humanely euthanized. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 2, art. 1, § 8 [Ord. No. 81-47, § 8, 9-22-81; Ord. No. 86-84, § 2, 11-25-86]; Ord. No. 92-60, § I(B), 8-25-92; Ord. No. 94-61, § I, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 97-3, § II, 1-14-97; Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 03-48, § I, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 04-97, § I, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Sec. 6-39. - Traps prohibited. 
No person shall use, or place in use any steel, spring setting, mechanical jaw, leg hold trap or bar device trap designed for the capture of animals. It is an exception to this section for governmental agencies and entities to use such traps and equipment as necessary and as permitted by state law or regulation and with permission and approval by the City of Killeen. 
(Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02)  
Sec. 6-40. - Pen regulations. 
Small animals such as rabbits, guinea pigs, white rats, white mice and hamsters shall be located at the minimum distance of fifty (50) feet from every building or structure used for sleeping, dining, or living, except the home of the animal's owner. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 2, art. 1, § 4(f) [Ord. No. 81-47, § 4, 9-22-81]; Ord. No. 94-61, § I, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 03-48, § I, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 04-97, § I, 12-14-04)  
Sec. 6-41. - Prohibited wild animals. 
A.  It shall be unlawful to keep, maintain, harbor or possess any of the following animals, fowl or reptiles within the corporate limits of the city: 
1.  Class Reptillia. Family Heldermatidea (venomous lizards such as, but not limited to, gila monster and Mexican beaded lizard); family Viperidae (rattlesnakes, copperheads, cottonmouths, adders, bushmasters, other pit vipers and true vipers); family Elapidae (coral snakes, cobras, asps, mambas, and other elapids); the following listed species of family Colubridae Dispholidus typus (boomslang), Hydrodynastes gigas (water cobra), Bioga (mangrove snake), and Thelotornis (African twig snake) only; Order Phidia, family Boidae (racers and water snakes); and Order Crocadilla (crocodiles, alligators, caimans, and gavials). 
2.  Class Mammalia. Order Carnivora, family Felidae (such as ocelots, margays, tigers, jaguars, leopards and cougars), except commonly accepted domesticated cats; family Canidae (such as wolves, wolf-dog, hybrids, dingos, coyotes and jackals), except domesticated dogs; family Mustelidae (such as weasels, skunks, martins, mink and badgers) except domestic ferrets (Mustela putorius furo); family Procyonidae (raccoon); family Ursidae (such as bears); order Marsupialia (such as kangaroos, wallabies and common opossums); order Edentata (such as sloths, anteaters and armadillos); order Proboscidea (elephants); order Primata (such as monkeys, chimpanzees and gorillas); order Rodentia (such as porcupines); and order Ungulata (such as antelope, deer, bison and camels), unless the order Ungalata are located on properly zoned property. 
3.  Class Arachnida. Order Scorpiones (scorpions); order Araneae, genus, Loxosceles (recluse spiders such as brown recluse spider); order Araneae, genus, Latrodectus (such as black widow, red widow and brown or gray widow spiders). 
4.  Bats. 
5.  Skunks. 
6.  Animals not listed. The animal services' supervisor may declare any species of animal not listed in this subsection as "prohibited" if the confinement of the animal within the city can be shown to constitute a threat to public health and safety; and does not mean any bird kept in a cage or aviary that is not regulated by international, federal or state law, or a gerbil, hamster, guinea pig, hedgehog or laboratory mouse or rat. 
B.  No person shall own, keep, harbor or permit to be kept any prohibited wild animal as a pet. 
C.  No person shall keep or permit to be kept on his premises or premises under his control, any prohibited wild animal for sale, display or for exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee. 
D.  No person shall sell, give, transfer or import into the city any prohibited wild animal except for the transportation of a prohibited wild animal to and from a veterinary clinic. 
E.  It shall be unlawful for any person to breed, raise, keep or have in his possession any poisonous reptile within the corporate city limits, except a poisonous reptile kept by an educational or a scientific institution. These institutions shall be subject to initial approval and periodic inspections by an animal services' supervisor or his designee. 
F.  An animal services' supervisor may issue temporary approval for keeping, care and protection of an injured, newborn or immature animal native to this area that he deems to be incapable of caring for itself. Further, the animal services' supervisor shall have the power to release or order released any animal being kept temporarily under the provisions of the previous sentence. 
G.  This section shall not apply to the city, veterinary clinics, licensed wildlife rehabilitators, approved zoological parks, nonprofit animal humane society, performing animal exhibitions, circuses, primary and secondary schools, colleges and universities, or zoological parks owned and operated by a governmental entity. 
(Ord. No. 04-97, § I, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Sec. 6-42. - Livestock, fowl and swine prohibited within city limits. 
A.  No person shall possess, keep or permit to be kept, or have care, custody or control of any livestock, swine or fowl within the city except as provided herein, or by the city's zoning ordinances. 
B.  Subsection A. above shall not apply to the Killeen Independent School District, the City of Killeen, or any nonprofit animal shelter. 
(Ord. No. 04-97, § I, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Sec. 6-43. - Exemption for land zoned AG or AR-1. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter, section 6-42 shall not be applicable to any land zoned and used as AG (agricultural open space) or AR-1 (agricultural residential-1) designated according to the zoning ordinance of the city. 
B.  No owner of any exempted property under this section shall fail to exercise proper care and control of his livestock, fowl, swine, or any other animal to prevent them from becoming a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 04-97, § I, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Sec. 6-44. - Livestock, fowl or swine running at-large prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow any fowl, swine or livestock owned or possessed by him or under his control, custody, or care to run at-large or to wander in or upon or invade the premises of any other person without such person's consent, within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-97, § I, 12-14-04)  
Sec. 6-45. - Prohibition of animals at sporting, recreational and public events. 
A.  No person shall bring, take, carry or transport any animal to any public event, any sporting field such as, but not limited to, baseball, softball or soccer field, recreational centers, city-sponsored outdoor concerts, or any organized sporting or recreational event that is held on a playing field. It is not a defense that the animal was restrained by a leash, chain, rope, cage, voice command, or any other means. 
B.  Subsection A. above shall not apply to dogs or any other animals that are used as assistance animals, or that are participating in a public event such as a parade, pet show, etc. 
C.  Animals are allowed in city parks that do not have a field used for organized sporting or recreational events, and in parks used for organized sporting and recreational events if no such event is currently underway, if the animal is under the complete control of the owner or caretaker by means of a leash, cord, chain, or any other means excluding voice control. 
(Ord. No. 04-97, § I, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Sec. 6-46. - Keeping animals, livestock, swine or fowl near creeks and streams prohibited. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any animal, livestock, swine or fowl in a pen, cage, or enclosure in, near, or on a creek or stream within the City of Killeen and cause or contribute to the pollution of said creek or stream by permitting drainage from said pens, cages or enclosures, fecal matter or urine to enter said creek or stream. 
B.  No swine shall be permitted or allowed to have access to, enter, or go in a water creek or stream within the City of Killeen. 
(Ord. No. 04-97, § I, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Sec. 6-47. - Performing animal exhibitions. 
A.  All performing animal exhibitions, circuses, or petting zoos that require federal or state license shall provide a copy of said license and USDA Class C exhibitor's permit number at the time the application for a city permit is submitted. 
B.  No performing animal exhibition or circus shall be permitted in which animals are induced or encouraged to perform through the use of chemical, mechanical, electrical or manual devices in a manner which will cause, or is likely to cause, physical injury or suffering. 
C.  All equipment used on a performing animal shall fit properly and be in good working condition. 
D.  All performing animal exhibitions, such as, but not limited to, circuses, carnivals, and rodeos, may be inspected by an animal services' officer to ensure that the animals are being provided adequate food, water, shelter, humane care and treatment. 
E.  All petting zoos and any other animal exhibitions that permit contact between any animal and a person shall provide adequate means for hand sterilization following contact with an animal without a fee or charge. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 2, art. 1, § 10 [Ord. No. 81-47, § 10, 9-22-81]; Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 04-97, § I, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14) 
State Law reference— Circuses, carnivals and zoos, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 824.001 et seq.  
Sec. 6-48. - Animal waste. 
A.  The owner of every animal shall be responsible for the removal of any excreta deposited by his animal on public property or recreation areas or private property. 
B.  Animal owners shall remove all animal excreta from their premises as necessary to prevent odor, unsanitary conditions, or the breeding of flies or other insects. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 2, art. 1, § 12 [Ord. No. 81-47, § 12, 9-22-81]; Ord. No. 97-3, § III, 1-14-97; Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 04-15, § I, 3-16-04; Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Sec. 6-49. - Signs on premises. 
All dog owners with a dog(s) unattended in their backyard shall place a sign on their fence at each gate or entrance warning that there is a dog on the property. Such sign must be placed in accordance with the city's sign ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 04-97, § I, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 06-121, § I, 11-14-06)  
Secs. 6-50—6-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - IMPOUNDMENT, REDEMPTION, ETC. 
 
Sec. 6-61. - Impoundment authorized. 
A.  Unrestrained animals except any feral cats with an ear tip amputation performed by a veterinarian, farm animals or livestock shall be taken by any police officer or animal control officers, to the city animal shelter and there confined in a humane manner. Animal services shall return a cat that has an ear tip amputation which appears to have been performed by a veterinarian to the colony unless veterinary care is required or the criteria in subsection 6-129 F. apply. 
B.  Any person other than a police officer or an animal control officer, who impounds any animal under the provisions of this chapter, shall immediately give notice to the animal shelter of said impoundment. Any resident who delivers said animal to the animal shelter will not be charged a fee. 
C.  Any animal that is impounded by a court order, property manager/owner release or as a result of a law enforcement action shall be held a minimum of ten (10) working days unless sooner claimed by the owner/family member or their designee. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 2, art. 1, § 5(a) [Ord. No. 81-47, § 5, 9-22-81; Ord. No. 86-75, § 2, 9-23-86]; Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 04-97, § I, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 09-077, § I, 11-24-09; Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Sec. 6-62. - Retention period. 
Unless stated otherwise, animals impounded under this division shall be kept for not less than three (3) working days, unless sooner claimed by the owner. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 2, art. 1, § 5(c) [Ord. No. 81-47, § 5, 9-22-81; Ord. No. 86-75, § 2, 9-23-86] Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02)  
Sec. 6-63. - Notice to owner. 
If, by a license tag or other means, the owner of an impounded animal can be identified, the animal services unit shall, immediately upon impoundment, notify the owner by telephone, in person or by leaving a written notice on the door of the owner's residence. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 2, art. 1, § 5(c) [Ord. No. 81-47, § 5, 9-22-81; Ord. No. 86-75, § 2, 9-23-86]; Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Sec. 6-64. - Redemption of impounded animal. 
A.  An owner reclaiming an impounded animal or reptile such as, but not limited to, a cat, dog, lizard, snake, or bird shall pay a fee in accordance with the city's fee schedule. 
B.  All dogs or cats that are processed through or held in the animal shelter shall be mircochipped before being released to an owner/possessor claiming the animal. The cost of the microchip will be added to the impoundment fees. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 2, art. 1, § 5(d)—(f) [Ord. No. 81-47, § 5, 9-22-81; Ord. No. 86-75, § 2, 9-23-86]; Ord. No. 92-60, § I(D), 8-25-92; Ord. No. 94-61, § I, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 00-65, § II, 8-29-00; Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 04-97, § I, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 06-121, § I, 11-14-06; Ord. No. 09-020, § I, 3-10-09; Ord. No. 09-077, § I, 11-24-09; Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Sec. 6-65. - Exception. 
The above sections do not apply to unrestrained farm animals or livestock as the impoundment of these animals are within the jurisdiction of the Bell County Sheriff's Department pursuant to state law. 
(Ord. No. 04-97, § I, 12-14-04)  
Sec. 6-66. - Adoption fees. 
A.  The city shall charge an adoption fee and said adoption fee shall be paid by the person adopting an animal from the city's animal shelter at the time the animal is adopted. 
B.  The new owner shall obtain a rabies vaccination for the animal and deliver proof of such vaccination to the animal services unit within thirty (30) days of adoption or prior to the animal reaching the age of four (4) months, whichever is later. 
C.  Sterilization and microchipping/tattooing of animals adopted from the animal shelter shall be the responsibility of the new owner and performed by a veterinarian within the required time specified in the adoption sterilization agreement as required by state law. 
1.  The new owner shall have sterilization completed as follows: 
a.  By the 30th day after adoption of an adult animal; or 
b.  By the 30th day after an adopted infant animal becomes four (4) months old. 
2.  The new owner shall deliver a letter to animal services within seven (7) days from the date that: 
a.  The animal has been sterilized and microchipped/tattooed as required by state law. This letter must be signed by the veterinarian performing the surgery; or 
b.  The animal has died stating the cause of death, if known; or 
c.  The animal was stolen or lost and the circumstances surrounding the disappearance. 
D.  If before the agreement is completed, new owner wishes to transfer ownership to another person, both parties must meet at the animal shelter to complete an agreement transfer. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 2, art. 1, § 5(k), (l) [Ord. No. 81-47, § 5, 9-22-81; Ord. No. 86-75, § 2, 9-23-86]; Ord. No. 91-73, § I, 12-17-91; Ord. No. 94-61, § I, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 00-65, § III, 8-29-00; Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 06-121, § I, 11-14-06; Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Sec. 6-67. - Surrender fee. 
A.  If the owner of an animal surrenders the animal to the city because the animal is sick, injured or unwanted, a fee shall be charged to the owner in accordance with the city's fee schedule. 
B.  Only animals owned by residents of the City of Killeen, residents of Bell County who do not reside in a municipality, or residents of Bell County who reside in a municipality that does not have an animal shelter, shall be accepted for surrender by the animal shelter. Proof of residency is required, and the residency requirement shall be established by the owner presenting a current utility bill to the animal shelter at the time the animal is surrendered. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 2, art. 1, § 5(m) [Ord. No. 81-47, § 5, 9-22-81; Ord. No. 86-75, § 2, 9-23-86]; Ord. No. 94-61, § I, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Sec. 6-68. - Disposition of unredeemed animals. 
Any animal impounded under this division not reclaimed by its owner within three (3) business days shall become the property of the city and shall be placed for adoption in a suitable home or humanely euthanized. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 2, art. 1, § 5(g) [Ord. No. 81-47, § 5, 9-22-81; Ord. No. 86-75, § 2, 9-23-86]; Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Sec. 6-69. - Notice of violation. 
In addition to, or in lieu of, impounding an animal found at large, the animal control officer or police officer may issue to the owner/caretaker of such animal a citation for said violation. Failure to appear at the municipal court to enter a plea to such charge within ten (10) days following the issuance of such notice shall result in the issuance of a warrant for the violator's arrest. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 2, art. 1, § 5(h) [Ord. No. 81-47, § 5, 9-22-81; Ord. No. 86-75, § 2, 9-23-86]; Ord. No. 94-61, § I, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02)  
Sec. 6-70. - Suit authorized. 
The owner of an animal impounded under this division may be proceeded against for any violation of this article. Such suit may be criminal, civil or equitable in nature. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 2, art. 1, § 5(i) [Ord. No. 81-47, § 5, 9-22-81; Ord. No. 86-75, § 2, 9-23-86]; Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02)  
Sec. 6-71. - Microchip requirement. 
A.  All dogs and cats kept within the corporate city limits must be microchipped. 
B.  The microchip link information must be kept current to ensure the animal owner can be contacted in the event of an emergency. 
C.  All dogs or cats that are processed through or held in the animal shelter shall be mircochipped prior to being released to an adopted owner or released to a prior owner. Microchips will be inserted between the shoulder blades. The cost of the microchip will be added to the impoundment fees. 
D.  The microchip fee is not refundable and may be used only for the dog or cat for which it was issued. 
E.  Subsections A and B does not apply to feral cats that have been properly marked in accordance with division 5, feral cat program of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14) 
Note— Section V of Ord. No. 14-083 states the effective date for § 6-71 is March 15, 2015.  
Sec. 6-72. - Spayed or neutered requirement. 
A.  All dogs and cats kept in the city limits must be spayed/neutered. The owner of such animals must retain documentation of the spay/neuter of their animals. 
B.  All dogs or cats impounded within the corporate city limits are required to be spayed/neutered. New adoption owners must agree to enter a contract to have the spay/neuter procedure performed at their cost within designated period as defined by V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 828. 
C.  The following animals are exempt from compliance with subsection A: 
1.  Animals under four (4) months of age; 
2.  Animals where a licensed veterinarian certifies that the dog or cat should not be spayed/neutered for health reasons or is permanently non-fertile; 
3.  Trained animals used by or under the authority of a governmental agency for police or rescue work; 
4.  Animals transferred to another animal shelter or rescue group that provide an application to the city agreeing to follow all state and local laws; or 
5.  Animals, picked up for the first time belonging to a resident that has a valid competition or breeding exemption and has: 
a.  The animal's microchip number; 
b.  A copy of the animal's up-to-date health statement; 
c.  Paid the fees associated with the impoundment of the animal; and 
d.  Appropriate documents to establish exemption or signed affidavit attesting to participation in competition; 
e.  If an animal is impounded for an at-large violation a second time, the owner must agree to remove the animal from the city or enter into a contract to have the spay/neuter procedure performed at their cost within designated period not to exceed 30 days or face a penalty and potential seizure of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14) 
Note— Section V of Ord. No. 14-083 states the effective date for § 6-72 is March 15, 2015.  
Secs. 6-73—6-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RABIES CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Rabies control, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code §§ 826.001 et seq., 826.041 et seq. 
 
Sec. 6-81. - Rabies vaccinations requirement. 
A.  All dogs, cats and ferrets shall be vaccinated by the age of four (4) months and at regular intervals as prescribed by a veterinarian certified to practice in the State of Texas. It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain a dog, cat or ferret over the age of four months that does not have a current rabies vaccination. 
B.  A veterinarian who vaccinates a dog, cat or ferret against rabies shall issue the current owner a vaccination certificate and a metal tag. The tag shall be attached to the animal's collar and shall be worn by the animal when outdoors and not in the presence of the owner or caretaker. 
C.  Vaccination certificates shall be in the current owner's name. Should a person acquire a currently vaccinated animal the new owner shall have a period of ten (10) days to transfer the rabies certificate into their name. 
(Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 11-062, § I, 7-12-11; Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Sec. 6-82. - Reports of possible exposure to rabies. 
A.  Any person having knowledge of an animal bite or scratch to a human or another animal shall report the incident to the animal services unit as soon as possible, but no later than twenty-four (24) hours from the time of the incident. 
B.  The animal services unit shall investigate each bite or scratch incident. 
(Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 04-97, § I, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Sec. 6-83. - Quarantine of biting animals. 
A.  Should any dog, cat or ferret bite or scratch any person, such animal shall be quarantined for an observation period of not less than two hundred forty (240) hours. Any animal under this division not current on rabies vaccinations shall not be vaccinated against rabies during the observation period, however the animal shall be required to be vaccinated and registered at the end of the quarantine period, and before released from quarantine. The two hundred forty (240) hours observation period will begin on the day of the incident. 
1.  When the owner of such animal has been identified; the owner or caretaker shall confine said animal in a building or other secure enclosure to prevent the escape or injury to said animal and to prevent contact with other persons or animals. Failure of the owner or caretaker of said animal to act herein described shall constitute an offense, and each hour of failure to comply with these provisions after receipt of knowledge of the incident shall constitute a separate offense. 
2.  When the owner of such animal is unidentified, said animal shall be considered a stray and placed in quarantine at the city animal shelter. 
a.  If said animal remains unclaimed after seventy-two (72) hours, said animal may be euthanized by the local rabies control authority and the specimen shall be submitted to the Texas Department of Health for rabies testing or shall remain in quarantine for the remainder of the quarantine period. 
b.  Should a person appear to claim such animal within seventy-two (72) hours that person shall be considered the owner and shall be required to comply with all requirements of this division. 
B.  If the biting or scratching animal is a high-risk animal, it shall be euthanized by the local rabies control authority or a licensed veterinarian and the specimen shall be submitted to the Texas Department of Health for rabies testing. 
C.  If the biting or scratching animal is a low-risk animal, neither quarantine nor rabies test will be required unless the local rabies control authority has cause to believe that the biting animal is rabid, in which case the animal shall be euthanatized and the specimen submitted to the Texas Department of Health for rabies testing. 
D.  The local rabies control authority may require an animal which has inflicted multiple bite wounds, punctures, or lacerations to the face, head, or neck of a person to be euthanatized and the specimen submitted to the Texas Department of Health for rabies testing. 
E.  If the biting or scratching animal is not included in subsections A., B., C. or D. of this section, the animal shall be euthanatized and the specimen submitted to the Texas Department of Health for rabies testing or the local rabies control authority may require the animal to be confined for a thirty-day observation period as an alternate method. 
(Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 04-97, § I, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 08-038, § I, 5-27-08; Ord. No. 11-022, § I, 3-22-11; Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Sec. 6-84. - Time limit for quarantine compliance. 
Quarantine arrangements for a dog, cat, ferret or animal required by this division shall be made by the owner or caretaker of such animal within twenty-four (24) hours of the bite or scratch. Failure to make quarantine arrangements and so advise the animal services unit may result in the animal services unit making application to a judge of the municipal court of the city for a warrant to seize the animal. The animal shall be quarantined at the city animal shelter and the owner will be responsible for all fees incurred. 
(Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Sec. 6-85. - Method of quarantine. 
Quarantine of a dog, cat, ferret or animal under this division shall be accomplished by one (1) of the following methods as allowed by the local rabies control authority: 
A.  City animal shelter: 
1.  A current kennel cough vaccine is required. 
2.  A fee shall be charged to, and be payable by, the owner of such animal for each day or part of a day an animal is quarantined at the city animal shelter. Such fee is to be paid prior to the release of the animal from quarantine. 
B.  The animal may be quarantined at a commercial boarding kennel, animal hospital or clinic of any licensed veterinarian. All fees are the responsibility of the animal owner. 
C.  The animal owner may request the animal be euthanatized by a licensed veterinarian and the specimen submitted to the Texas Department of Health for rabies testing. All fees are the responsibility of the animal owner. 
D.  The owner may request permission from the local rabies control authority for home quarantine if the following criteria can be met: 
1.  The animal is currently vaccinated against rabies. Exception: animals that are 3 months of age and younger are not required to have a current rabies vaccination. 
2.  The animal was not at large at the time of the bite or scratch. 
3.  Secure facilities must be available at the home of the animal's owner, and must be approved by the local rabies control authority. 
4.  Home quarantine is defined as: 
a.  The animal must be kept in a secure building. 
b.  The animal cannot be allowed to come into contact with people or other animals outside the immediate household. 
c.  The animal is allowed to be taken outside by the owner, on a leash, in order to urinate and/or defecate, then immediately placed back inside the secure building. 
d.  The animal and quarantine location must be made available to the animal services unit for periodic inspections. 
e.  The owner shall observe the animal for any signs of illness and report such changes to the animal services unit immediately. 
f.  The animal shall not be moved from the known quarantine location without prior permission and approval of the local rabies control authority. 
E.  Such animal may be quarantined at other locations upon the approval of the local rabies control authority. 
F.  Any animal required to be quarantined under this division which cannot be maintained in a secure quarantine, shall be euthanized and the specimen submitted to the Texas Department of Health for rabies testing. 
G.  Regardless of the place of quarantine, a licensed veterinarian or the local rabies control authority shall examine the animal on the first day of the two hundred forty-hour quarantine period. 
H.  Regardless of the place of quarantine, a licensed veterinarian or the local rabies control authority shall examine the animal on the last day of the two hundred forty-hour quarantine period. 
(Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 03-48, § I, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 04-97, § I, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Sec. 6-86. - Attacks on public employees. 
Should any dog or other animal kept, maintained or harbored within the city attack, bite, scratch, injure or cause an injury to an employee of the city, county, state, federal government, a public utility, or cable television company, while in the performance of the employee's official duties, the owner or custodian of such dog or other animal may be cited for keeping, maintaining or harboring a nuisance. Upon conviction of the offense, the person convicted shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. Any subsequent conviction for an attack by the same animal shall be grounds for the court ordering that such animal shall be delivered to the animal services unit and euthanized. 
(Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 04-97, § I, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Sec. 6-87. - Biting and bitten animals. 
Should an animal be bitten or directly exposed by physical contact with a rabid animal or its fresh tissues it shall be handled by one (1) of the following methods: 
A.  If not currently vaccinated the exposed animal shall be immediately vaccinated against rabies, placed in strict isolation for ninety (90) days, and given booster vaccinations during the third and eighth weeks of isolation. For young animals, additional vaccinations may be necessary to ensure that the animal receives at least two (2) vaccinations at or after the age prescribed by the United States Department of Agriculture for the vaccine administered. All fees incurred are the responsibility of the animal owner. 
B.  If currently vaccinated, the exposed animal shall be given a booster rabies vaccination immediately and placed in strict isolation for forty-five (45) days. All fees incurred are the responsibility of the animal owner. 
C.  Euthanasia. All fees incurred are the responsibility of the animal owner. 
The above provisions apply only to domestic animals for which and approved rabies vaccine is available. 
(Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 04-97, § I, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 08-038, § I, 5-27-08; Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Sec. 6-88. - Destruction. 
Any animal suspected of being infected with rabies shall be euthanized immediately upon the recommendation by a licensed veterinarian and the specimen submitted to the Texas Department of Health. 
(Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02)  
Sec. 6-89. - Declaration of nuisance. 
Any dog or other animal kept, maintained or harbored within the city which has bitten, scratched or otherwise attacked any person is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 2, art. 1, § 6(l) [Ord. No. 81-47, § 7, 9-22-81]; Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02)  
Sec. 6-90. - Court proceeding against nuisance. 
A.  Upon written complaint wherein any dog or other animal is alleged to be a nuisance as defined in this article, the municipal court shall have the authority to order and hold a hearing upon giving notice to the owner of such dog or other animal. If the court determines at such hearing that such dog or other animal has bitten, scratched or attacked any person, the court may order that: 
1.  Such dog or other animal be kept muzzled; 
2.  Same be kept within a sufficient enclosure; 
3.  Same be delivered to the animal services unit and by it destroyed; 
4.  A fine as established in section 1-8 be assessed against the owner; or 
5.  Any of the foregoing. 
B.  A copy of such order for hearing detailing the time, date, place and purpose therefore, personally delivered or enclosed in a correctly addressed envelope to such owner, postage prepaid, and deposited in the United States mail not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of such hearing shall be deemed sufficient and proper notice. Provided, however, if it appears upon trial thereof that any person attacked, scratched or bitten was trespassing upon the property of the owner or person having control of such animal, or if any person attacked, scratched or bitten was provoking or teasing such dog or other animal, such conduct shall be a complete defense to any complaint brought hereunder. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 2, art. 1, § 6(m) [Ord. No. 81-47, § 7, 9-22-81] Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 04-97, § I, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Secs. 6-91—6-118. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - DANGEROUS AND AGGRESSIVE DOGS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-083, § 1, adopted Nov. 25, 2014, amended Div. 4 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 4, §§ 6-121—6-128 was entitled "Dangerous Animals", and derived from: Code 1963; Ord. No. 90-80, adopted Aug. 28, 1990; Ord. Nos. 90-84, and 90-94 adopted Sept. 25, 1980; Ord. No. 90-106, adopted Aug. 28, 1990; Ord. No. 02-22, adopted May 28, 2002; Ord. No. 04-97, adopted Dec. 14, 2004; Ord. No. 06-121, adopted Nov. 14, 2006; and Ord. No. 09-008, adopted Feb. 10, 2009. 
State Law reference— Keeping a vicious dog, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.12. 
 
Sec. 6-119. - Dangerous dogs. 
No dog deemed dangerous will be allowed within the corporate city limits of Killeen. 
(Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Sec. 6-120. - Determination of a dangerous dog. 
A.  If a person believes a dog to be dangerous, the person may make a complaint by filing a sworn affidavit with animal services detailing the alleged incident, to include: 
1.  Name, address and telephone number of complainant and other known witnesses; 
2.  Date, time and location of any incident involving the dog; 
3.  Description of the dog; 
4.  Name and address of the animal's owner/possessor, if known; 
5.  Statement describing the facts upon which the complaint is based; and 
6.  Statement describing any incidents where the animal has exhibited dangerous propensities in past conduct, if known. 
B.  After a sworn statement is filed or upon personal observation by an animal services' officer, an animal services' officer shall enter into a fact finding investigation to determine whether sufficient facts are present to support review for a dangerous dog. If sufficient facts appear to be present, the animal services' officer will: 
1.  Prepare an affidavit for the court's review to consider the dog as dangerous; 
2.  The affidavit will be presented to the court. If there appears to be probable cause sufficient to support a finding of dangerous dog: 
a.  The owner may consent to relinquish ownership to the animal services unit; 
b.  The owner may consent for the animal services unit to hold the dog pending a hearing; or 
c.  The court shall issue an immediate search and seizure warrant for the animal and begin the dangerous dog review process. 
3.  The court shall set a time for a hearing to determine whether the dog is dangerous. The hearing must be held no later than ten (10) business days after the date on which the warrant was issued; 
4.  Once the dog has been seized, the animal will be held until the scheduled hearing. The owner/possessor may: 
a.  Challenge the dangerous dog finding by appearing at the hearing with additional facts; 
b.  Surrender the dog to animal services; or 
c.  Notify the court and arrange to remove the dog from the city; 
d.  If no action is taken on the part of the owner, after the hearing date has passed the dog will be classified as abandoned and considered the property of the City of Killeen. 
(Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Sec. 6-121. - Prohibition. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or harbor a dangerous dog within the corporate city limits. 
B.  For purposes of this chapter, a person learns that the person is the owner/possessor of a dangerous dog when: 
1.  The owner/possessor knows of an attack or bite committed by the dog as described in the definition of dangerous dog; or 
2.  The owner/possessor receives notice that a court has found that the animal is a dangerous dog. 
(Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Sec. 6-122. - Aggressive dogs. 
A.  If an animal services' officer or an individual believes that an dog has exhibited behavior indicating that it represents a potential danger, the animal services' officer may initiate an investigation into whether or not the dog is aggressive. During the course of the investigation if it is deemed that the animal may pose a potential threat to the public the animal services' officer may prepare an affidavit for an order of immediate seizure to seize the animal and confine the animal in a humane manner at the animal shelter. A dog may be defined as "aggressive" if it has engaged in the conduct defined in section 6-4. 
B.  At the conclusion of the investigation, the findings will be reviewed by the animal control manager. If sufficient facts are found to demonstrate that a dog poses a threat it may be deemed aggressive. The dog owner will be served with a written notice that the animal has been deemed aggressive and will be required to comply with section 6-125 of the Killeen Code of Ordinances, "Requirement for owner/possessors of an aggressive dog". If the owner/possessor disagrees with the finding they may file an appeal as outlined in section 6-123 of Killeen Code of Ordinances. 
C.  If a dog's behavior creates a more dangerous situation after it has been deemed aggressive and the owner has complied with all remedial requirements, animal services will review the new facts and if necessary may request a hearing before the court to consider more stringent requirements based on the totality of the situation. 
(Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Sec. 6-123. - Appeal determination of aggressive dog. 
A.  If animal services determines that a dog is aggressive under this chapter, that decision is final unless the dog owner/possessor files a written appeal with the municipal court along with a copy of the notice of aggressive dog within ten (10) business days of receiving the notice that the animal has been determined to be aggressive. 
B.  Upon appeal, the owner/possessor must immediately release the dog to an animal services' officer to keep such animal at the animal shelter or provide proof of shelter at a veterinarian's clinic at the owner's/possessor's expense, until the hearing is held by the municipal court for a final disposition. The owner/possessor is liable for all fees pertaining to the dog's impoundment awaiting hearing. Each day the animal has not been surrendered to animal services shall constitute a separate offense. 
C.  The appeal standard is a substantial evidence review and is a civil proceeding for the purpose of affirming or reversing animal services determination of aggressiveness. 
(Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Sec. 6-124. - Aggressive dog determination hearing. 
A.  The court, on receiving a timely request for a hearing to appeal the determination of animal services' finding of an aggressive dog, shall set a time for a hearing to determine whether the animal is an aggressive dog. The hearing must be held no later than ten (10) business days after the date of the request. 
B.  The court shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to: 
1.  The owner/possessor of the dog or the person from whom the animal was seized; and 
2.  The person who made the complaint. 
C.  The court may receive testimony at the hearing to determine if the dog deemed to be aggressive by animal services is an aggressive dog. 
1.  If the court determines that an animal is aggressive, the court may: 
a.  Order the animal to be permanently removed from the City of Killeen within ten (10) business days and the owner/possessor must provide proof to animal services; 
b.  Order the animal be euthanized in a humane manner; or 
c.  Order the owner/possessor to register the animal as an aggressive dog and comply with the requirements for owners/possessors of aggressive dogs found in this chapter. 
2.  Upon the court's determination that an animal is not aggressive, the court shall order the return of the animal back to the owner/possessor. 
3.  To order removal, euthanasia, or registration as an aggressive dog, the court must find the following facts to be true: 
a.  The animal is an aggressive dog; and 
b.  The removal, euthanasia or registration is necessary to preserve the public health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Sec. 6-125. - Requirements for owners/possessors of aggressive dogs. 
A.  Unless the person is appealing animal services' determination that the animal is an aggressive animal, not later than ten (10) business days after a person learns that the person is the owner/possessor of an aggressive dog, the person shall: 
1.  Remove the dog from the corporate city limits of Killeen; or 
2.  Register the animal with animal services and pay applicable registration fee once a year; 
3.  Restrain the aggressive dog at all times either indoors or within a double secured enclosure outdoors, where each of the two enclosures consists of a substantial fence or enclosure measuring at least 100 square feet secured by a lock to include a secure top and concrete bottom, and of sufficient strength and height to prevent the animal from escaping or reaching any part of its body over, under, or through the fence; 
4.  Obtain liability insurance coverage or show financial responsibility in an amount of at least $100,000.00 to cover damages resulting from an attack by the aggressive dog causing bodily injury to a person and provide proof of the required liability insurance coverage or financial responsibility to the animal services; 
5.  Have the dog sterilized by a veterinarian if the animal is over four (4) months old, or sterilized by the 30th day after the animal becomes four (4) months old; 
6.  Have the dog identified by a microchip device and provide proof to animal services; 
7.  Identify the animal with an aggressive dog tag provided upon registration to be worn by the animal at all times; and 
8.  Pay any kennel fees accrued due to the seizure of the dog by the city. 
B.  It is an exception to subsection A.2. if the dog is being transported to or from a veterinary or kennel appointment and is secured by means of a leash, cord or chain to control the actions of such animal or secured within the passenger compartment of a motor vehicle. 
C.  If the dog was not seized and the owner/possessor of the aggressive dog decides not to comply with subsection A., they shall deliver the animal to animal services no later than ten (10) business days after the owner/possessor learns that the animal is an aggressive dog. 
D.  If a dog is found at-large after being deemed aggressive, the animal shall be impounded by animal services and may be humanely euthanized. 
(Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Sec. 6-126. - Public notice of aggressive dog. 
The City of Killeen Animal Services may, after notification to the owner/possessor that a dog has been determined to be aggressive, require public notice of the determination. 
A.  The notice may be required to include the animal's description, place of residence, and any other public information the city deems relevant to maintain the public health, safety and welfare. 
B.  The city may provide notice of the aggressive dog by posting notices in the area where the aggressive dog resides or posting notice on the city's website. 
(Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Sec. 6-127. - Search and seizure. 
A.  Animal control officers and Killeen Police Officers shall be authorized to obtain a search and seizure warrant if there is reason to believe that: 
1.  A dog determined to be aggressive by animal services presents a credible threat to public health, safety and welfare prior to a hearing; 
2.  An animal ordered to be removed from the city for being dangerous or aggressive has not been so removed; or 
3.  An owner/possessor has failed to comply with one or more of the requirements for owners/possessors of an aggressive dog. 
B.  An aggressive dog seized and impounded under this section shall not be returned to the owner/possessor unless: 
1.  The court orders the animal to be returned after a hearing under section 6-124; or 
2.  The owner/possessor complies with all the requirements for owners/possessors of an aggressive dog. 
C.  If all the fees have not been paid and all requirements have not been met within 72 hours of a seizure under subsection A.2. or A.3. of this section, the aggressive dog may be humanely euthanized. 
(Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Sec. 6-128. - Animal control authority's right of defense. 
Upon attack by an animal, the animal services authority, by taking such means as he deems necessary in that situation, may defend himself or any other person endangered by such attack. This grant of authority is in addition to the common-law right all persons have to reasonably defend themselves against attack by an animal. 
(Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
DIVISION 5. - FERAL CATS 
 
Sec. 6-129. - Cat colony permit. 
A.  A cat colony manager shall obtain a permit from animal services for each cat colony that the manager intends to feed or water prior to the date on which the cat colony manager commences to feed or water the colony. All cat colony managers feeding colonies prior to the effective date of this chapter shall register each colony within 10 business days from the effective date of this chapter. 
B.  To apply for a permit to feed or water a cat colony, a person must present evidence to animal services of satisfactory completion of a trap, neuter, and release educational course. 
C.  It shall be a violation of this chapter to feed a cat running at-large outside of the property owned by the person feeding the cat, without first obtaining a cat colony permit and maintaining proper management and sterilization as required by section 6-130. 
D.  A cat colony manager shall implement proper management and sterilization practices as required by animal services to maintain a valid permit. 
E.  Any cat colony manager determined to be in violation of proper management and sterilization practices required by animal services shall be issued a written warning and allowed a period of time, which shall not exceed ninety (90) days, to come into compliance. Failure to comply within the given time period is a violation of this chapter. 
F.  Animal services may immediately seize and remove all, or parts of any colony for the following reasons: 
1.  Public health or safety concerns including, but not limited to, rabies or other epizootic and certain zoonoses identified by the department of health; 
2.  Animals creating a public nuisance by interfering with passing vehicles, trespassing on schoolgrounds, or crying or whining in an excessive, continuous or untimely fashion. 
(Ord. No. 09-077, § I, 11-24-09; Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Sec. 6-130. - Proper management and sterilization. 
A.  A cat colony manager must provide animal services with a reasonable estimation of the number of cats in each cat colony on an annual basis or as required by animal services. 
B.  A cat colony manager must sterilize at least 50% of the unsterilized cats of each permitted cat colony annually and show proof to animal services of the number sterilized. 
C.  A cat colony manager must provide adequate fresh food and water to the cats in the feral cat colonies that the cat colony manager has obtained a permit for on a daily basis. 
D.  A cat colony manager must make all reasonable efforts to catch a sick or injured cat within the cat colony that the cat colony manager has obtained a permit for and take the cat to a veterinarian. 
E.  A cat colony manager shall ensure that all cats which the cat colony manager has caused to be sterilized will be vaccinated for rabies and obtain an ear tip amputation performed by a veterinarian. 
F.  A cat colony manager shall submit annual reports to animal services as to the estimated number of cats per colony that the cat colony manager has obtained a permit for, the number of cats vaccinated for rabies and sterilized, and the location of the veterinary clinic used. 
G.  A cat colony manager must obtain written permission of the landowner or the landowner's agent where the cats congregate or are fed to obtain a permit for the cat colony and provide a copy of the written permission to animal services. 
H.  A cat colony manager may apply for a waiver of any provision of this section. The ruling of animal services on the application is final and non-appealable. 
(Ord. No. 09-077, § I, 11-24-09; Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Sec. 6-131. - Revocation of permit. 
A.  A permit issued under this chapter may be revoked by the animal services' manager or authorized representative, for any violation of the provisions of this chapter by the holder thereof. 
B.  Animal services shall provide written notice of the revocation to the holder by sending the notice certified mail or by personally delivering the written notice to the holder of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 09-077, § I, 11-24-09; Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Secs. 6-132—6-135. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ANIMAL VENDORS AND OTHER COMMERCIAL ACTIVITIES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 15. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 6-136. - Premises; regulations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, trade, lease, rent or give away any live animal on any roadside, public right-of-way, commercial or private parking lot, or flea market within the city limits. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 14, § 2 [Ord. No. 69-45, § 2, 9-22-69]; Ord. No. 94-61, § I, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 04-97, § I, 12-14-04)  
Sec. 6-137. - Kennel, pet shop, riding school or stables or other commercial activities. 
No person shall engage in any commercial business concerning animals such as, but not limited to, a breeding operation that lends more than two litters per household/business per year, a kennel, pet store, riding school or stables, at a location not properly zoned for that activity, whether operated separately or in connection with another enterprise. 
(Ord. No. 04-97, § I, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 06-121, § I, 11-14-06; Ord. No. 11-062, § I, 7-12-11)  
Sec. 6-138. - Breeder license. 
Any person who breeds animals for sale or otherwise, shall be required to obtain a breeder license for each litter within 30 days of the birth of the animal(s) and make the breeding location available for inspection by animal services. A breeder license may be obtained for up to two litters per year, per household/business. One license only may be obtained per year, per animal. 
(Ord. No. 06-121, § I, 11-14-06; Ord. No. 09-020, § I, 3-10-09; Ord. No. 11-062, § I, 7-12-11; Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Secs. 6-139—6-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SELLER PERMIT 
 
Sec. 6-151. - Required. 
A.  Any person who shall engage in the business of selling dogs or cats within the city limits shall be required to have a permit to do so. Such a permit issued under this division is nontransferable. This provision does not apply to the city animal shelter. 
B.  A commercial vendor permit fee as provided in the adopted fee schedule will apply to all commercial vendor permits. 
C.  Any person who sells their own cat or dog from their residence shall obtain a noncommercial sale of animal permit for a fee as provided in the adopted fee schedule. Two permits per year, per household may be issued under this section. Multiple animals may be listed on one permit; however, only the specific animal(s) declared in the permit application will be covered by the permit. 
D.  The noncommercial sale of animal permit fee shall be waived for a person who has paid the breeder license fee applicable to the specific animal(s) declared in the permit application for a noncommercial sale of animal. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 14, § 1 [Ord. No. 69-45, § 1, 9-22-69]; Ord. No. 94-61, § I, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 11-062, § I, 7-12-11; Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14; Ord. No. 19-047 , § III, 9-17-19)  
Sec. 6-152. - Compliance. 
Each person applying for a license under this division shall comply with the standard set forth in this article. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 14, § 1 [Ord. No. 69-45, § 1, 9-22-69]; Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02)  
Sec. 6-153. - Application. 
All applications for a license required by this division must be filed with the city building official and shall be made in writing on a printed form provided for such purpose. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 14, § 1 [Ord. No. 69-45, § 1, 9-22-69]; Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02)  
Sec. 6-154. - Inspection of premises. 
Upon request for a license to sell animals within the city, the building official, animal control officer, or health department official shall inspect the premises for which the license is requested to determine whether or not the premises meet the criteria of this article and all applicable city codes. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 14, § 3 [Ord. No. 69-45, § 3, 9-22-69]; Ord. No. 94-61, § I, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02)  
Sec. 6-155. - Issuance; fee. 
License required by this division shall be issued annually by the building official upon payment of a license fee. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 14, § 1 [Ord. No. 69-45, § 1, 9-22-69]; Ord. No. 94-61, § I, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02)  
Sec. 6-156. - Expiration. 
Each license issued under this division shall expire on December 31 st of each year and a new application as provided in this division, shall be required for renewal. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 14, § 4 [Ord. No. 69-45, § 4, 9-22-69]; Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02)  
Sec. 6-157. - Periodic inspections on license; revocation of license. 
The building official, animal control officer, or health department official may make unannounced periodic inspections during normal business hours on each licensee to see if they continue to comply with the health standards imposed under this article. 
The building official shall have the power and authority to revoke a license issued under the provisions of this division at any time for good cause, but only after notice has been given to the owner or manager of the business of a hearing to be held not less than ten (10) days after the service of such notice by registered or certified United States mail. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 14, § 6 [Ord. No. 69-45, § 6, 9-22-69]; Ord. No. 94-61, § I, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02)  
Sec. 6-158. - Turtles. 
No person or retailer shall sell or give away any turtle with a carapace length of four (4) inches or less. "Carapace" shall mean the length of the shell measured from anterior to posterior. 
(Ord. No. 02-22, § I, 5-28-02)  
Secs. 6-159, 6-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - BEEKEEPING 
 
Sec. 6-161. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed in this section, unless the context of their usage clearly indicates another meaning: 
Apiary means a place where bee colonies are kept. 
Bee means any stage of the common domestic honey bee, Apis mellifera species. 
Colony means a hive and its equipment and appurtenances, including bees, comb, honey, pollen, and brood. 
Director means building official. 
Hive means a structure intended for the housing of a bee colony. 
Tract means a contiguous parcel of land under common ownership. 
Undeveloped property means any idle land that is not improved or actually in the process of being improved with residential, commercial, industrial, church, park, school, or governmental facilities or other structures or improvements intended for human use occupancy and the grounds maintained in association therewith. The term shall be deemed to include property developed exclusively as a street or highway, or property used for commercial agricultural purposes. 
(Ord. No. 93-40, § II, 5-25-93)  
Sec. 6-162. - Purpose; certain conduct declared unlawful. 
A.  The purpose of this article is to establish certain requirements of sound beekeeping practices, which are intended to avoid problems that may otherwise be associated with the keeping of bees in populated areas, and to require a license to insure compliance. Such license shall be issued annually by the director or his designee. There shall be no fee for such license. Existing apiaries shall be allowed to continue in their present locations and conditions, if registered with the director within sixty (60) days from the date of the passage of this article, unless there is found to be a danger to the public health and safety. 
B.  Notwithstanding compliance with the various requirements of this article, it shall be unlawful for any beekeeper to keep any colony or colonies in such a manner or of such disposition as to cause any unhealthy condition, interfere with the normal use and enjoyment of human or animal life of others, or interfere with the normal use and enjoyment of any public property or property of others. 
(Ord. No. 93-40, § II, 5-25-93; Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Sec. 6-163. - Hives. 
All bee colonies shall be kept in Langstroth-type hives with removable frames, which shall be kept in sound and usable condition. 
(Ord. No. 93-40, § II, 5-25-93)  
Sec. 6-164. - Fencing of flyways. 
In each instance in which any colony is situated within twenty-five (25) feet of a public or private property line of the tract upon which the apiary is situated, as measured from the nearest point on the hive to the property line, the beekeeper shall establish and maintain a flyway barrier at least six (6) feet in height consisting of a solid wall, fence, dense vegetation, or combination thereof, that is parallel to the property line and extends ten (10) feet beyond the colony in each direction so that all bees are forced to fly at an elevation of at least six (6) feet above ground level over the property lines in vicinity of the apiary. It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the property adjoining the apiary tract in the vicinity of the apiary is undeveloped property for a distance of at least twenty-five (25) feet from the property line of the apiary tract. 
(Ord. No. 93-40, § II, 5-25-93)  
Sec. 6-165. - Water. 
Each beekeeper shall ensure that a convenient source of water is available at all times to the bees so that the bees will not congregate at swimming pools, bibcocks, pet watering bowls, bird baths, or other water sources where they may cause human, bird, or domestic pet contact. 
(Ord. No. 93-40, § II, 5-25-93)  
Sec. 6-166. - General maintenance. 
Each beekeeper shall ensure that no bee comb or other materials that might encourage robbing are left upon the grounds of the apiary site. Upon their removal from the hive, all such materials shall promptly be disposed of in a sealed container or placed within a building or other beeproof enclosure. 
(Ord. No. 93-40, § II, 5-25-93)  
Sec. 6-167. - Queens. 
In any instance in which a colony exhibits unusually aggressive characteristics by stinging or attempting to sting without due provocation, or exhibits an unusual disposition towards swarming, it shall be the duty of the beekeeper to promptly requeen the colony. Queens shall be selected from stock bred for gentleness and nonswarming characteristics. 
(Ord. No. 93-40, § II, 5-25-93)  
Sec. 6-168. - Colony densities. 
A.  It shall be unlawful to keep more than the following numbers of colonies on any tract within the city, based upon the size or configuration of the tract on which the apiary is situated: 
1.  One-quarter (¼) acre or less tract size: Four (4) colonies. 
2.  More than one-quarter (¼) acre but less than one-half (½) acre tract size: Eight (8) colonies. 
3.  More than one-half (½) acre but less than one (1) acre tract size: Twelve (12) colonies. 
4.  One (1) acre or larger tract size: Sixteen (16) colonies. 
5.  Regardless of tract size, where all hives are situated at least two hundred (200) feet in any direction from all property lines of the tract on which the apiary is situated, there shall be no limit to the number of colonies. 
6.  Regardless of tract size, so long as all property other than the tract upon which the hives are situated, that is, within a radius of at least two hundred (200) feet from the hive, remains undeveloped property, there shall be no limit to the number of colonies. 
B.  For each two (2) colonies authorized under colony densities (subsection A.), there may be maintained upon the same tract one (1) nucleus colony in a hive structure not exceeding one (1) standard nine and five-eighths-inch depth ten-frame hive body with no supers attached as required from time to time for managements of swarms. Each such nucleus colony shall be disposed of or combined with an authorized colony within thirty (30) days after the date it is acquired. 
(Ord. No. 93-40, § II, 5-25-93; Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Sec. 6-169. - Marking hives; presumption of possession. 
A.  In apiaries, the name and telephone number shall be branded, painted, or otherwise clearly marked upon the structure of at least two (2) hives and placed at opposite ends of the apiary. Instead of marking the hives, the beekeeper may conspicuously post a sign setting forth the name and telephone number of the beekeeper. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection that a colony is kept upon the same tract upon which the owner resides. 
B.  Unless marked in accordance with subsection A., it shall be presumed, for purposes of this article, that the beekeeper is the person or persons who own or otherwise have the present right of possession and control of the tract upon which a hive or hives are situated. The presumption may be rebutted by a written agreement authorizing another person to maintain the colony or colonies upon the tract setting forth the name, address and telephone number of the other person who is acting as the beekeeper. 
(Ord. No. 93-40, § II, 5-25-93; Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Sec. 6-170. - Inspection. 
An animal control officer shall enforce the provisions of this subchapter, and he or his representative, upon presentation of proper identification to the owner, agent, or tenant in charge of such apiary shall have the right to inspect any apiary during all reasonable hours except in cases of an emergency, in which case this limitation shall not apply. Where practicable, prior notice shall be given to the beekeeper if he resides at the apiary or if his name is marked on the hives. 
(Ord. No. 93-40, § II, 5-25-93; Ord. No. 04-97, § I, 12-14-04)  
Sec. 6-171. - Compliance. 
A.  Upon receipt of information that any colony situated within the city is not being kept in compliance with this article, the director shall cause an investigation to be conducted. If he finds that grounds exist to believe that one (1) or more violations have occurred, he shall cause a written complaint affidavit to be issued to the beekeeper. 
B.  The complaint affidavit shall set forth the following: 
1.  The date, time and place at which the hearing will be conducted; 
2.  The violation(s) alleged; 
3.  That the beekeeper may appear in person or through counsel, present evidence, cross examine witnesses, and request a court reporter; and 
4.  That the bees may be ordered destroyed or removed from the city if the hearing officer finds that they have been kept in violation of this article. Notices shall be given by certified United States mail or personal delivery. However, if the hearing officer is unable to locate the beekeeper, then the notice may be given by publication one (1) time in a newspaper of general circulation at least five (5) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
C.  The hearing shall be conducted by the director or his designee. The burden shall be on the city to demonstrate by a preponderance of credible evidence that the colony or colonies have in fact been kept in violation of this article. If the hearing officer finds that the colony or colonies have been kept in violation of this article, then he may order that the bees be destroyed or removed from the city within a time not to exceed thirty (30) days, and that bees not thereafter be kept upon the tract for a period of two (2) years. In instances where the hearing officer finds that the violations were not intentional and that the beekeeper has employed corrective actions that will probably be effective to cure the violations alleged, then he may issue a warning in lieu of ordering the bees destroyed or removed. Upon failure of the beekeeper to comply with the order, the hearing officer may cause the bees to be destroyed and the hive structures to be removed. In each instance in which a bee colony is destroyed, all usable components of the hive structure that are not damaged or rendered unhealthy by the destruction of the bees shall, upon the beekeeper's request, be returned to the beekeeper, provided that the beekeeper agrees to bear all transportation expenses for their return. 
D.  The decision of the hearing officer may be appealed by filing a notice of appeal with the city secretary within ten (10) calendar days following the date that the hearing officer announces his decision or, if the decision is not announced at the conclusion of the hearing, then within fifteen (15) days following the date that the hearing officer places written notice of his decision in the mail to the beekeeper. An appeal shall stay the hearing officer's decision, and the beekeeper is not required to remove the bees from the city pending the determination of the appeal. 
E.  The provisions of this section shall not be construed to require a hearing for the destruction of: 
(1)  Any bee colony not residing in a hive structure intended for beekeeping; 
(2)  Any swarm of bees; or 
(3)  Any colony residing in a beekeeping hive which, by virtue of its condition, has obviously been abandoned by the beekeeper. 
(Ord. No. 93-40, § II, 5-25-93; Ord. No. 04-97, § I, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 14-083 , § 1, 11-25-14)  
Chapter 7 - AVIATION  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 7-1—7-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - KILLEEN MUNICIPAL AIRPORT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to acquire, operate, etc., airports, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 46d-2. 
 
Secs. 7-26, 7-27. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-043 , § I, adopted June 27, 2017, repealed §§ 7-26, 7-27, which pertained to rules adopted and penalty for violation and derived from Ord. No. 88-124, § I(1½-1-1, 1½-1-2), adopted Dec. 27, 1988.  
Sec. 7-28. - Airport zoning commission. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Killeen is designated as the airport zoning commission and shall recommend the boundaries of the zones to be established and the regulations for these zones. The commission shall make a preliminary report and hold public hearings on the report before submitting a final report on its recommendations to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 15-066 , § II, 11-10-15)  
Secs. 7-29—7-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - KILLEEN MUNICIPAL AIRPORT ZONING ORDINANCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Building and construction regulations, Ch. 8; planning and development, Ch. 21; basic zoning ordinance, Ch. 31. 
State Law reference— Airport Zoning Act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 241. 
 
Sec. 7-51. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as "Killeen Municipal Airport Hazard Zoning Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 88-27, § II(9-5-1), 4-26-88)  
Sec. 7-52. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Airport shall mean Skylark Field. 
Airport elevation shall mean the established elevation of the highest point on the usable landing area measured in feet from mean sea level. 
Airport hazard shall mean any structure or object of natural growth or use of land which obstructs the air space required for the flights of aircraft or which obstructs or interferes with the control or tracking and/or data acquisition in the landing, taking off or flight at an airport, or at any installation or facility relating to flight, and tracking and/or data acquisition of the flight craft; hazardous, interfering with or obstructing such landing, taking off or flight of aircraft or which is hazardous to or interferes with tracking and/or data acquisition pertaining to flight and flight vehicles. 
Airport hazard area shall mean any area of land or water upon which an airport hazard might be established if not prevented as provided in this article. 
Airport reference point shall mean the point established as the approximate geographic center of the airport landing area and so designated. 
Approach surface shall mean a surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth in section 7-54. In plan, the perimeter of the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone. 
Approach, transitional, horizontal, and conical zones shall mean those zones set forth in section 7-53. 
Board of adjustment shall mean a board consisting of five (5) members appointed by the city council. 
Conical surface shall mean a surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of twenty (20) feet outward to one (1) foot upward for a horizontal distance of four thousand (4,000) feet. 
Hazard to air navigation shall mean an obstruction determined to have a substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace. 
Height shall mean for the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this article and shown on the zoning map and the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified. 
Horizontal surface shall mean a horizontal plane one hundred fifty (150) feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with the perimeter of the horizontal zone. 
Landing area shall mean the surface area of the airport used for the landing, takeoff or taxiing of aircraft. 
Nonconforming use shall mean any pre-existing structure, object of natural growth, or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this article or an amendment thereto. 
Nonprecision instrument runway shall mean a runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area-type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned. 
Obstruction shall mean any structure, growth or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in section 7-54. 
Person shall mean an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association or body politic, and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, administrator, executor, guardian or other representative. 
Precision instrument runway shall mean a runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing an instrument landing system (ILS) or a precision approach radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an approved airport layout plan or any other planning document. 
Primary surface shall mean a surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends two hundred (200) feet beyond each end of that runway; but when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface, or planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface of a runway will be that width prescribed in Part 77 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) for the most precise approach existing or planned for either end of that runway. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. The width of a primary surface for other than utility runways is one thousand (1,000) feet for a nonprecision instrument runway having a nonprecision instrument approach with visibility minimums as low as three-fourths of a statute mile, and for precision instrument runways. 
Runway shall mean a defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length. 
Structure shall mean an object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by man, including, but not limited to, buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formations and overhead transmission lines. 
Transitional surfaces shall mean those surfaces which extend outward at ninety-degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven (7) feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. Transitional surfaces for these portions of the precision approach surfaces, which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend a distance of five thousand (5,000) feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach surface and at ninety-degree angles to the extended runway centerline. 
(Ord. No. 88-27, § II(9-5-2), 4-20-88; Ord. No. 15-066 , § II, 11-10-15) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— General definitions applicable to airport zoning, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 241.003.  
Sec. 7-53. - Zones. 
In order to carry out the provisions of this article, there are hereby created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying beneath the approach surfaces, transition surface, horizontal surface and conical surface as they apply to the airport. Such zones are shown on zoning map consisting of one (1) sheet, prepared by the Texas Aeronautics Commission, Austin, Texas, and dated May 22, 1984, which is attached to this article and made a part hereof. The map is on file in the offices of the city secretary and the building official. An area located in more than one (1) of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows: 
(1)  Approach zones: 
a.  Runway 01 approach zone is established beneath the approach surface at the end of Runway 01 on Killeen Municipal Airport for precision instrument landings, and takeoffs on Runway 19: The inner edge of the approach zone shall have a width of one thousand (1,000) feet which coincides with the width of the primary surface at a distance of two hundred (200) feet beyond the end of the runway, widening thereafter uniformly to a width of sixteen thousand (16,000) feet at a horizontal distance of fifty thousand (50,000) feet beyond the end of the primary surface, its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
b.  Runway 19 approach zone is established beneath the approach surface at the end of Runway 19 on the Killeen Municipal Airport for nonprecision instrument landings and takeoffs on Runway 01. The inner edge of the approach zone shall have a width of one thousand (1,000) feet which coincides with the width of the primary surface at a distance of two hundred (200) feet beyond the end of the runway, widening thereafter uniformly to a width of four thousand (4,000) feet at a horizontal distance of ten thousand (10,000) feet beyond the end of the primary surface, its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(2)  Transition zones. Transition zones are hereby established beneath the transition surface adjacent to each runway and approach surface as indicated on the zoning map. Transition surfaces, symmetrically located on either side of runways, have variable widths as shown on the zoning map. Transitional surfaces extend outward and upward at right angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven (7) feet outward to one (1) foot upward from the sides of the primary surface and from the sides of approach surfaces. Transitional surfaces for those portions of the precision approach surface which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend a distance of five thousand (5,000) feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach surface and at right angles to the runway centerline. 
(3)  Horizontal zone. The area beneath a horizontal plane one hundred fifty (150) feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which is constructed by swinging arcs of ten thousand (10,000) feet radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of runway 01/19 and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs. 
(4)  Conical zone. The area beneath the conical surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of twenty (20) feet outward to one (1) foot upward for a horizontal distance of four thousand (4,000) feet. 
(Ord. No. 88-27, § II(9-5-3), 4-26-88)  
Sec. 7-54. - Height limitations. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, no structure shall be erected, altered, or maintained, and no object of natural growth shall be allowed to grow in any zone created by this article to a height in excess of the applicable height limit herein established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows: 
(1)  Approach zones: 
a.  Runway 01. One (1) foot in height for each fifty (50) feet in horizontal distance beginning at the end of and at the elevation of the primary surface and extending to a point ten thousand (10,000) feet from the end of the primary surface, then rising one (1) foot in height for each forty (40) feet in horizontal distance for an additional forty thousand (40,000) feet from the end of the primary surface. 
b.  Runway 19. One (1) foot in height for each thirty-four (34) feet in horizontal distance beginning at the end of and at the elevation of the primary surface and extending to a point ten thousand (10,000) feet from the end of the primary surface. 
(2)  Transition zones. Slope seven (7) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach surface, and extending to a height of one hundred fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation which is eight hundred forty-six (846) feet above mean sea level. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits sloping seven (7) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending to where they intersect the conical surface. Where the precision instrument runway approach zone projects beyond the conical zone, there are established height limits sloping seven (7) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending a horizontal distance of five thousand (5,000) feet measured at ninety-degree angles to the extended runway centerline. 
(3)  Horizontal zone. Established at one hundred fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation, or a height of nine hundred ninety-six (996) feet above mean sea level. 
(4)  Conical zone. Slopes twenty (20) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at one hundred fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of three hundred fifty (350) feet above the airport elevation. 
(5)  Excepted height limitations. The growth, construction or maintenance of any object of natural growth or structure to a height up to fifty (50) feet above the surface of the land shall not be prohibited by this article except as follows: 
a.  In the approach zone for Runway 01 beginning at the end of the primary surface and extending to a point two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet from the end of the primary surface; 
b.  In the approach zone for Runway 19 beginning at the end of the primary surface and extending to a point one thousand seven hundred (1,700) feet from the end of the primary surface; and 
c.  In the transition zone adjacent to the primary surface and approach zones beginning at the side of the primary surface for a distance of three hundred fifty (350) feet on either side of the primary surface and extending to a point two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet from the end of the primary surface on the south and one thousand seven hundred (1,700) feet from the end of the primary surface on the north. 
Where an area is covered by more than one (1) height limitation, the more restrictive limitation shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 88-27, § II(9-5-4), 4-26-88)  
Sec. 7-55. - Use restrictions. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, no use may be made of land or water within any zone established by this article in such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, taking off, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport. 
(Ord. No. 88-27, § II(9-5-5), 4-26-88)  
Sec. 7-56. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this article shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure or object of natural growth not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the construction, alteration or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to such effective date, and is diligently prosecuted. 
(b)  Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this section, the owner of any nonconforming structure or object of natural growth is hereby required to allow the installation, operation and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the building official to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport, the presence of such airport hazards. Such markers and light shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the city. 
(Ord. No. 88-27, § II(9-5-6), 4-26-88) 
State Law reference— Nonconforming uses and structures, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 214.019, 214.035.  
Sec. 7-57. - Permits. 
(a)  Future uses. Except as specifically provided in subsections (a)(1), (2) and (3) below, no material change shall be made in the use of land, no structure shall be erected or otherwise established, and no object of natural growth shall be planted in any zone hereby created unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to include, but not be limited to, certification as to elevation by a registered professional engineer, architect or registered surveyor, so that the building official can determine whether the resulting use, structure, or tree would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. No permit for a use inconsistent with the provisions of this article shall be granted unless a variance has been approved in accordance with subsection (d) below: 
(1)  In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and conical zone, no permit shall be required for any object of natural growth or structure less than seventy-five (75) feet of vertical height above the ground, except when, because of terrain, land contour or topographic features, such object of natural growth or structure would extend above the height limits prescribed for such zones. (Advisory note: permits should not be required for improvements to property with an elevation of nine hundred twenty (920) feet mean sea level or less.) 
(2)  In areas lying within the limits of the approach zones, but at a horizontal distance of not less than four thousand two hundred (4,200) feet from each end of the runway, no permit shall be required for any object of natural growth or structure less than seventy-five (75) feet of vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or structure would extend above the height limit prescribed for such approach zones. 
(3)  In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zone, no permit shall be required for any object of natural growth or structure less than seventy-five (75) feet of vertical height above the ground, except when such object of natural growth or structure, because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, would extend above the height limit prescribed for such transition zones. 
Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction, or alteration of any structure, or growth of any tree in excess of any of the height limits established by this article except as set forth in subsection 7-54(5). 
(b)  Existing uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of any airport hazard or permit a nonconforming use, structure, or object of natural growth to be made or become higher, or become a greater hazard to air navigation, than it was on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived or any amendments thereto or than it is when the application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for such a permit shall be granted. 
(c)  Nonconforming uses destroyed. Whenever the city building official determines that a nonconforming structure or object of natural growth becomes more than eighty (80) percent torn down, physically deteriorated, or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations. 
(d)  Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any object of natural growth, or use his property, in violation of the regulations prescribed in this article, may apply to the board of adjustment for a variance from such regulations in question. The application for variance shall be accompanied by a determination from the federal aviation administration as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. Such variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations will result in unnecessary hardship and the relief granted would not be contrary to the public interest, but do substantial justice, and be in accordance with the spirit of this article. 
(e)  Obstruction marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed advisable by the building official or the board of adjustment to effectuate the purpose of this article and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to allow the building official to install, operate, and maintain, at the expense of the city, such markings and lights as may be necessary. 
(f)  Administrative approval of minor encroachments. 
(1)  This section establishes authority for administrative authorization of certain minor encroachments into airport hazard areas. 
(2)  In order to administratively approve such variance, the building official, or designee, must find that with regard to the encroachment: 
a.  The Federal Aviation Administration has made a determination of no hazard to air navigation; 
b.  No change will be required to airport instrument minimums; and 
c.  There will be no loss of utility of the airport. 
(3)  The building official's denial of an administrative variance may be appealed to the board of adjustment by filing a written notice of appeal within ten (10) calendar days of the building official's decision. 
(Ord. No. 88-27, § II(9-5-7), 4-26-88; Ord. No. 15-066 , § II, 11-10-15) 
State Law reference— Permits, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 241.020.  
Sec. 7-58. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the building official to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed in this article. Applications for permits shall be made to the building official upon a form published for that purpose. Applications required by this article to be submitted to the building official shall be promptly considered and granted or denied. Applications for variances shall be made to the board of adjustment by first filing such application for variance with the building official who shall forthwith transmit such application to the board of adjustment for determination. Fees, if any, shall be established by ordinance of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 88-27, § II(9-5-8), 4-26-88) 
State Law reference— Administrative agency required, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 241.031.  
Sec. 7-59. - Aviation board of adjustment. 
(a)  There is hereby created an aviation board of adjustment to have and exercise the following powers: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the building official in the enforcement of this article. 
(2)  To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this article upon which such aviation board of adjustment under such regulations may be required to pass. 
(3)  To hear and decide specific variances. 
(b)  The aviation board of adjustment shall consist of five (5) members who shall be appointed by the city council of this city and shall include at least one (1) person with aviation experience. Each member shall serve for a term of two (2) years and is removable for cause by the appointment authority upon written charges, after a public hearing. 
(c)  The aviation board of adjustment shall adopt rules for its governance and procedure in harmony with the provisions of this article. Meetings of the aviation board of adjustment shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such times as the aviation board of adjustment may determine. The chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All hearings of the aviation board of adjustment shall be public. The aviation board of adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the office of the city secretary and shall be a public record. 
(d)  The aviation board of adjustment shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law stating the facts upon which it relied when making its legal conclusions in reversing, affirming or modifying any order, requirement, decision or determination which comes before it under the provisions of this article. 
(e)  The concurring vote of four (4) members of the aviation board of adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the building official or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this article, or to effect any variation in this article. 
(Ord. No. 88-27, § II(9-5-9), 4-26-88; Ord. No. 15-066 , § II, 11-10-15) 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, etc., generally, § 2-116 et seq. 
State Law reference— Board of adjustment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 241.032 et seq.  
Sec. 7-60. - Appeals. 
(a)  A decision of the building official made in its administration of this article may be appealed to the board of adjustment by: 
(1)  A person who is aggrieved by the decision; 
(2)  A taxpayer who is affected by the decision; or 
(3)  The governing body of a political subdivision or a joint airport zoning board that believes the decision is an improper application of the airport zoning regulation. 
(b)  All appeals under this section must be taken within a reasonable time as provided by the rules of the board of adjustment, by filing with the building official a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The building official shall forthwith transmit to the board of adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(c)  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the building official certifies to the board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in the opinion of the building official, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of the board of adjustment on notice to the building official and on due cause shown. 
(d)  The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(e)  The board of adjustment may in conformity with the provisions of this article, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination, as may be appropriate under the circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 88-27, § II(9-5-10), 4-26-88) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 241.036.  
Sec. 7-61. - Judicial review. 
Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the board of adjustment under the provisions of this article, may appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the Airport Zoning Act, as amended [V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 241]. 
(Ord. No. 88-27, § II(9-5-11), 4-26-88) 
State Law reference— Judicial review of decisions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 241.041 et seq.  
Sec. 7-62. - Enforcement and remedies. 
The city council may institute in any court of competent jurisdiction, an action to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate any violation of this article or of any order or ruling made in connection with its administration or enforcement including, but not limited to, an action for injunctive relief as provided by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 241.044. 
(Ord. No. 88-27, § II(9-5-12), 4-26-88)  
Sec. 7-63. - Conflicting regulations. 
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this article and any other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or objects of natural growth, the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail. 
(Ord. No. 88-27, § II(9-5-14), 4-26-88) 
State Law reference— Conflicts between airport zoning regulations and other regulations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 241.901.  
Sec. 7-64. - Penalty. 
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-8.  
Chapter 8 - BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Airport zoning, § 7-51 et seq.; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 11; flood damage prevention, Ch. 12; housing discrimination, § 14-26 et seq.; mobile homes and travel trailer parks, Ch. 17; planning and development, Ch. 21; subdivisions and other developments, Ch. 26; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 30; zoning, Ch. 31. 
State Law reference— Authority to enforce ordinances necessary to protect and preserve health, property, good government and order, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.004. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this chapter, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Additional terms and definitions are found in the adopted construction codes: 
Board shall mean the construction board of appeals of the city as appointed by the city council. 
Building official shall mean the officer or other designated authority, or his duly authorized representative, charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter. 
Construction codes shall mean the adopted construction codes and regulations listed within this chapter as amended. 
Department shall mean the building and inspections division of the city. 
Homeowner shall mean person or persons residing in a single-family dwelling that is lawfully recorded as his or her homestead. 
Inspector shall mean an employee of the city duly authorized and charged with the enforcement of this chapter under the direction of the building official. 
Project shall mean any new construction, addition, alteration, demolition or repair of a building or structure within the City of Killeen, which requires a construction permit. 
Registered contractor shall mean any person lawfully registered with the city and possessing any and all state required licenses, certifications, endorsements and/or registrations required to perform such regulated work who is engaged in a business of installation or altering, by contract, a structure or equipment to whom permits may be issued to. It shall include any authorized person, whether actually doing work or not, and any authorized person who subcontracts to do such work, but does not include bona fide employees employed by such contractor to do or supervise such work. 
Registration shall mean the contractor registration by type(s) issued by the city under this chapter. 
Registration year shall mean the calendar year, from January first to December thirty-first. 
(Ord. No. 90-38, § I (5-2-1), 5-8-90; Ord. No. 93-90, § II, 9-28-93; Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 11-009, § I, 2-8-11; Ord. No. 18-043 , § I, 11-27-18)  
Sec. 8-2. - Penalty. 
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02)  
Secs. 8-3—8-10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION  
DIVISION 1. - PERMIT FEES 
 
Sec. 8-11. - Fees. 
(a)  New single-family residential construction. All fees for new single-family residential construction shall be calculated at a rate of thirteen cents ($0.13) per square foot based on the total square footage under roof. This fee includes permits for the structure, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, flatwork, certificate of occupancy, and plans review. This fee does not include permits for fences, storage buildings, accessory structures, lawn irrigation, whole house water softener units or swimming pools. 
(b)  New duplex, townhouse, multifamily, commercial, etc., construction. All fees are based on total square footage. The fee for new construction for duplexes, townhouses, multifamily, all commercial, and all additions (including additions to existing single-family dwellings) to square footage under roof, (includes storage buildings, patio covers, modular/portable buildings and carports) shall be as follows: 
Building Area Square Feet 	Building 	Electrical 	Mechanical 	Plumbing (1) 	Plans (2) 
500 or less 	$  35.00 	$ 35.00 	$ 35.00 	$  35.00 	$ 35.00 
501—1,000 	70.00 	40.00 	40.00 	40.00 	60.00 
1,001—1,500 	100.00 	40.00 	40.00 	40.00 	85.00 
1,501—2,000 	130.00 	50.00 	40.00 	50.00 	110.00 
2,001—2,500 	160.00 	60.00 	40.00 	60.00 	140.00 
2,501—3,000 	190.00 	70.00 	40.00 	70.00 	160.00 
3,001—3,500 	220.00 	80.00 	45.00 	80.00 	185.00 
3,501—4,000 	250.00 	90.00 	50.00 	90.00 	210.00 
4,001—4,500 	280.00 	100.00 	55.00 	100.00 	235.00 
4,501—5,000 	310.00 	110.00 	60.00 	110.00 	260.00 
5,001—5,500 	340.00 	120.00 	65.00 	120.00 	285.00 
5,501—6,000 	370.00 	130.00 	70.00 	130.00 	310.00 
6,001—6,500 	400.00 	140.00 	70.00 	140.00 	335.00 
6,501—7,000 	430.00 	150.00 	80.00 	150.00 	360.00 
7,001—7,500 	460.00 	160.00 	85.00 	160.00 	385.00 
7,501—8,000 	490.00 	170.00 	90.00 	170.00 	410.00 
8,001—8,500 	520.00 	180.00 	95.00 	180.00 	435.00 
8,501—9,000 	550.00 	190.00 	100.00 	190.00 	460.00 
9,001—9,500 	580.00 	200.00 	105.00 	200.00 	485.00 
9,501—10,000 	610.00 	210.00 	110.00 	210.00 	510.00 
10,001—15,000 	915.00 	315.00 	165.00 	315.00 	765.00 
15,001—20,000 	1,215.00 	415.00 	215.00 	415.00 	1,015.00 
20,001—25,000 	1,515.00 	515.00 	265.00 	515.00 	1,265.00 
25,001—30,000 	1,815.00 	615.00 	315.00 	615.00 	1,515.00 
30,001—35,000 	2,115.00 	715.00 	365.00 	715.00 	1,765.00 
35,001—40,000 	2,415.00 	815.00 	415.00 	815.00 	2,015.00 
40,001—45,000 	2,715.00 	915.00 	465.00 	915.00 	2,265.00 
45,001—50,000 	3,015.00 	1,015.00 	515.00 	1,015.00 	2,515.00 
 
The fee for structures over 50,000 square feet is determined by combining fees to equal the square footage. 
For duplex, townhouses, apartments, hotels and motels add: 
$30.00 per unit for building 
$30.00 per unit for electrical 
$30.00 per unit for mechanical 
$30.00 per unit for plumbing 
$30.00 per unit for fire sprinkler 
Note: 
(1)  Plumbing—All connections to a water, sewerage or gas piping system. Fire sprinkler systems are to be permitted separately. The plumbing fee column shall be used for new fire sprinkler systems. 
(2)  All plan review fees must be paid at time of application. 
(c)  Remodel, repair, finish-out, maintenance, or improvements. 
(1)  Residential dwelling unit remodel, repair or improvements. Residential dwelling unit remodel, repair or improvement permits for single-family units, two-family (duplex) units, townhouses units and apartment units shall be permitted as follows: 
a.  Residential dwelling unit projects shall be permitted per individual dwelling unit. 
b.  Each permit type shall be individually permitted by applicable trades (building, electrical, plumbing and mechanical work) at a rate of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each trade. Work requiring plan review shall be charged an additional thirty-five dollar ($35.00) fee for each dwelling unit project. 
c.  Solar panels. Base fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) plus thirty-five dollar ($35.00) plans review fee plus five dollar ($5.00) fee for each solar panel installed. 
d.  Re-roof (one permit for whole structure). Base fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) plus one dollar ($1.00) fee for each 100 square feet of roof covering installed or fraction thereof, or an alternate permit fee structure of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for 1,500 sq. ft. or less of roof area being installed; fifty dollars ($50.00) for 1,501 sq. ft. to 2,500 sq. ft. of roof area being installed; and seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for 2,501 sq. ft. or greater of roof area being installed. 
e.  Windows and door replacement. Base fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) plus three dollars ($3.00) for each window or door replaced. 
(2)  Commercial and non-dwelling unit remodel, finish-out, repairs, maintenance, other. The fee for commercial and non-dwelling remodeling, alterations, repairs, finish-out of shell buildings, and other construction, including all swimming pools, fences, decks, flatwork (concrete/asphalt), signs, gas tanks/pumps, lawn irrigation, etc., shall be as follows: 
Dollar 
Valuation (3) 	Building 	Electrical 	Mechanical 	Plumbing (1) 	Plans (2) 
$0—3,000.00 	$ 35.00 	$ 35.00 	$ 35.00 	$ 35.00 	$ 35.00 
3,000.01—4,000.00 	43.00 	35.00 	35.00 	35.00 	35.00 
4,000.01—5,000.00 	54.00 	43.00 	43.00 	43.00 	35.00 
5,000.01—6,000.00 	65.00 	52.00 	52.00 	52.00 	35.00 
6,000.01—7,000.00 	76.00 	61.00 	61.00 	61.00 	38.00 
7,000.01—8,000.00 	87.00 	69.00 	69.00 	69.00 	44.00 
8,000.01—9,000.00 	98.00 	78.00 	78.00 	78.00 	49.00 
9,000.01—10,000.00 	109.00 	87.00 	87.00 	87.00 	55.00 
10,000.01—11,000.00 	119.00 	95.00 	95.00 	95.00 	60.00 
11,000.01—12,000.00 	130.00 	104.00 	104.00 	104.00 	65.00 
12,000.01—13,000.00 	141.00 	113.00 	113.00 	113.00 	71.00 
13,000.01—14,000.00 	152.00 	122.00 	122.00 	122.00 	76.00 
14,000.01—15,000.00 	163.00 	130.00 	130.00 	130.00 	82.00 
15,000.01—50,000.00 	163.00 	130.00 	130.00 	130.00 	82.00 
Plus per $1,000.00 over $15,000.00 	6.00 	5.00 	5.00 	5.00 	4.00 
50,000.01—100,000.00 	373.00 	305.00 	305.00 	305.00 	187.00 
Plus per $1,000.00 over $50,000.00 	5.00 	4.00 	4.00 	4.00 	3.00 
100,000.01—500,000.00 	623.00 	505.00 	505.00 	505.00 	312.00 
Plus per $1,000.00 over $100,000.00 	4.00 	3.00 	3.00 	3.00 	2.00 
500,000.01—up 	2,223.00 	1,705.00 	1,705.00 	1,705.00 	1,112.00 
Plus per $1,000.00 over $500,000.00 	1.00 	1.00 	1.00 	1.00 	1.00 
 
Note: 
(1)  Plumbing—All connections to a water, sewerage or gas piping system. Fire sprinkler systems are to be permitted separately. The plumbing fee column shall be used for new fire sprinkler systems. 
(2)  All plan review fees must be paid at time of application. 
(3)  Permit fees are calculated individually by permit type. 
(d)  Miscellaneous. The following miscellaneous fees shall be charged: 
(1)  Demolition/move structure, per structure .....$50.00 
(2)  Failed inspection penalty (any kind), per inspection .....$50.00 
(3)  Food dealer's permit, per year .....$50.00 
(4)  Temporary final utility service, per service (electric, water, or gas) .....$35.00 
(5)  Temporary electric service pole, per pole .....$35.00 
(6)  Mobile home park license, per year: 
a.  1—20 units .....$175.00 
b.  21—50 units .....$275.00 
c.  51—120 units .....$450.00 
d.  121—200 units .....$690.00 
e.  201—300 units .....$1,000.00 
f.  301 units and above .....$1,300.00 
(7)  Construction registration, per year .....$80.00 
Electrical and Plumbing contractors are exempt from fee pursuant to state law. 
(8)  Appeals: 
a.  Construction board of appeals, per request .....$275.00 
b.  Zoning board of adjustments and appeals, per request .....$275.00 
(9)  Certificate of occupancy: 
a.  New certificate of occupancy .....$90.00 
b.  Partial certificate of occupancy (each) .....$90.00 
c.  Temporary certificate of occupancy: 
1.  First 30 days .....$90.00 
2.  Second extension of 30 days .....$180.00 
3.  Third or more extensions of 30 days each .....$270.00 
d.  Lost or replacement (reprint) certificate of occupancy .....$5.00 
(10)  Right-of-way permit .....$50.00 
(11)  Floodplain permit: 
a.  One and two family residential lots .....$35.00 
b.  Other lot .....$70.00 
(12)  Landscape permit/R-3 and R-3F (with only one structure on one lot) .....$35.00 
(13)  Landscape permit/commercial and R-3A .....$50.00 
(14)  Temporary off-premises sign: 
a.  First sign (per calendar year) .....$25.00 
b.  Each sign tag thereafter in the same calendar year .....$1.00 
(15)  Commercial kitchen hood permit (each): 
a.  Type I Hood (grease and smoke) .....$75.00 
b.  Type II Hood (smoke and/or steam) .....$35.00 
(16)  Partial inspection (each) .....$35.00 
(17)  After hours inspections $200.00 for first two hours and $100.00 for each additional hour or fraction thereof. The minimum $200.00 fee must be paid in advance of the inspection. 
(e)  Fee adjustment. Owner of an expired permit may make written request within 30 days after date of expiration to the building official to reinstate said permit and shall be charged a fee of one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made in the original plans and specifications for such work. 
(f)  Penalty. Where construction is commenced before a permit is obtained, the permit fees shall be doubled. 
(g)  Occupy without a certificate of occupancy. It shall be an offense for the contractor, whether commercial or residential, to allow an owner or tenant of property to occupy a new or remodeled building or space before the contractor obtains a certificate of occupancy. Upon conviction, a person violating this section shall be fined in an amount not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). For the second or subsequent conviction within a twelve-month period, such person shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00), nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(h)  Fees waived. Projects for city owned facilities requiring permits shall be exempt from permit fees. However, contractors shall be responsible for contractor registration, construction trailers and/or other temporary construction structures, failed inspection penalties, or other penalties and fees. 
(i)  Fee refunds. The building official shall authorize the refund of fees as follows: 
(1)  The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. 
(2)  Not more than fifty (50) percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this chapter. 
(3)  Not more than fifty (50) percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan review effort has been expended. 
The building official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid, except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the date of fee payment. 
(Ord. No. 90-40, § I (5-4-1), 5-8-90; Ord. No. 92-67, § I, 9-8-92; Ord. No. 93-90, § I, 9-28-93; Ord. No. 00-65, § V, 8-29-00; Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 05-76, § I, 9-13-05; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 06-135, § I, 12-19-06; Ord. No. 09-016, § I, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 10-003, § VII, 2-9-10; Ord. No. 11-009, § I, 2-8-11; Ord. No. 15-043 , § III, 9-8-15; Ord. No. 15-061 , § I, 10-27-15; Ord. No. 18-043 , § I, 11-27-18; Ord. No. 19-033 , § I, 7-23-19)  
Sec. 8-12. - Conflict with adopted fee schedule. 
In the event of a conflict between the fees in section 8-11 and the adopted fee schedule, section 8-11 shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 19-047 , § IV, 9-17-19)  
Secs. 8-13—8-20. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02-43, § I, adopted Aug. 27, 2002, repealed § 8-12 in its entirety. Formerly, § 8-12 pertained to the exemption for political subdivisions and derived from Ord. No. 90-40, § I(5-8-2), adopted May 8, 1990.  
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING AND INSPECTIONS DIVISION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-043 , § I, adopted Nov. 27, 2018 changed the title of Div. 2 from "Building and inspections department" to read as herein set out. 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-31 et seq. 
 
Sec. 8-21. - Established. 
There is hereby established a department to be called the building and inspections division and the person charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter shall be known as the building official. 
(Ord. No. 90-109, § I (9-2-2(a)(B)), 11-27-90; Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 11-009, § I, 2-8-11; Ord. No. 18-043 , § I, 11-27-18)  
Sec. 8-22. - Restrictions on employees. 
An inspector or employee connected with the department shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building system, or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he or she is the owner of such building. Such inspector or employee shall not engage in any other work which is inconsistent with his duties or conflicts with the interests of the department. 
(Ord. No. 90-109, § I (9-2-2(a)(B)(4)), 11-27-90; Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 11-009, § I, 2-8-11)  
Sec. 8-23. - Permit required and issuance. 
(a)  Permit required. Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by this chapter, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit. 
(b)  Permit issuance. Construction permits shall only be issued to a registered contractor or to a homeowner as defined in this chapter performing such work with their own hands. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 11-009, § I, 2-8-11)  
Sec. 8-24. - Single permit projects. 
Projects with only one permit required shall be issued only to the registered contractor performing such work or to the homeowner as defined in this chapter performing such work with their own hands. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06)  
Sec. 8-25. - Multi-permit projects. 
Projects requiring more than one permit issuance shall be issued to a registered general contractor. The contractor is responsible for all inspections, failed inspection penalties, and any other fees. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 09-016, § I, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 11-009, § I, 2-8-11)  
Sec. 8-26. - Permit application and plan review. 
(a)  Application review time. Construction permit applications shall be reviewed and either approved or disapproved within 45 calendar days from the date submitted. Such applications shall be submitted on forms furnished by the building and inspections division. In addition, the applicant shall provide all necessary technical data sufficient to perform the permit review. The building and inspections division shall provide written notice and reasons why the city is unable to grant the permit application. 
(b)  Project submittals. 
(1)  Project submittals for the construction of new buildings, additions and other development shall include documents necessary for the review and approval of the proposed land use development, the proposed private and/or public water, sewer and drainage infrastructure to include the proposed connections to all public infrastructure, the proposed connectivity and access to public streets, the proposed landscaping plan, if required, and all details of the proposed building to include its plumbing, electrical, mechanical, energy and other system requirements for the project. 
(2)  Projects proposing the construction of one or more buildings at the same time will require a separate permit application for each building. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 11-009, § I, 2-8-11; Ord. No. 15-061 , § I, 10-27-15; Ord. No. 18-043 , § I, 11-27-18)  
Sec. 8-27. - Expired permit application. 
Construction permit applications shall expire forty-five (45) calendar days from the date such permit has been either approved and applicable fees remain unpaid or remains disapproved for more than forty-five (45) calendar days. The building official may grant an additional thirty-day extension upon written evidence justifying the delay to complete the permit issuance. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06)  
Sec. 8-28. - Expired permit. 
Construction permits issued shall become invalid because of failure to commence work within one hundred eighty (180) days after the issuance of the permit, when work is suspended or abandoned for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days after the time the work is commenced, or failure to perform substantial amount of work authorized by such permit within one hundred eighty (180) days after the issuance of the permit. The building official is authorized to grant one (1) or more extensions of time, for periods not more than one hundred eighty (180) days each. The extension shall be requested by the applicant in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 11-009, § I, 2-8-11)  
Sec. 8-29. - Inspections required. 
Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official and such construction or work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of this Code or of other ordinances of the city. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this Code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the building official nor the city shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection. 
(Ord. No. 11-009, § I, 2-8-11)  
Sec. 8-30. - Inspection penalty fees paid. 
Inspection penalty fees (re-inspection fees) shall be paid upon notice and before the project's final inspection and/or certificate of occupancy is issued. Contractors or applicants more than thirty (30) days past due on any failed inspection penalty fees shall be suspended from further inspections until the past due amount is paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 11-009, § I, 2-8-11)  
Sec. 8-31. - Limitations on buildings and structures placed in easements. 
Buildings, accessory buildings or structures, ground signs, in-ground swimming pools and storable above ground swimming pools over twenty-four (24) inches in height are prohibited from being placed in public utility easements without prior written approval from the director of public works or his designee. Fences, portable sheds not anchored to a permanent foundation and not more than eighty (80) square feet, and landscaping (excluding trees) may be placed over public utility easements; however, these obstructions are subject to removal by the city or utility provider, at the landowner's sole expense, when access to the easement is necessary for the installation, removal, replacement and/or maintenance of utilities. In addition, no buildings, accessory buildings, ground signs, swimming pools, fences or other objects that may impede the functionality of a drainage easement shall be permitted to encroach into any public drainage easement without prior written approval from the director of public works or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 11-009, § I, 2-8-11; Ord. No. 15-061 , § I, 10-27-15; Ord. No. 19-007 , § I, 2-26-19)  
Secs. 8-32—8-35. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF APPEALS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions generally, § 2-116 et seq. 
 
Sec. 8-36. - Membership. 
(a)  There shall be a board to be called the construction board of appeals, which shall consist of seven (7) members as follows: 
(1)  An architect. 
(2)  An engineer. 
(3)  A mechanical contractor. 
(4)  A representative from the county health department. 
(5)  A general contractor/builder. 
(6)  An electrical contractor. 
(7)  A plumbing contractor. 
(b)  Up to two (2) alternate members with similar qualifications as one of the members listed above may be appointed, who shall serve in the absence of one (1) or more of the regular members. 
(c)  Members and alternates shall serve for terms of three (3) years or until their successors are appointed. 
(Ord. No. 90-39, § I (5-3-1), 5-8-90; Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06)  
Sec. 8-37. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  The construction board of appeals shall hear appeals and requests for variances, as provided in this chapter. The board shall have no authority to waive requirements of the construction standards adopted in this chapter. However, the board may consider modifications of the adopted construction standards. 
(b)  The term "board" or similar term in such construction codes shall mean the construction board of appeals and all characteristics and duties of such board shall be as provided herein. 
(c)  The board shall hold hearings for the revocation or suspension of a holder of contractor's registration as set forth in this chapter. 
(d)  The board shall hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this chapter. A majority vote is required to overturn a decision made by the building official. 
(e)  The board shall hold hearings regarding dangerous buildings, structures, or building portions and its systems. 
(f)  The board shall hear and decide appeals or variances to the landscape regulations. 
(Ord. No. 90-39, § I (5-3-2), 5-8-90; Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06)  
Sec. 8-38. - Quorum. 
Four (4) members of the board shall constitute a quorum. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the board shall be necessary to modify an order of the building official or to vary the application of any provision of the construction codes over which it has jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 90-39, § I (5-3-3), 5-8-90; Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02)  
Sec. 8-39. - Procedures. 
The board shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of this article. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but shall mandate that only relevant information be received. 
(Ord. No. 90-39, § I (5-3-4), 5-8-90; Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02)  
Sec. 8-40. - Appeals and hearings. 
(a)  General. The board shall hear all appeals from the decision of the building official and shall hear all requests for variances from the provisions of this chapter. Such appeals and variances shall be limited to the following situations: 
(1)  When the building official shall reject or refuse to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation, construction, or alteration of a building, structure, electrical system, plumbing system, gas system, mechanical system, energy conservation system, landscaping requirements, or swimming pool or other system regulated by this chapter; or 
(2)  When appellant claims that the provisions of the construction codes over which the board has jurisdiction do not apply or that any equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in a specific case; or 
(3)  When appellant claims that the true intent and meaning of the construction codes or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted; or 
(4)  When appellant claims any matter related to the securing of a dangerous structure in accordance with the provisions of section 8-390 or emergency; or 
(5)  When a structure is unsecured, dilapidated, substandard, or unfit for human habitation and a hazard to the public health, safety, and welfare. A hearing shall be conducted by the board to determine whether the structure complies with the standards set out in the adopted construction codes in this chapter and order the repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal of the structure if violations exist. The board may also order the structure to be vacated. 
(b)  Notice of appeal. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed with the required application fee within thirty (30) days after the decision is rendered by the building official. Appeals shall be on forms provided by the building official. 
(c)  Regulation of unsafe buildings or other structures. The board shall preside over hearings required by article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 90-39, § I (5-3-5), 5-8-90; Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06)  
Sec. 8-41. - Decisions. 
(a)  Appeals. After a hearing, the board may vary the application of any provision of the construction codes to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice, and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of said codes or public interest, or when, in its opinion, the interpretation of the building official should be modified or reversed, provided the board does not waive requirements of the construction standards adopted in this chapter. However, the board may consider modifications of the adopted construction standards. 
(b)  Action. The board shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the board shall also include the reasons for the decision. If a decision of the board reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the building official, or varies the application of any provision of the construction codes over which it has jurisdiction, the building official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. 
(c)  Decisions final. Every decision of the board shall be final, subject to appeal to the district court of the county, provided such appeal is made within thirty (30) days from rendition of such decision. 
(Ord. No. 90-39, § I (5-3-6), 5-8-90; Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06)  
Sec. 8-42. - Advisory responsibility. 
The board shall submit to the city council such recommendations for the adoption of the construction codes as it may from time to time deem necessary and to establish the minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare, and provide safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment. 
(Ord. No. 90-39, § I (5-3-7), 5-8-90; Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02)  
Secs. 8-43—8-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTORS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, ch. 15. 
 
Sec. 8-60. - Required; scope. 
(a)  Before any person shall perform, contract to perform, or obtain a permit to perform a construction operation within the city limits for which a permit is required under this chapter, he or she shall first obtain a construction registration issued by the city. This registration does not substitute for any permit required under this chapter, nor does it substitute for any license required under this chapter or under state law. 
(b)  Issuance of the registration is conditioned that the person engaged in the construction operation shall faithfully observe all of the ordinances pertaining to this chapter, as now written or as they may hereafter be amended, and shall faithfully observe, as well, any and all state laws governing construction operations performed under this chapter or as they may hereafter be amended; further, that the city shall be indemnified and saved harmless from all claims arising from accidents and any damage of any character whatsoever caused by the negligence of such person engaged in any construction operation, or by any other unfaithful or inadequate work done either by such person, or his agents or employees. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to perform or contract to perform a construction operation within the city limits without first obtaining a construction registration issued by the city as described in this article. 
(d)  No construction registration shall be required for a construction operation solely performed by a homeowner in a building owned and occupied by him or her as his or her homestead. Requirements for applicable permits, inspections, and fees remain in effect. 
(Ord. No. 90-37, § I (5-1-2), 5-8-90; Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 09-016, § I, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 8-61. - Application for registration; updates. 
(a)  Persons shall file an application for a registration with the department, on a form provided by the department, giving full name, residence address, name and address of business, type of construction operation to be performed, proof of state license where required, persons authorized to obtain permits, and such additional information as may be needed for proper guidance of the department in issuing the registration. 
(b)  The registrant shall update the application for registration upon the expansion of types of construction operations, change in persons authorized to obtain permits, or upon addition of state-licensed workers not already recorded on the original application. Such update shall be recorded by the department at no charge to the registrant. 
(c)  The registrant shall notify the department of change of address. 
(d)  Types of contractor registrations: 
1.  General contractor. A responsible person or company to oversee the project, ensure that all required permits and fees for a total project are obtained and to ensure that all required inspections are performed for compliance with the adopted construction codes. 
2.  Electrical contractor. A responsible person or company that possesses a valid license by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation (TDLR) to contract and perform electrical work. 
3.  Plumbing contractor. A person that possesses or a company that employs a Responsible Master Plumber licensed by the Texas State Board of Plumbing Examiners (TSBPE) to contract or perform plumbing work. 
4.  Mechanical contractor. A person or company lawfully licensed by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation (TDLR) to contract and perform mechanical work. 
5.  Fire sprinkler contractor. A person or company that employs a person as who is lawfully licensed by the state fire marshal's office as possessing a person with a responsible managing employee (RME) License. 
6.  Sign contractor. A person or company that permits, installs, repairs or makes changes to all types of signs. Such person or company must possess a valid electrical sign contractor license issued by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation (TDLR) to perform such work. The installation of non-electrical portable signs and/or banners does not require a contractor registration. 
7.  Lawn irrigator contractor. A person or company that possesses a valid irrigator's license issued by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). 
8.  Whole house water softener contractor. A person possessing or a company employing a person who possesses a valid water treatment specialist Class 2 or 3 license issued by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). 
9.  Swimming pool contractor. A person or company who contracts to install swimming pools and/or hot tubs. 
(e)  Contractor types not defined. Contractor types not listed above shall be considered a general contractor. A person or company may be issued more than one type of registration, as he or she may be qualified. All contractors required to possess state licenses, certifications, endorsements and/or registrations shall provide proof of such in order to permit or work within the city. 
(Ord. No. 90-37, § I (5-1-3), 5-8-90; Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 09-016, § I, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 11-009, § I, 2-8-11)  
Sec. 8-62. - Fees. 
Fees for registrations shall be paid at time of application. Fees shall be in accordance with the adopted fee schedule, paid per calendar year, renewable each January first. 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 09-016, § I, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 15-043 , § IV, 9-8-15; Ord. No. 19-047 , § IV, 9-17-19)  
Sec. 8-63. - Issuance or refusal. 
The registration required by this article shall be issued or refused in writing not more than ten (10) days after the application has been made. If the registration is refused, the reasons for the refusal shall be given in writing. Nothing in this article shall be interpreted as granting or attempting to grant to any city inspector or employee any discretionary authority to issue a registration or to refuse to issue a registration. Registrations shall be issued to each applicant complying with all applicable state laws and city ordinances, and registrations shall be refused for any applicant failing to comply with all such applicable laws and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 90-37, § I (5-1-6), 5-8-90; Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 09-016, § I, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 8-64. - Restrictions imposed. 
The registration issued under this article shall show on its face the restrictions placed thereon by reason of the types of construction operations to be performed, including but not limited to, general, electrical, plumbing or mechanical. 
(Ord. No. 90-37, § I (5-1-7), 5-8-90; Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 09-016, § I, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 8-65. - Transfer prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person holding a general construction registration to transfer same or to allow the use of same directly or indirectly by any other person for the purpose of obtaining a permit to do any construction operation work herein specified. 
(Ord. No. 90-37, § I (5-1-8), 5-8-90; Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02)  
Sec. 8-66. - Display. 
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a registered construction operation in the city to keep his registration in such convenient location so as to be able to present such registration upon the request of the building official or his designated inspector. 
(Ord. No. 90-37, § I (5-1-9), 5-8-90; Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02)  
Sec. 8-67. - Records. 
The building official shall establish and maintain records of each registration application and each registration issued. Such records shall be retained in the official records for the period required by the city's retention schedule. 
(Ord. No. 90-37, § I (5-1-10), 5-8-90; Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02)  
Sec. 8-68. - Expiration. 
Each registration issued under this article shall expire on the thirty-first day of December following the issuance thereof. 
(Ord. No. 90-37, § I (5-1-5), 5-8-90; Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 09-016, § I, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 8-69. - Suspension. 
(a)  Generally. Any registration issued under this division may be suspended by the board at any time during the life of the registration for any violation by the registrant of the ordinance provisions relating to the registration or the subject matter of the registration, as outlined below. Such suspension may be in addition to any fine imposed. 
(b)  Grounds. The board may suspend the registration of any registrant for a period of not more than one (1) year, after determining at a proper hearing as set out in this article that the registrant has done any of the following: 
(1)  Taken out a permit in the name of a person authorized to do the work and thereafter permitted a person not authorized by this code to do the work; 
(2)  Tampered with, diverted from, or in any way interfered with the proper action, connection, or registration of any public utility service; 
(3)  Employed any person not licensed as provided in this chapter to do work which requires a license under state law or city ordinance; 
(4)  Permitted an unlawful or fraudulent use of the registration issued under this article; 
(5)  Habitually violated this code, where "habitual" means a registrant who has failed to first obtain the required permits prior to work being performed on two (2) or more projects within a twelve (12) month period; 
(6)  Performed any work that is in violation of this chapter and then failed or refused to make corrections necessary for the work to conform to this chapter or has failed to pay any failed inspection penalties of other penalties; or 
(7)  Performed any work in violation of any restrictions imposed on a registration issued to him or her. 
(Ord. No. 90-37, § I (5-1-11), 5-8-90; Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 09-016, § I, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 11-009, § I, 2-8-11)  
Sec. 8-70. - Procedure and hearing. 
(a)  In determining any charges listed for the suspension of a registration issued under this article, the building official shall proceed upon sworn information furnished it by: 
(1)  An official, employee, or inspector of the city; or 
(2)  Any person aggrieved by the action of a registrant in the performance of construction work for which a registration is required by this code. 
(b)  Such information shall be in writing and shall be verified by the person familiar with the facts therein charged. 
(c)  The building official, if he deems the information sufficient to support further action by the board, shall make a written complaint setting out the charges and shall set a hearing before the board at a specified time and place, and shall cause a copy of the complaint and notice of setting for the hearing to be served upon the licensee by certified mail, return receipt requested, no less than ten (10) days before the date appointed in the notice of setting. 
(d)  The registrant may appear in person, or by counsel, at the time and place named in the notice of setting and may make his defense to the charges. 
(e)  All such hearings shall be open to the public, as provided under V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 551 [Texas Open Meetings Act]. 
(f)  The building official and the city attorney or his designee shall be entitled to present evidence and argument at such hearing. If the registrant fails or refuses to appear, the board may proceed to hear and determine the charges in his absence. The board shall have the power, through its chairman, to administer oaths and to compel the attendance of witnesses before it by subpoena issued over the name of the chairman. 
(g)  When the board has completed such hearing and made its decision, it shall cause one (1) copy of its decision to be filed with the building official and one (1) copy to be forwarded to the registrant. 
(Ord. No. 90-37, § I (5-1-12), 5-8-90; Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 09-016, § I, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 8-71. - Surrender and return of registration. 
Any registration which has been suspended under this article shall be surrendered to and be retained by the building official. At the end of the period of suspension, in the absence of further violations, the surrendered registration shall be returned to the registrant and shall be valid under the provisions of this article. If the period of suspension extends beyond the normal expiration date of the registration, the registrant shall pay all registration fees without proration in order to receive a valid registration to continue construction operations following the suspension period. 
(Ord. No. 90-37, § I (5-1-13), 5-8-90; Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 09-016, § I, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 8-72. - Appeals. 
(a)  Scope. This section shall apply to all appeals from any action by any city officer or employee refusing to issue a registration. (This section shall also apply to appeals from any action by the board suspending a registration.) 
(b)  Appeal to building official. Any decision made by any employee of the city with a lower rank than building official may be taken to the building official. Such appeal may be taken by filing a written note, notice, or letter with the building official, briefly describing the decision being appealed. The person seeking the appeal must file the note, notice, or letter within ten (10) business days of the date of being notified of the decision from which the appeal is sought. The building official shall provide an opportunity for conference and shall decide the appeal promptly. 
(c)  Appeal to construction board of appeals. Any decision made by the building official, whether an original decision or a decision on appeal from an employee's decision, may be appealed to the construction board of appeals. 
(d)  Board decisions. Any person affected by a decision of the board relating to issuance or suspension of a registration shall have a right to file a petition for appeal within ten (10) business days thereafter for a hearing before the city council. The city council shall set the matter for hearing upon fourteen (14) days' written notice to the aggrieved person and thereupon take testimony, examine the facts of the case, and determine whether the petitioner is entitled to a registration or is subject to suspension of this registration under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-37, § I (5-1-14), 5-8-90; Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 09-016, § I, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 11-009, § I, 2-8-11)  
Secs. 8-73—8-179. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS  
DIVISION 1. - BUILDING CODE 
 
Sec. 8-180. - Adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by the city the International Building Code, 2018 Edition, together with Appendices C [Group U—Agricultural Buildings], F [Rodent Proofing], H [Signs], I [Patio Covers], K [Administrative Provisions (Electrical)] and amendments, a copy of which is attached hereto and made a part of this chapter for all purposes, the same as if copied in full herein, with the exception of such sections thereof as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended. 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 09-016, § I, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 11-009, § I, 2-8-11; Ord. No. 15-061 , § I, 10-27-15; Ord. No. 18-043 , § I, 11-27-18)  
Sec. 8-181. - Amendments. 
The following sections of the International Building Code, 2018 Edition, together with Appendices C [Group U—Agricultural Buildings], F [Rodent Proofing], H [Signs], I [Patio Covers], K [Administrative Provisions (Electrical)] and amendments, are hereby amended to read as follows: 
(1)  Section 101.1 of the International Building Code, 2018 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
"101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the building code of the City of Killeen, Texas, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(2)  Section 102 of the International Building Code, 2018 Edition, is amended by adding section 102.7 as follows: 
"Section 102.7 Historic buildings. All buildings or structures that are listed in the State or National Register of Historic Places; designated as a historic property under local or state designation law or survey; certified as a contributing resource with a National Register listed or locally designated historic district; or with an opinion or certification that the property is eligible to be listed on the National or State Registers of Historic Places either individually or as a contributing building to a historic district by the State Historic Preservation Officer or the Keeper of the National Register of Historic Places, are exempt from this code. Permit applications for new construction, demolition, renovation or repair of any historic building, structure or site, including secondary buildings and landscape features, within the city shall be initially reviewed by the historic preservation officer and forwarded with a recommendation to the building official. If the property is determined by the historic prevention officer to be a contributing building or is potentially significant, the applicant shall be required to apply for a hearing before the historic preservation board for a determination of significance pursuant to article V, division 9, heritage preservation of the city's zoning ordinance prior to the application for any building permit." 
(3)  Section 105.2 of the International Building Code, 2018 Edition, is amended by deleting Building, item 6 and amending Building, items 1 and 2 to read as follows: 
"Building: 
1. One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses, and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 20 square feet. 
2. Fences not over 2 feet high." 
(4)  Section 107.1 of the International Building Code, 2018 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
"107.1 Submittal documents. Submittal documents consisting of construction documents, statement of special inspections, geotechnical report and other data shall be submitted in two or more paper sets along with an electronic copy with each permit application. The construction documents shall be prepared by a registered design professional where required by the statutes of the jurisdiction in which the project is to be constructed. Where special conditions exist, the building official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional. 
The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data, for the following: 
1.  Group A - assembly occupancies with a design occupant load over 100 persons. 
2.  Group E - educational occupancies with a design occupant load over 50. 
3.  All group H - hazardous and I - institutional occupancies. 
Exception: The building official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that reviewing of construction documents is not necessary to obtain compliance with this code." 
(5)  Section 110 of the International Building Code, 2018 Edition, is amended by adding subsections 110.7.1, 110.7.2, and 110.7.3 to read as follows: 
"110.7.1 Reinspection. Where any work or installation does not pass any initial inspection, the necessary corrections shall be made so as to achieve compliance with this code. The work or installation shall then be resubmitted to the code official for reinspection. A fee shall be paid to the department for each failed inspection. 
110.7.2 Subsequent reinspection. Where any work or installation does not pass a reinspection, the necessary corrections shall be made so as to achieve compliance with this code. The work or installation shall then be resubmitted to the code official for a subsequent reinspection. A fee shall be paid to the department prior to each subsequent failed inspection. A failed inspection fee shall be paid to the department prior to any subsequent inspection. 
110.7.3 Requirements prior to inspections. No inspection for new commercial or new residential construction shall occur if any of the following are not placed at each permitted construction site: 
1.  Trash receptacle. Such trash receptacle shall be sufficient in size for the project but not smaller than 24 square feet by 4 feet in height with openings no larger than 9 square inches and must be capable of containing construction debris. Such receptacles must be properly maintained and serviced. 
2.  Project address number posted and visible from street. 
3.  Construction worker toilet facilities as required in 311.1 of the 2018 IPC." 
(6)  Section 113 of the International Building Code, 2018 Edition, is amended by amending the title and section 113.1 to read as follows: 
"SECTION 113 CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF APPEALS 
113.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a construction board of appeals. The construction board of appeals is established in this chapter. Where board of appeals appears in this code, it shall hereinafter read construction board of appeals." 
(7)  Section 114.1 of the International Building Code, 2018 Edition, is amended by adding section 114.1.1 to read as follows: 
"114.1.1 Project nuisances. A stop work order may be issued if any of the following occur: 
1.  Construction litter and debris not kept in an approved receptacle designed in a manner so as not to allow it to be blown, carried, or deposited by the wind upon any private or public property or any right-of-way. 
2.  Project address is not posted or visible from the street or the construction worker toilet facility missing or not in sanitary condition. 
3.  Excessive construction noise in violation of chapter 16 - miscellaneous provisions and offenses of the Killeen Code of Ordinances." 
(8)  Section 406.7.2 of the International Building Code, 2018 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
"406.7.2 Canopies. Canopies under which fuels are dispensed shall have a clear, unobstructed height of not less than 14 feet 0 inches (4,267.2 mm) to the lowest projecting element in the vehicle drive through area. [The remaining section in the code remains in effect and is not amended]. 
(9)  Chapter 11 of the International Building Code, 2018 Edition, is amended by deleting sections 1102 through 1111 in their entirety, and amending section 1101.2 to read as follows: 
"1101.2 Design. Buildings and facilities shall be designed and constructed to be accessible in accordance with the Texas Accessibility Standards (TAS) of the Architectural Barriers Act. Buildings subject to the requirements of the Texas Accessibility Standards are described in Administrative Rules of the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation, Title 16 Texas Administrative Code, Part 4, Chapter 68 Elimination of Architectural Barriers. 
Exception: Buildings regulated under State Law and built in accordance with State certified plans, including any variances or waivers granted by the State, shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this chapter." 
(10)  Section 1612.3 of the International Building Code, 2018 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
"1612.3 Establishment of flood hazard areas. To establish flood hazard areas, the governing body shall adopt a flood hazard map and supporting data. The flood hazard map shall include, at a minimum, areas of special flood hazard as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency an engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for the City of Killeen," as amended or revised with the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM) and related supporting data along with any revisions thereto. The adopted flood hazard map and supporting data are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this section. (REF. Chapter 12 Flood Damage Prevention of the City of Killeen's Code of Ordinances)" 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 09-016, § I, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 11-009, § I, 2-8-11; Ord. No. 15-061 , § I, 10-27-15; Ord. No. 18-043 , § I, 11-27-18)  
Secs. 8-182—8-185. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - EXISTING BUILDING CODE 
 
Sec. 8-186. - Adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by the city the International Existing Building Code, 2018 Edition, a copy of which is attached hereto and made a part of this chapter for all purposes, the same as if copied in full herein, with the exception of such sections thereof as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 09-016, § I, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 11-009, § I, 2-8-11; Ord. No. 15-061 , § I, 10-27-15; Ord. No. 18-043 , § I, 11-27-18)  
Sec. 8-187. - Amendments. 
The following sections of the International Existing Building Code, 2018 Edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
(1)  Section 101.1 of the Existing International Building Code, 2018 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
"101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the existing building code of the City of Killeen, Texas, hereinafter referred to as 'this code.'" 
(2)  Section 105.2 of the International Existing Building Code, 2018 Edition, is amended by deleting Building, items 1 and 5. 
(3)  Section 106.1 of the International Existing Building Code, 2018 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
"106.1 Submittal documents. Construction documents, special inspection and structural observation programs, and other data shall be submitted in one or more sets with each application for a permit. The construction documents shall be prepared by a registered design professional where required by statutes of the jurisdiction in which the project is to be constructed. Where special conditions exist, the building official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional. 
The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data, for the following: 
1.  Group A - assembly occupancies with a design occupant load over 100 persons. 
2.  Group E - educational occupancies with a design occupant load over 50 persons. 
3.  All Group H - hazardous occupancies and I - institutional occupancies. 
Exception: The building official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that reviewing of construction documents is not necessary to obtain compliance with this code." 
(4)  Section 109.6 of the International Building Code, 2018 Edition, is amended by adding subsections 109.6.1, 109.6.2, and 109.6.3 to read as follows: 
"109.6.1 Reinspection. Where any work or installation does not pass any initial inspection, the necessary corrections shall be made so as to achieve compliance with this code. The work or installation shall then be resubmitted to the code official for failed reinspection. A fee shall be paid to the department for each failed inspection. 
109.6.2 Subsequent reinspection. Where any work or installation does not pass a reinspection, the necessary corrections shall be made so as to achieve compliance with this code. The work or installation shall then be resubmitted to the code official for a subsequent reinspection. A failed inspection fee shall be paid to the department prior to any subsequent inspection. 
109.6.3 Requirements prior to inspections. No inspection for new commercial or new residential construction shall occur if any of the following are not placed at each permitted construction site: 
1.  Trash receptacle. Such trash receptacle shall be sufficient in size for the project but not smaller than 24 square feet by 4 feet in height with openings no larger than 9 square inches and must be capable of containing construction debris. Such receptacles must be properly maintained and serviced. 
2.  Project address number posted and visible from street. 
3.  Construction worker toilet facilities as required in 311.1 of the 2018 IPC." 
(5)  Section 112 of the International Existing Building Code, 2018 Edition, is amended by amending the title and section 112.1 to read as follows: 
"SECTION 112 CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF APPEALS 
112.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a construction board of appeals. The construction board of appeals is established in this chapter. Where board of appeals appears in this code, it shall hereinafter read construction board of appeals." 
(6)  Section 114.1 of the International Existing Building Code, 2018 Edition, is amended by adding section 114.1.1 to read as follows: 
"114.1.1 Project nuisances. A stop work order may be issued if any of the following occur: 
1.  Litter not kept in an approved receptacle designed in a manner so as not to allow it to be blown, carried, or deposited by the wind upon any private or public right-of-way. 
2.  Project address is not posted or visible from the street or the construction worker toilet facility missing or not in sanitary condition. 
3.  Excessive construction noise in violation of chapter 16 - miscellaneous provisions and offenses of the Killeen Code of Ordinances." 
(7)  Section 110.1 of the Existing International Building Code, 2018 Edition, is amended by adding sections 110.1.2 and 110.1.3 to read as follows: 
"110.1.2 Change in tenancy. It shall be unlawful to make a change in tenancy of any existing commercial building or lease space without first making application for and obtaining approval for a certificate of occupancy. 
110.1.3 Nontransferable. Once issued, a certificate of occupancy is not transferable to another owner, person, business or property." 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 09-016, § I, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 11-009, § I, 2-8-11; Ord. No. 15-061 , § I, 10-27-15; Ord. No. 18-043 , § I, 11-27-18)  
Secs. 8-188—8-189. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RESIDENTIAL CODE 
 
Sec. 8-190. - Same—Adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by the city the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2018 Edition, together with Appendices A [Sizing and Capacities of Gas Piping], B [Sizing of Venting Systems], C [Exit Terminals of Mechanical Draft and Direct-vent Venting Systems], D [Recommended Procedure for Safety Inspection of an Exiting Appliance Installation], E [Manufactured Housing used as Dwellings], F [Radon Control Methods, G [Piping Standards for Various Applications], H [Patio Covers], J [Existing Buildings and Structures], K [Sound Transmission], M [Home Day Care], N [Venting Methods], O [Automatic Vehicular Gates], P [Sizing of Water Piping], Q [Tiny Houses], T [Solar-Ready Provisions] and amendments, a copy of which is attached hereto and made a part of this chapter for all purposes, the same as if copied in full herein, with the exception of such sections thereof as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended. 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 09-016, § I, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 11-009, § I, 2-8-11; Ord. No. 15-061 , § I, 10-27-15; Ord. No. 18-043 , § I, 11-27-18)  
Sec. 8-191. - Same—Amendments. 
The following sections of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2018 Edition and amendments, are hereby amended to read as follows: 
(1)  Section R101.1 of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2018 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
"R101.1 Title. These provisions shall be known as the residential code of the City of Killeen, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(2)  Section R105.2 of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2018 Edition, is amended by deleting Building, items 5 and 10 and amending Building, items 1 and 2 to read as follows: 
"Building: 
1.  One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 20 square feet (3.71 m2). 
2.  Fences not over 2 feet high." 
(3)  Section R109.4 of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2018 Edition, is amended by adding subsections R109.4.1, R109.4.2, and R109.4.3 to read as follows: 
"R109.4.1 Reinspection. Where any work or installation does not pass any initial inspection, the necessary corrections shall be made so as to achieve compliance with this code. The work or installation shall then be resubmitted to the code official for reinspection. A failed inspection fee shall be paid to the department for each failed inspection. 
R109.4.2 Subsequent reinspection. Where any work or installation does not pass a reinspection, the necessary corrections shall be made so as to achieve compliance with this code. The work or installation shall then be resubmitted to the code official for a subsequent reinspection. A failed inspection fee shall be paid to the department prior to any subsequent inspection. 
R109.4.3 Requirements prior to inspections. No inspection for new residential construction shall occur if any of the following are not placed at each permitted construction site: 
1.  Trash receptacle. Such trash receptacle shall be sufficient in size for the project but not smaller than 24 square feet by 4 feet in height with openings no larger than 9 square inches and must be capable of containing construction debris. Such receptacles must be properly maintained and serviced. 
2.  Project address number posted and visible from street. 
3.  Construction worker toilet facilities as required in R306.5 of the 2009 IRC." 
(4)  Section R112 of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2018 Edition, is amended by amending the title and section R112.1, and by deleting sections R112.2 through R112.4 to read as follows: 
"SECTION R112 CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF APPEALS 
R112.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a construction board of appeals. The construction board of appeals is established in this chapter. Where board of appeals appears in this code, it shall hereinafter read construction board of appeals." 
(5)  Section 114.1 of the International Residential Code for One and Two-Family Dwellings, 2018 Edition, is amended by adding section 114.1.2 to read as follows: 
"114.1.2 Project nuisances. A stop work order may be issued if any of the following occur: 
1.  Litter not kept in an approved receptacle designed in a manner so as not to allow it to be blown, carried, or deposited by the wind upon any private or public property or right-of-way. 
2.  Project address is not posted or visible from the street or the construction worker toilet missing or not in sanitary condition. 
3.  Excessive construction noise in violation of chapter 16 - miscellaneous provisions and offenses of the Killeen Code of Ordinances." 
(6)  Section R301.1 of the International Residential Code for One-and Two-Family Dwellings, 2009 Edition, is amended by inserting the appropriate design criteria in Table R301.2(1) as follows: 
Ground Snow Load 	Wind Speed d (mph) 	Seismic Design Category f 
5 lb/ft 2 	115 (3-sec-gust) 	A 
 
Subject to damage from 
Weathering a 	Frost line depth b 	Termite c 	Decay d 	Winter Design Temp f 	Flood Hazards g 
Moderate 	4" 	Moderate to 
heavy 	Slight to 
moderate 	26 o F 	Local code 
 
(7)  Section R306 of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2018 Edition, is amended by adding section 306.5 to read as follows: 
"R306.5 Toilet facilities for workers. Each contractor shall provide toilet facilities for construction workers and such facilities shall be maintained in a sanitary condition. Construction worker toilet facilities of the non-sewer type shall conform to ANSI Z4.3. The path of travel to required facilities shall not exceed a distance of 150 feet (45.5 m)." 
(8)  Section R313.2 of the International Residential Code for One-and Two-Family Dwellings, 2018 Edition, is amended by deleting section 313.2 in its entirety. 
(9)  Section G2417.4.1 of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2018 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
"G2417.4.1 Test pressure. The test pressure to be used shall be no less than one and one-half times the proposed maximum working pressure but not less than 10 psig (68.9 kPa gauge) and the test gauge shall not be rated higher than 30 PSI, or at the discretion of the code official, the piping and valves may be tested at a pressure of at least six (6) inches (152 mm) of mercury, measured with a manometer, low pressure diaphragm gauge or slope gauge. For welded piping, and for piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of 0.5 psig or fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48 kPa), the test pressure shall not be less than sixty (60) pounds per square inch (413.4 kPa)." 
(10)  Chapters 34 through 4043 of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2018 Edition [Electrical Requirements], are amended by deleting them in their entirety. 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 09-016, § I, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 11-009, § I, 2-8-11; Ord. No. 15-061 , § I, 10-27-15; Ord. No. 18-043 , § I, 11-27-18)  
Secs. 8-192—8-209. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ELECTRICAL CODE  
Subdivision 1. - Code Adoption 
 
Sec. 8-210. - Adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by the city the National Electrical Code (NFPA 70), 2017 Edition, a copy of which is attached hereto and made a part of this chapter for all purposes, the same as if copied in full herein, with the exception of such sections thereof as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended. 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 09-016, § I, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 11-009, § I, 2-8-11; Ord. No. 15-061 , § I, 10-27-15; Ord. No. 18-043 , § I, 11-27-18)  
Secs. 8-211—8-219. - Reserved.  
Subdivision 2. - Additional Local Requirements 
 
Sec. 8-220. - General installation requirements for residential and commercial buildings and structures. 
(a)  All electrical construction and all materials and appliances used in connection with the installation, maintenance, and operation of electrical wiring, apparatus or equipment for the utilization of electrical energy for light, heat or power shall conform to the rules and regulations of this section, the adopted electrical code, and in harmony with the electrical service guidelines of the local electrical utility provider. 
(b)  Abandoned wiring. Whenever new wiring is replacing old wiring, the old wiring shall be completely removed where possible. Abandoned wiring that cannot be removed shall be rendered unusable for future use before final approval shall be given for the new wiring. 
(c)  Additions to existing wiring. Where additions or extensions are made, and part of the existing wiring remains in use, and if defects exist in same, the existing wiring must be corrected and shall meet standards for new work. 
(d)  Electrical service upgrade required. The electrical service shall be upgraded on a structure when electrical power is disconnected for any of the following conditions: 
(1)  Dangerous or unsafe electrical hazards; 
(2)  Substantial damage to electrical service over fifty percent (50%); 
(3)  Loss of electrical power for a period of one (1) year or longer. 
(e)  Electrical system upgrade required (total rewire). The electrical system shall be upgraded on a structure when any of the following occur: 
(1)  Dangerous or unsafe electrical hazards. 
(2)  Substantial damage to electrical system over fifty percent (50%). 
(3)  Change from residential use to commercial use. For the purpose of this section, apartment dwellings are considered residential use and hotel/motel structures are considered commercial use. 
(f)  Service masts as supports. In addition to the requirements in the NEC, section 230-28, all service masts installed as support for service-drop conductors shall meet the following: 
(1)  Only service-drop conductors shall be permitted to be attached to a service mast. 
(2)  Service conduit extending through the roof and used for a service support shall be sealed at the roof with an approved flashing and extend a minimum of thirty of thirty-six (36) inches above the roof. Such service conduit shall be anchored just before entering the roof. 
(3)  A minimum size of two (2) inches rigid conduit shall be used for service mast. E.M.T. or I.M.C are not acceptable for service masts supports. 
(g)  Services—general. In addition to the requirements in the NEC, Section 230, all services installed shall meet the following: 
(1)  All entrance service conductors shall be enclosed in galvanized conduit or electrical metallic tubing. A minimum of one and one-quarter inch (1-1/4") conduit shall be used for service other than for service masts. 
(2)  Length of outside service wire extension beyond service weatherhead shall not be less than (1) one foot. 
(3)  Unless otherwise allowed in Section 230 of the adopted NEC, tenant or lease space buildings shall have only (1) electrical service meter allowed for each individual tenant space. Reconfigured tenant spaces that combine the interior, through doors or other access points, of two or more originally separate tenant spaces in order to serve one (1) tenant exclusively shall be required to remove all but one (1) electrical service meter. 
(h)  Electrical metallic tubing installation. Electrical metallic tubing shall not be permitted for direct burial in earth or installed in or under concrete on grade or below grade. (REF. NEC Article 348-10 Uses Permitted.) 
(i)  Main disconnects. Service entrance conductors hereafter installed on all buildings, shall require a single main disconnect (limited to six (6) overcurrent devices) or manual shunt-trip device located outside the building or structure. When a remote shunt-trip button is installed, it shall be located on the exterior of the building or structure and shall have a visual indication that the service has been disconnected when the trip has been activated. The shunt-trip button shall be in a sturdy, exterior cabinet that can be secured with a padlock. The cabinet shall be permanently marked on the exterior, stating "shunt-trip disconnect." 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 09-016, § I, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 11-009, § I, 2-8-11; Ord. No. 15-061 , § I, 10-27-15; Ord. No. 18-043 , § I, 11-27-18)  
Sec. 8-221. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-043 , § I, adopted Nov. 27, 2018, repealed § 8-221, which pertained to additional residential requirements for one- and two-family dwellings, townhouses, and apartment use buildings and derived from Ord. No. 02-24, § I, adopted May, 28, 2002; Ord. No. 09-016, § I, adopted Feb. 24, 2009; and Ord. No. 11-009, § I, adopted Feb. 8, 2011.  
Sec. 8-222. - Additional commercial requirements for hotel, motel, and other non-residential use buildings or structures. 
(a)  Wiring requirements. All electrical wiring installed in nonresidential buildings and dwelling buildings over three (3) stories tall shall be installed with code approved conduit materials and methods. Non-metallic sheathed cable (Romex type wire) shall not be used. 
(b)  Receptacle requirements. Receptacles and switches in commercial buildings shall be rated a minimum of twenty (20) ampere. 
(c)  Minimum building service. Except for small unoccupied buildings and structures such as ATM booths, billboards, and similar uses all nonresidential buildings shall have a minimum of a two hundred (200) ampere service. 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 09-016, § I, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 18-043 , § I, 11-27-18)  
Secs. 8-223—8-239. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - PLUMBING CODE 
 
Sec. 8-240. - Adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by the city the International Plumbing Code, 2018 Edition, together with Appendices B (Rates of Rainfall for Various Cities, C (Structural Safety), D (Degree Day and Design Temperatures, and E (Sizing of Water Pipe System) and amendments, a copy of which is attached hereto and made a part of this chapter for all purposes, the same as if copied in full herein, with the exception of such sections thereof as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended. 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 09-016, § I, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 11-009, § I, 2-8-11; Ord. No. 15-061 , § I, 10-27-15; Ord. No. 18-043 , § I, 11-27-18)  
Sec. 8-241. - Amendments. 
The following sections of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 Edition, together with Appendices B, C, D and E, and amendments, are hereby amended to read as follows: 
(1)  Section 101.1 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
"101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the plumbing code of the City of Killeen, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(2)  Section 305.4.1 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
"305.4.1 Building Sewers. Building sewers that connect to private sewage systems shall be a minimum of 6 inches below finished grade at the point of septic tank connection. Building sewers shall be a minimum of 6 inches below grade." 
(3)  Section 903.1 of the International Plumbing Code, 2018 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
"903.1 Roof extension. All open vent pipes that extend through a roof shall be terminated at least 6 inches (152 mm) above the roof, except that where a roof is to be used for any purpose other than weather protection, the vent extensions shall terminate at least 7 feet (2,134 mm) above the roof." 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 09-016, § I, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 11-009, § I, 2-8-11; Ord. No. 15-061 , § I, 10-27-15; Ord. No. 18-043 , § I, 11-27-18)  
Secs. 8-242—8-259. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - FUEL GAS CODE 
 
Sec. 8-260. - Adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by the city the International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 Edition, together with Appendix A (Sizing and Capacities of Gas Piping), B (Sizing of Vent Systems), C (Exit Terminations), D (Recommended Procedures for Safety Inspections) and amendments, a copy of which is attached hereto and made a part of this chapter for all purposes, the same as if copied in full herein, with the exception of such sections thereof as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended. 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 09-016, § I, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 11-009, § I, 2-8-11; Ord. No. 15-061 , § I, 10-27-15; Ord. No. 18-043 , § I, 11-27-18)  
Sec. 8-261. - Amendments. 
The following sections of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 Edition, are hereby amended to read as follows: 
(1)  Section 101.1 of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
"101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the fuel gas code of the City of Killeen, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(2)  Section 406.4.1 of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 Edition, is amended by amending sections 406.4.1 and 406.4.2 to read as follows: 
"406.4.1 Test pressure. The test pressure to be used shall be no less than 11/2 times the proposed maximum working pressure but not less than 10 psig (69 kPa gauge) and the test gauge shall not be rated higher than 30 PSI, or at the discretion of the code official, the piping and valves may be tested at a pressure of at least six (6) inches (152 mm) of mercury, measured with a manometer, low pressure diaphragm gauge or slope gauge. For welded piping, and for piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of 0.5 psig or fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48 kPa), the test pressure shall not be less than sixty (60) pounds per square inch (413.4 kPa). Where the test pressure exceeds 125 psig (862 kPa gauge), the test pressure shall not exceed a value that produces a hoop stress in the piping greater than 50 percent of the specified minimum yield strength of the pipe. 
406.4.2 Test duration. Test duration for residential dwellings shall be not less than 10 minutes. For larger piping systems the code official may require a longer test duration, not to exceed 24 hours." 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 09-016, § I, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 11-009, § I, 2-8-11; Ord. No. 15-061 , § I, 10-27-15; Ord. No. 18-043 , § I, 11-27-18)  
Secs. 8-262—8-279. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - MECHANICAL CODE 
 
Sec. 8-280. - Adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by the city the International Mechanical Code, 2018 Edition, together with Appendix A (Chimney Connector Pass-Throughs), and amendments, a copy of which is attached hereto and made a part of this chapter for all purposes, the same as if copied in full herein, with the exception of such sections thereof as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended. 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 09-016, § I, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 11-009, § I, 2-8-11; Ord. No. 15-061 , § I, 10-27-15; Ord. No. 18-043 , § I, 11-27-18)  
Sec. 8-281. - Amendments. 
The following sections of the International Mechanical Code, 2018 Edition, are hereby amended to read as follows: 
(1)  Section 101.1 of the International Mechanical Code, 2018 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
"101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the mechanical code of the City of Killeen, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 09-016, § I, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 11-009, § I, 2-8-11; Ord. No. 15-061 , § I, 10-27-15; Ord. No. 18-043 , § I, 11-27-18)  
Secs. 8-282—8-299. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE 
 
Sec. 8-300. - Adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by the city the International Energy Conservation Code, 2018 Edition, together with Appendix RA (Solar-Ready Provisions) with amendments, a copy of which is attached hereto and made a part of this chapter for all purposes, the same as if copied in full herein, with the exception of such sections thereof as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended. 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 09-016, § I, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 11-009, § I, 2-8-11; Ord. No. 15-061 , § I, 10-27-15; Ord. No. 18-043 , § I, 11-27-18)  
Sec. 8-301. - Amendments. 
The following sections of the International Energy Conservation Code, 2018 Edition, are hereby amended to read as follows: 
(1)  Section 101.1 of the International Energy Conservation Code, 2018 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
"101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the energy conservation code of the City of Killeen, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 09-016, § I, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 11-009, § I, 2-8-11; Ord. No. 15-061 , § I, 10-27-15; Ord. No. 18-043 , § I, 11-27-18)  
Secs. 8-302—8-309. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE 
 
Sec. 8-310. - Adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by the city the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2018 Edition, together with amendments, a copy of which is attached hereto and made a part of this chapter for all purposes, the same as if copied in full herein, with the exception of such sections thereof as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended. 
(Ord. No. 15-061 , § I, 10-27-15; Ord. No. 18-043 , § I, 11-27-18)  
Sec. 8-311. - Amendments. 
The following sections of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2018 Edition, are hereby amended to read as follows: 
(1)  Section 101.1 of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2018 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
"101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the swimming pool and spa code of the City of Killeen, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
( Ord. No. 18-043 , § I, 11-27-18)  
Secs. 8-312—8-319. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-061 , § I, adopted Oct. 27, 2015 renumbered div. 9 as division 10, as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 8-320. - Adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by the city the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition, and amendments, a copy of which is attached hereto and made a part of this chapter for all purposes, the same as if copied in full herein, with the exception of such sections thereof as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended. 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 09-016, § I, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 11-009, § I, 2-8-11; Ord. No. 15-061 , § I, 10-27-15; Ord. No. 18-043 , § I, 11-27-18)  
Sec. 8-321. - Amendments. 
The following sections of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition, and amendments, are hereby amended to read as follows: 
(1)  Section 101.1 of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
"101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the property maintenance code of the City of Killeen, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(2)  Section 103.5 of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
"103.5 Fees. The fees for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as established by the applicable governing authority. The fee for activities and services performed by the department in carrying out its responsibilities under the property maintenance code shall be as indicated in section 8-11 of the City of Killeen Code of Ordinances." 
(3)  Section 106.4 of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
"106.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or fail to comply therewith, or fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or repair work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $2,000 dollars. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense." 
(4)  Section 107.1 of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
"107.1 Notice to owner or to person or persons responsible. Whenever the building official determines that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be given to the owner or the person or persons responsible therefore in the manner prescribed in sections 107.2 and 107.3." 
(5)  Section 108 of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition, is amended by amending section 108.1 and by deleting sections 108.1.1 through 108.7 to read as follows: 
"108.1 General. When a structure or equipment is found by the building official to be unsafe, dilapidated, imminently dangerous, found unfit for human occupancy, or is found unlawful, such structure shall be condemned pursuant to the provisions of article V of chapter 8 of the code of ordinances." 
(6)  Section 109 of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition, is amended by deleting it in its entirety. 
(7)  Section 110 of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition, is amended by deleting it in its entirety. 
(8)  Section 111 of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition, is amended by amending section 111.1 and by deleting sections 111.2 through 111.8 to read as follows: 
"SECTION 111 CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF APPEALS 
111.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a construction board of appeals. The construction board of appeals is established in this chapter. Where board of appeals appears in this code, it shall hereinafter read construction board of appeals." 
(9)  Section 302.4 of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
"302.4 Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of 12 inches (304.8 mm). All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens." 
(10)  Section 302.7 of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition, is amended to add Section 302.7.1 to read as follows: 
"302.7.1 Fence Maintenance. 
For the purposes of the chapter, fence shall be as defined in Chapter 31, Division 10 of the Killeen Code of Ordinances. 
All fences shall be maintained as follows: 
a.  Fences shall not be out of vertical alignment more than one (1) foot from the true vertical (90 degree angle from adjacent grade) measured at the top of the fence. 
b.  Any and all broken, loose, damaged, insect damaged, or missing parts (i.e., slats, posts, wood rails, bricks, panels) shall be replaced or repaired within thirty (30) days of notification of non-compliance. Fences enclosing swimming pools or spas must be repaired immediately. 
c.  Repairs of any nature shall be made with materials of comparable composition, color, size, shape, and quality of the original fence to which the repair is being made. Nothing herein shall be construed so as to prohibit the complete removal of a fence, unless such fence encloses a swimming pool or spa or the fence is required for screening purposes in accordance with Chapter 31 - Zoning." 
(11)  Section 304.14 of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
"304.14 Insect screens. Every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas, or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly fitted screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm) and every screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. 
Exception: Screen doors shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed." 
(12)  Sections 602.3 and 602.4 of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition, are amended to read as follows: 
"602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory or guestroom on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat to maintain a temperature of not less than 65°F (18°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms. 
Exception: When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall not be required provided that the heating system is operating at its full design capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature for the locality shall be as indicated in Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code. 
602.4 Occupied work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat to maintain a temperature of not less than 65°F (18°C) during the period the space is occupied. Exceptions: 
1.  Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions. 
2.  Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities." 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 09-016, § I, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 11-009, § I, 2-8-11; Ord. No. 15-061 , § I, 10-27-15; Ord. No. 18-043 , § I, 11-27-18)  
Secs. 8-322—8-339. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - AIRCRAFT NOISE ATTENUATION REQUIREMENTS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-061 , § I, adopted Oct. 27, 2015 renumbered div. 10 as division 11, as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 8-340. - Aircraft noise attenuation requirements. 
I.  Aircraft Noise Zones. 
A.  For the purposes of this code, certain sections of the city are declared to be and are hereby established as zones subject to significant noise from aircraft. These zones shall be known and designated as the 65-70 LDN Noise Zone and the Over 70 LDN Noise Zone, as such are identified within the 1991 Killeen municipal airport master plan. 
B.  These noise zones shall include, and be limited to, such territory or portions of the city as is designated and shown within aircraft noise impact maps of the 1991 Killeen Municipal airport master plan, which are hereby incorporated into this code and made a part hereof for all intents and purposes. 
II.  Noise Level Reduction Standards. 
A.  Plans for the construction of buildings or structures within noise zones shall be certified as achieving at least the outdoor to indoor noise level reductions as measured in decibels within the building as follows: 
BUILDING USE 	65-70 LDN NOISE ZONE 	OVER 70 LDN NOISE ZONE 
RESIDENTIAL 		
Residential within each unit 
including transient lodgings 	25 	30 
PUBLIC USE 		
Schools, Hospitals, Nursing Homes 	25 	30 
 
III.  Certification of Plans Prior to Issuance of Building Permit. 
A.  The building official shall not issue a building permit for any buildings or structures within the noise zones established by this ordinance unless: 
1.  The plans and specifications accompanying the application for said permit are certified by a bona fide acoustical consultant as meeting the Noise Level Reduction standards required by this ordinance; or 
2.  By certification of the building official that the following construction standards have been met: 
a.  Building Requirements for a Minimum Noise Level Reduction of 25 dB (within the 65-70 LDN): 
Exterior Walls 
Masonry walls shall be equivalent in weight to six inch minimum light-weight concrete block. At least one surface shall be painted or plastered. A furred interior wall is not required on the inside of masonry walls. 
Siding-on-sheathing, stucco or brick veneer shall be installed on the outside of minimum 4-inch nominal deep studs. 
Interior wall surface of exterior wall shall be minimum half-inch gypsum board or plaster installed on the inside of the wall studs. 
Continuous sheathing as required by the code shall cover the exterior said of the wall studs behind wood, asphalt or aluminum siding. The sheathing shall be minimum half-inch thick. 
Sheathing boards or panels shall be butted tightly and covered on the exterior with overlapping and airtight building paper when wood sheathing is used. 
Brick veneer, masonry blocks or stucco walls shall be constructed airtight except as otherwise required by the code. All surface joints shall be grouted or caulked airtight. Weep Holes shall be installed in the bottom vertical joint a maximum of eight foot on center. 
Penetration of wall by pipes or ducts shall be caulked or filled with mortar. 
Windows 
Glass of single-glazed windows shall be minimum three-sixteenth's of an inch thick. 
Glass of double-glazed windows shall be of standard manufacturers' thickness and separation of not less than one-quarter inch. 
All operable windows in these dwellings shall contain hinged-type sash or double-hung sash. The sash shall be rigid and weather stripped with an efficiently airtight, flexible nonmetallic material that is compressed airtight when the window is closed. 
Horizontally sliding sash windows may be used only if the sash is weather stripped with an efficiently airtight gasket and if the window has a laboratory sound transmission rating of STC-28 or greater. 
Glass for fixed-sash windows shall be set and sealed in an airtight non-hardening glazing compound or in an elastomer gasket. 
The perimeter of window frames shall be sealed airtight to the exterior wall construction and all gaps between the window frame and the wall framing shall be filled with an insulating foam or stuffed with batt insulation. 
Doors 
All exterior doors shall be one and three-quarter inch solid core wood or metal clad door and shall be fully weather stripped in an airtight manner and all gaps between the window frame and wall framing shall be filled with an insulating foam or stuffed with batt insulation. 
Sliding doors may be used if the operable sash is weather stripped with an efficient airtight gasket and if the door has a laboratory sound transmission rating of STC-28 or greater. Glass of sliding doors shall be minimum three-sixteenth's of an inch thick. 
The perimeter of door frames shall be sealed airtight to the exterior wall construction. 
Ceilings 
Minimum half inch thick gypsum board or plaster ceilings shall be provided below attic space or roof rafters or roof construction less than eight psf. 
A minimum thermal resistance ® factor of nineteen shall be provided above the ceiling between the joists. Insulation in attic space shall have no paper or foil covering on the face exposing to the attic. 
Ventilation 
Mechanical ventilation shall be provided of a type and design to provide adequate environmental comfort with all doors and windows closed during all seasons. 
Window and through-the-wall ventilation units shall not be allowed. 
Vent openings in attic or crawl spaces shall be minimum in number and size to provide proper ventilation. A "vent" shall mean a conduit or passageway, vertical or nearly so, for conveying products of combustion to the outside atmosphere. 
Return air duct lining shall be one inch minimum coated glass fiber duct liner. 
Fireplaces shall be provided with well-fitted dampers. 
b.  Building Requirements for a Minimum Noise Level Reduction of 30 dB (within the 70 and above LDN): 
Exterior Walls 
Masonry block units shall be equivalent in weight to minimum six inch dense concrete block. At least one surface shall be painted or plastered. A furred interior wall is not required on the inside of masonry walls. 
Siding-on-sheathing, stucco or brick veneer shall be installed on the outside of minimum four inch nominal deep studs. 
Interior wall surface of exterior walls shall be minimum five-eighth inch gypsum board or plaster installed on the inside of the wall studs. 
Continuous sheathing as required by the code shall cover the exterior side of the wall studs behind wood, asphalt or aluminum siding. The sheathing shall be minimum half-inch thick. The weight of the sheathing and facing shall be at least four psf. 
Sheathing boards or panels shall be butted tightly and covered on the exterior with overlapping and airtight building paper. The top and bottom edges of the sheathing shall be sealed airtight. 
A minimum thermal resistance ® factor of thirteen shall be provided in the cavity space behind the exterior sheathing and between wall studs with glass fiber or mineral wool. 
Brick veneer, masonry blocks or stucco walls shall be constructed airtight except as otherwise required by the code. All surface joints shall be grouted or caulked airtight. 
Penetration of wall by pipes or ducts shall be caulked or filled with mortar. 
Windows 
Single-glazed windows may be used if the window is fixed and if the glazing is acoustical glass with a laboratory sound transmission rating of minimum STC-35. 
Glass of double-glazed windows shall be minimum of three-sixteenth's of an inch in thickness. Panes of glass shall be separated by a minimum quarter-inch air space and shall not be equal in thickness. 
Glass of triple-glazed windows shall be of standard manufacturer's width and separation. 
Double and triple glazed windows shall contain fixed sash or efficiently weather stripped operable sash. The sash shall be rigid and weather stripped with an efficiently airtight material that is compressed airtight when the window is closed. 
Glass of fixed-sash windows shall be set and sealed in an airtight non-hardening glazing compound or in a elastomer gasket. 
The perimeter of window frames shall be sealed airtight to the exterior wall construction and all gaps between the window frame and the wall framing shall be filled with an insulating foam or stuffed with batt insulation. 
The total area of glass of both windows and doors in sleeping spaces shall not exceed twenty percent of the net floor area. 
Doors 
Double-door construction is required for all door openings to the exterior. If doors are separated by a vestibule of three-foot minimum depth, each door shall be one and a half-inch minimum solid core wood or metal clad door. One door shall be weather stripped in an airtight manner. The other door shall be tightly fitted to the door frame or shall be weather stripped. 
If no vestibule is used, a one and three-quarters of an inch minimum solid core wood door may be used in series with a storm door. Both doors shall be weather stripped in an airtight manner. 
Single-frame sliding glass doors shall not be used. The glass of double sliding doors shall be separated by a minimum one-quarter of an inch airspace. Each sliding frame shall be provided with an efficiently airtight weather stripping material. 
Glass of storm and sliding doors shall be minimum three sixteenth's of an inch. Glass of double sliding doors shall not be equal in thickness. 
The perimeter of door frames shall be sealed airtight to the exterior wall construction. 
Roofs 
Roof sheathing shall be minimum three quarter inch thick continuous plywood. Spaced board-sheathing shall not be used. 
Roof sheathing joints shall be sealed airtight and shall be covered with overlapping, airtight building paper. 
Exposed roof decks shall be minimum two inch thick wood or concrete, and the total weight of the roof construction shall be a minimum of twelve psf. 
Ceilings 
A minimum half inch thick gypsum board or plaster ceiling shall be provided below attic spaces or below the roof rafters or roof decks less than two inches thick and weighing less than twelve psf. 
The ceiling shall be a minimum of twelve inches below the roof sheathing. 
A minimum thermal resistance ® factor of twenty-three shall be provided above the ceiling between the joists. Insulation in attic space shall have no paper or foil covering on the face exposing to the attic. 
Ventilation 
Mechanical ventilation shall be provided of a type and design to provide adequate environmental comfort with all doors and windows closed during all seasons. 
Window and through-the-wall ventilation units shall not be used. 
Vent openings in attic or crawl spaces shall be minimum in number and size. The openings shall be provided with five-foot long transfer ducts containing at least one ninety degree elbow and internal acoustical lining. 
Ventilation ducts connecting the interior space to the outdoor or attic space shall contain at least ten-foot long internal duct lining plus one limited ninety degree elbow. 
Duct lining shall be coated glass fiber duct liner of one inch minimum thickness. 
Operational vented fireplaces shall not be used. 
Building heating units with flues or combustion air vents shall be located in a closet or room closed off from the occupied space by doors. 
Doors to mechanical equipment areas shall be one and three-quarter inch minimum solid core wood or twenty gauge steel hollow metal and shall be fully weather stripped. 
Other 
All sleeping spaces shall be provided with either carpeting or an acoustically treated ceiling. 
Through-the wall/door mailboxes shall not be allowed. 
B.  Bona fide acoustical noise consultants shall include members of the National Council of Acoustical Consultants and others who are approved by the building official, such approval being based on the demonstration of competence and credentials in the area of architectural acoustics. 
C.  A building or structure which is located partly within a noise zone and partly without, or located partly within one noise zone and partly within another noise zone shall be considered to be entirely within the most restrictive of the noise zones within which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 90-42, § I (5-8-2), 5-8-90; Ord. No. 93-25, § I, 4-13-93)  
Secs. 8-341—8-369. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS OR OTHER STRUCTURES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 8-370. - Scope. 
This chapter shall apply to all dangerous buildings or other structures and/or any of its components or systems and shall apply equally to new and existing conditions. 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06)  
Sec. 8-371. - Definitions. 
Board means the construction board of appeals of the City of Killeen. 
Building official shall mean the officer or other designated authority, or his duly authorized representative, charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter. 
Construction standards means all of the construction codes adopted in this chapter. 
Dangerous building or structure means any premises, building or structure that is: 
(a)  Regardless of the structural condition of the building or structure, unoccupied by its owners, lessees, or other invitees and is unsecured from unauthorized entry to the extent that it could be entered or used by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage or could be entered or used by minors; or 
(b)  Boarded up, fenced, or otherwise secured in any manner if: 
(1)  The building constitutes a danger to the public even though secured from entry; or 
(2)  The means used to secure the building are inadequate to prevent unauthorized entry or use of the building in the manner described in subdivision (a) of this definition; or 
(c)  Dilapidated, substandard or unfit for human habitation and a hazard to the public health, safety and welfare. A building, premises or structure that contains the following defects shall be considered a dangerous building or structure under this definition: 
(1)  Those buildings or structures whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base. 
(2)  Those buildings or structures which, exclusive of the foundations, show 33 percent or more damage or deterioration to the supporting member or members, or 50 percent damage or deterioration to the nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or covering; 
(3)  Those buildings or structures: 
a.  Which have improperly distributed loads upon floors or roofs or in which the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used; or 
b.  In which the stress in any material, member or portion thereof, due to all imposed loads, including dead load, exceeds the stresses allowed in the construction standards adopted by the city; 
(4)  Those buildings or structures which have been damaged by fire, flood, earthquake, wind, or other causes so as to have become dangerous to life, safety or the general health and welfare of the occupants or the general public; 
(5)  Those buildings or structures which have been damaged by fire, flood, earthquake, wind, or other causes to the extent that the structural integrity of the building or structure is less than it was prior to the damage and is less than the minimum requirements established by the construction standards adopted by the city for new buildings; 
(6)  The condition of the structure or building is likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to work injury to the health, safety or general welfare of those living therein or to persons or property in its vicinity; 
(7)  A building, structure, or portion thereof which, as a result of decay, deterioration or dilapidation, is reasonably likely to fully or partially collapse; 
(8)  Those buildings or structures having light, air and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to protect the health, safety or general welfare of human beings who occupy the building or structure; 
(9)  Those buildings or structures having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes, or other means of communication in order to evacuate in a timely and expedient manner in order to avoid injury or peril from within; 
(10)  Those buildings or structures which have: 
a.  Parts thereof which are detached that they may reasonably be expected to fall and injure members of the public or property, or 
b.  Any exterior appendage or portion of the building or structure that is not securely fastened, attached or anchored such that it is capable of resisting wind or similar loads as required by the construction standards adopted. 
(11)  Those buildings, structures, or a portion thereof, that do not contain sufficient space for sleeping or occupation of the building; 
(12)  Those buildings or structures which because of their condition are unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous to the health, safety or general welfare; 
(13)  Those buildings or structures that are unsafe, unsanitary or not provided with adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or is otherwise dangerous to human life, or, which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment; 
(14)  Those buildings or structures that have been constructed or maintained in violation of a specific requirement of any of the construction codes adopted in chapter 8 or contrary to any State law. 
Structure means a building or other structure, or part of a building or other structure. 
Unsafe equipment means equipment on the premises or within a structure which is in such disrepair or condition that such equipment is a hazard to life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the premises or structure to include any boiler, heating equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid containers or other equipment. 
Unsafe building or structure means one that is found to be dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure contains unsafe equipment or is damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe, or of such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that partial or complete collapse is possible. 
Vacate means to leave the premises and not return until further allowed by the building official or the board. 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 09-016, § I, 2-24-09)  
Secs. 8-372—8-380. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ENFORCEMENT AND ABATEMENT 
 
Sec. 8-381. - Public nuisance. 
All "dangerous buildings or structures" within the terms of section 8-371 are declared to be public nuisances, and shall be abated as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02)  
Sec. 8-382. - Standards for repair, vacation or demolition. 
The standards for ordering repair, vacation and/or demolition of a building or other structure shall be as follows: 
(a)  Ordered repaired. If the dangerous building or structure can be feasibly repaired or the condition remedied so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this chapter, it shall be ordered remedied or repaired. Repairs shall be deemed feasible only if less than 50 percent of the structure of the building must be repaired or replaced or the value of the structure is reduced by less than 50 percent because of the violations. Value shall be determined by comparing the most recent valuation for the building or structure by the Bell County Tax Appraisal District with the valuation of the building or structure two years prior to the most recent valuation by the Bell County Tax Appraisal District. 
(b)  Ordered vacated and/or secured. If the dangerous building or structure is in such a condition as to make it hazardous to the health, safety or general welfare of its occupants or the public, it shall be ordered vacated and secured, and the order may also require the occupants to be relocated. 
(c)  Ordered demolished. In any case where more than 50 percent of a building or structure is damaged, decayed or deteriorated, it shall be ordered demolished or removed, unless the board deems that the structure can be feasibly repaired or the condition remedied. In all cases where a building cannot be repaired, it shall be ordered demolished. 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06)  
Sec. 8-383. - Minimum standards for continued use or occupancy. 
In this chapter, the minimum standards that shall determine the suitability of a building for continued use or occupancy, regardless of the date of construction, are those found in article IV of the city's adopted construction standards, as amended by the city. 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06)  
Sec. 8-384. - Commencement of proceedings. 
Whenever the building official has determined that a structure is a dangerous building or structure, he shall obtain a date and time for a public hearing before the board to determine whether the building complies with the standards set out in this chapter. The building official may seek voluntary compliance with this chapter with the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of the building or structure before seeking a hearing before the board. If the building official receives voluntary compliance from the owner, lienholder or mortgagee, the building official need not seek a public hearing from the board. 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02)  
Sec. 8-385. - Notice of hearing. 
(a)  Notice of the public hearing required under section 8-384 shall be sent to the owner of record, lienholder, and mortgagee of the affected property. The notice shall be served at least fifteen (15) calendar days there from prior to the hearing date. The notice may be served personally or by certified mail, return receipt. The executed return receipt shall be prima facie evidence of service. If the owner of record, lienholder, or mortgagee of the building cannot be identified, the city shall make a diligent effort, use its best efforts, or make a reasonable effort to determine the identity and address of an owner, a lienholder, or mortgagee. If a notice is mailed according to this subsection and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as "refused" or "unclaimed," the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice shall be deemed to be delivered. 
(b)  The city may file a notice of the hearing in the official public records of real property for Bell County. 
(c)  The filing of the notice of hearing in the official public records of real property for Bell County is binding on subsequent grantees, lienholders, or other transferees of an interest in the property who acquire such interest after the filing of the notice and constitutes notice of the hearing on any subsequent recipient of any interest in the property who acquires such interest after the filing of the notice. 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 18-043 , § I, 11-27-18)  
Sec. 8-386. - Contents of notice. 
(a)  The notice shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner of the affected property if that information can be determined; 
(2)  A legal description of the affected property; and 
(3)  A description of the hearing. 
(b)  A notice of a public hearing required by section 8-384 sent to an owner, lienholder or mortgagee shall: 
(1)  Include a statement that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee will be required to submit at the hearing written proof of the scope of any work that may be required to comply with this chapter and the time it will reasonably take to perform the work; and 
(2)  Contain a description of each violation which allegedly exists, a statement that the city may perform the required work to abate the violation if the owner fails to do so, and an explanation of the owners right to a hearing before the board. 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06)  
Sec. 8-387. - Public hearing. 
At the hearing the building official shall present evidence of the condition of the structure and may recommend a course of action. The owner, lienholder, mortgagee or any other interested party may present evidence on any relevant issues. 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02)  
Sec. 8-388. - Board orders. 
(a)  After the public hearing, if a structure is found in violation of standards set out in this chapter or any other applicable ordinances, the board may: 
(1)  Find the structure to be a dangerous building or structure and order that the building or structure be vacated, secured, repaired, removed or demolished by the owner within a reasonable time. The board may order that the owner relocate the occupants within a reasonable time; or 
(2)  Grant a variance in order to avoid the imposition of an unreasonable hardship; or 
(3)  In the case of a single-family dwelling occupied by the owner where the health, safety and welfare of other persons will not be affected, grant an exception to any provision of this chapter to avoid the imposition of an unreasonable hardship. 
(b)  The mortgagees and lienholders may be provided an additional reasonable amount of time to comply with the ordered action in the event the owner fails to comply with the order within the time provided for action by the owner. 
(c)  A board order shall require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of the building to within 30 days: 
(1)  Secure the building from unauthorized entry; or 
(2)  Repair, remove or demolish the building, unless the owner or lienholder establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be performed within 30 days. 
(d)  If the board allows the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than 30 days to repair, remove or demolish the building, the board shall set specific time schedules for the commencement and performance of the work and shall require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to secure the property in a reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the work is being performed, as determined by the board. 
(e)  The board may not allow the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than 90 days to repair, remove or demolish the building or fully perform all work required to comply with the order unless the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee: 
(1)  Submits a written detailed plan and time schedule for the work at the hearing; and 
(2)  Establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be completed within 90 days because of the scope and complexity of the work. 
(f)  If the board allows the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than 90 days to complete any part of the work required to repair, remove or demolish the building, the board will require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to regularly submit progress reports, as defined by the board, to the building official to demonstrate compliance with the time schedules established for commencement and performance of the work. The order may require that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee appear before the board or the building official to demonstrate compliance with the time schedules. 
(g)  If the board allows the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to repair, remove or demolish the building, the work shall be done in compliance with all permitting requirements of the city and State of Texas. Any repair work must comply with the applicable codes for the work to be completed. 
(h)  If the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee owns property, including structures and improvements on property, within the city limits of the city with a value that exceeds $100,000.00 in total value, the board may require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to post a cash or surety bond in an amount adequate enough to cover the cost of repairing, removing or demolishing a building or structure under subsection (f) of this section. In lieu of a bond, the board may require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to provide a letter of credit from a financial institution or guaranty from a third party approved by the board. The bond must be posted, or the letter of credit or third party guaranty provided, not later than the 30 th day after the board issues the order. Value may be determined by using the appraised value of real property and improvements as determined by the Bell County Tax Appraisal District, or its successor in interest. 
(i)  The owner, lienholder, or mortgagee has the burden of proof to demonstrate the scope of any work that may be required to comply with the applicable city ordinances and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work. 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 09-016, § I, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 8-389. - Actions subsequent to board order. 
(a)  Within ten (10) days after the date the order is issued, the city shall: 
(1)  File a copy of the order in the office of the city secretary; and 
(2)  Publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the city in which the building is located a notice containing: 
a.  The street address or legal description of the property; 
b.  The date of the hearing; 
c.  A brief statement indicating the results of the order; and 
d.  Instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be obtained. 
(b)  The building official shall promptly mail by certified mail, return receipt requested, a copy of the order to the owner of the building and to any lienholder or mortgagee of the building. The city shall use its best efforts to determine the identity and address of any owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of the building. If a copy of the order is mailed according to this subsection and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as "refused" or "unclaimed," the validity of the mailing is not affected, and the copy of the order shall be deemed to be delivered. 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 09-016, § I, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 8-390. - Compliance with board order. 
(a)  If the building is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed or demolished, or the occupants are not relocated within the allotted time, the city may vacate, secure, remove, or demolish the building or relocate the occupants at its own expense. 
(b)  If the city incurs expenses under subsection (a) of this section, the city may assess the expenses on, and the city has a lien against, unless it is a homestead as protected by the Texas Constitution, the property on which the building is located. The lien is extinguished if the property owner or another person having an interest in the legal title to the property reimburses the city for the expenses. The lien arises and attaches to the property at the time the notice of the lien is recorded and indexed in the office of the county clerk of Bell County. The notice must contain the name and address of the owner if that information can be determined with a reasonable effort, a legal description of the real property on which the building was located, the amount of expenses incurred by the city, and the balance due. The lien is a privileged lien, subordinate only to tax liens. 
(c)  This section does not limit the city's ability to collect on a bond or other financial guaranty that may have been required by section 8-388(h). 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02)  
Sec. 8-391. - City's authority to secure a dangerous structure. 
(a)  The city may secure a building the building official determines: 
(1)  Violates the minimum standards; and 
(2)  Is unoccupied or is occupied only by persons who do not have a right of possession to the building. 
(b)  Before the 11 th day after the date the building is secured, the building official shall give notice to the owner by: 
(1)  Personally serving the owner with written notice; 
(2)  Depositing the notice in the United States mail addressed to the owner at the owner's post office address; 
(3)  Publishing the notice at least twice within a ten (10) day period in a newspaper of general circulation if personal service cannot be obtained and the owner's post office address is unknown; or 
(4)  Posting the notice on or near the front door of the building if personal service cannot be obtained, and, the owner's post office address is unknown. 
(c)  The notice must contain: 
(1)  An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the building and the property on which it is located; 
(2)  A description of the violation of the city standards that is present at the building; 
(3)  A statement that the city will secure or has secured, as the case may be, the building; and 
(4)  An explanation of the owners entitlement to request a hearing about any matter relating to the city's securing of the building. 
(d)  The board shall conduct a hearing at which the owner may testify or present witnesses or written information about any matter relating to the city's securing of the building if, within 30 days after the date the city secures the building, the owner files with the building official a written request for the hearing. The board shall conduct the hearing within 20 days after the date the request is filed. 
(e)  If the city incurs expenses under this section, the city may assess the expenses on, and the city has a lien against, unless it is a homestead as protected by the Texas Constitution, the property on which the building is located. The lien is extinguished if the property owner or another person having an interest in the legal title to the property reimburses the city for the expenses. The lien arises and attaches to the property at the time the notice of the lien is recorded and indexed in the office of the county clerk in the county in which the property is located. The notice must contain the name and address of the owner if that information can be determined with a reasonable effort, a legal description of the real property on which building was located, the amount of expenses incurred by the city, and the balance due. 
(f)  After the hearing conducted in accordance with subsection (d) of this section, the board may: 
(1)  Uphold the city's actions; 
(2)  Order that the amount of the lien assessed under subsection (e) of this section be reduced or extinguished. 
(g)  The authority granted by this section is in addition to any other remedy provided in this chapter or by state law. 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 09-016, § I, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 8-392. - Additional authority regarding substandard building. 
(a)  A board order issued pursuant to section 8-388 may require that after the expiration of the time allotted for repair, removal or demolition of a building: 
(1)  That the city repair, remove or demolish the building or structure at the expense of the city and may place a lien on the land which the building stands or to which it is attached for the expenses of the repair; or 
(2)  Assess a civil penalty against the property owner for failure to repair, remove or demolish the building and may recover the penalty by placing a lien on the property. 
(b)  The city may repair a building under subsection (a) of this section only to the extent necessary to bring the building into compliance with the minimum standards and only if the building is a residential building with ten or fewer dwelling units. The repairs may not improve the building to the extent that the building exceeds minimum housing standards. 
(c)  If the board orders the building or structure repaired or assesses a civil penalty against the owner under subsection (a) of this section, the city shall impose a lien against the land on which the structure stands or stood, unless it is a homestead as protected by the Texas Constitution, to secure the payment of the repair expenses or the civil penalty. Promptly after the imposition of the lien, the city must file for record, in recordable form in the office of the county clerk of Bell County, a written notice of the imposition of the lien. The notice must contain a legal description of the land. 
(d)  Any civil penalty or other assessment imposed under this section accrues interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per year from the date of the assessment until paid in full. 
(e)  The city's right to the assessment lien cannot be transferred to third parties. 
(f)  A lien acquired under this section by the city for repair expenses may not be foreclosed if the property on which the repairs were made is occupied as a residential homestead by a person 65 years of age or older. 
(g)  The board may assess by order, and the city may recover, a civil penalty against a property owner at the time of the board hearing on violations of this chapter in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 a day for each violation or, if the owner shows that the property is the owner's lawful homestead, in an amount not to exceed $10.00 a day for each violation, if the city proves: 
(1)  The property owner was notified of the requirements of the ordinance and the owner's need to comply with the requirements; and 
(2)  After notification, the property owner committed acts in violation of the ordinance or failed to take an action necessary for compliance with the ordinance. 
(i)  Notice of an action taken under subsection (a) of this section shall be the same notice provided for in section 8-389. 
(j)  The authority granted by this section is in addition to any other remedy provided in this chapter or by state law. 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02)  
Sec. 8-393. - Diligent or best efforts by the city. 
Under this chapter, the city is deemed to have made a diligent effort, used its best efforts, or made a reasonable effort to determine the identity and address of an owner, a lienholder, or mortgagee if it searches the following records: 
(a)  County real property records of the county in which the building is located; 
(b)  Appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the building is located; 
(c)  Records of the secretary of state; 
(d)  Assumed name records of the county in which the building is located; 
(e)  Tax records of the city; and 
(f)  Utility records of the city. 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02)  
Sec. 8-394. - Responsibility for expense of repair, removal, demolition, etc. 
(a)  Demolition, closure, removal or repair of a structure may be accomplished by the owner in compliance with this section or by the city. The expense of demolition, closure, correction, removal or repair, when performed under contract with the city or by city forces and filed in accordance with the law, constitutes a lien against the real property on which a structure stood and the lien runs and is attached to the land. 
(b)  The city may use all other lawful means to collect costs from an owner. 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02)  
Sec. 8-395. - Timely vacation of structure. 
(a)  Each occupant of a structure or dwelling unit that has been ordered vacated shall vacate the structure or dwelling unit within the time specified in the order. It is unlawful for any person to occupy a structure or dwelling unit that has been ordered vacated. 
(b)  A person who is ordered to vacate a structure shall not be considered a displaced person and shall not be eligible for relocation assistance if: 
(1)  The person is ordered to vacate a structure as a consequence of his own intentional or negligent conduct; or 
(2)  The person began occupying the structure after the building official placed a red placard on the structure warning of its dangerous condition. 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 09-016, § I, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 8-396. - Placing of placard on structure. 
The building official may place a red placard on a structure or dwelling unit that is unsanitary or unsafe warning of its dangerous condition. A person commits an offense if: 
(a)  Without authority from the building official, he removes or destroys a red placard placed by the building official; 
(b)  He occupies a vacant structure or dwelling unit on which the building official has placed a red placard; or 
(c)  As owner of a structure or dwelling unit, he allows a person to occupy or continue to occupy a structure or dwelling unit on which he is aware or should be aware that the building official has placed a red placard. 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02)  
Sec. 8-397. - Emergency cases. 
(a)  In cases where it reasonably appears there is an immediate and imminent danger to the life or safety of any person unless a dangerous building as defined in this chapter is immediately vacated, repaired, closed or demolished, the building official shall cause the immediate vacation, repair, closure or demolition of such dangerous building or part thereof. The building official shall use the least intrusive means to abate the emergency. 
(b)  The building official shall make reasonable attempts to notify the affected persons in accordance with section 8-388. The costs of such emergency repair, vacation or demolition of such dangerous building shall be collected in the manner as provided for by section 8-394. 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 15-061 , § I, 10-27-15)  
Sec. 8-398. - Disconnecting public utilities. 
The building official may request that public utilities be disconnected in order that demolition may be accomplished without delay when an order for demolition has been issued or when an emergency situation exists. 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02)  
Sec. 8-399. - Violation, penalty. 
Any violation of any provision of this chapter constitutes a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof is subject to a fine in accordance with the provisions of section 1-8 of this Code of Ordinances. Each and every day a violation continues constitutes a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02)  
Sec. 8-400. - Civil penalty. 
In addition to imposing a criminal penalty, the city may, in accordance with section 1175(f) of Vernon's Civil Statutes, bring a civil action against a person violating a provision of this chapter relating to dangerous buildings. The civil action may include, but is not limited to a suit to recover a civil penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day or portion of a day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted. 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02)  
Sec. 8-401. - Judicial review. 
(a)  Any owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of record of property jointly or severally aggrieved by an order of the board issued under section 8-388 may file in district court a verified petition setting forth that the decision is illegal, in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of the illegality. The petition must be filed by the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee within thirty (30) calendar days after the respective dates a copy of the final decision of the municipality is mailed to them by first class mail, certified return receipt requested, or such decision shall become final as to each of them upon the expiration of each such thirty-calendar day period. 
(b)  On the filing of the petition, the court may issue a writ of certiorari directed to the city attorney to review the order of the board and shall prescribe in the writ the time within which a return on the writ must be made, which must be longer than ten (10) days, and served on the relator or the relator's attorney. 
(c)  The city attorney may not be required to return the original papers acted on by it, but it is sufficient for the city attorney to return certified or sworn copies of the papers or of parts of the papers as may be called for by the writ. 
(d)  The return must concisely set forth other facts as may be pertinent and material to show the grounds of the decision appealed from and shall be verified. 
(e)  The issuance of the writ does not stay proceedings on the decision appealed from. 
(f)  Appeal in the district court shall be limited to a hearing under the substantial evidence rule. The court may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or may modify the decision brought up for review. 
(g)  Costs may not be allowed against the City of Killeen. 
(h)  If the decision of the board is affirmed or not substantially reversed but only modified, the district court shall allow to the city all attorney's fees and other costs and expenses incurred by it and shall enter a judgment for those items, which may be entered against the property owners, lienholders, or mortgagees as well as all persons subject to the proceedings before the board. 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02)  
Sec. 8-402. - Seizure and sale of property to recover expenses. 
The city may foreclose a lien on property under this article in a judicial proceeding, if: 
(a)  a building or other structure on the property has been demolished; 
(b)  a lien for the cost of demolition of the building or other structure on the property has been created and that cost has not been paid more than 180 days after the date the lien was filed; and 
(c)  ad valorem taxes are delinquent on all or part of the property. 
(Ord. No. 02-24, § I, 5-28-02)  
Secs. 8-403—8-499. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 8-500. - Short title. 
The following regulations are hereby adopted and shall be known and may be cited as "City of Killeen Landscaping Regulations." 
(Ord. No. 04-40, § I, 5-11-04)  
Sec. 8-501. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to promote the following community benefits: 
(a)  Sustainability. To aid in stabilizing the environment's ecological balance by contributing to the processes of air purification, oxygen regeneration, ground water recharge, and storm water runoff retardation, while at the same time aid in abating soil erosion, noise, glare and heat. 
(b)  Retention of vegetation. To ensure that healthy quality trees and native vegetation are retained and replenished to the greatest extent practicable. 
(c)  Visual buffering. To provide visual buffering and to enhance the beautification of the city. 
(d)  Enhancement of property values. To safeguard and enhance property values and to protect public and private real estate investments. 
(e)  Preservation of economic base. To preserve and protect the unique identity and environment of the city and to preserve the economic base attracted to the city by these factors. 
(f)  Conservation. To conserve energy and natural resources. 
(g)  Protection. To promote the health, safety and general welfare of the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-40, § I, 5-11-04)  
Sec. 8-502. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Words not specifically defined shall have the meanings given in Webster's Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary, as revised. 
Best management practices shall mean measures undertaken during the course of development that reduce the amount of pollutants entering surface waters, ground waters, air or land, and may take the form of a process, activity or physical structure. 
Building shall mean any structure designed or built for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattel or property of any kind. 
Caliper shall mean the diameter of a predominant tree trunk measured twelve (12) inches above the base of the trunk. 
Canopy tree shall mean any self-supporting woody-stemmed plant with a well-defined trunk and a distinct and definite formed crown, which will attain a mature height of at least thirty (30) feet above ground. 
Development shall mean the construction of one (1) or more new buildings or structures, relocation or enlargement of one (1) or more new buildings or structures of an existing building or structure on one (1) or more building lots or sites, or the installation of site improvements to include parking lots. 
Drip line shall mean the area beneath the canopy of a tree defined by a vertical line extending from the outermost edges of the tree branches to the ground. 
Existing tree shall mean any self-supporting woody-stemmed plant with a well-defined trunk that is present on a property before its development. 
Grass shall mean any herbaceous plant species that will attain a thick cover over soil. 
Ground cover shall mean any woody or herbaceous planting that effectively shades out sod and will not attain a height of more than two (2) feet above the ground. 
Landscaping shall mean altering, re-arranging or adding to existing vegetation or landforms, including reshaping of the land by moving earth, preserving native vegetation or adding new vegetation, or any combination of these land treatments. 
Lot shall mean an undivided tract or parcel of land having access to a street, which is designated as a separate and distinct tract or lot number or symbol on a duly approved plat filed of record. The terms "lot" and "tract" shall be used interchangeably. 
Non-canopy tree shall mean any self-supporting woody-stemmed plant with one or more trunks, which will attain a mature height of at least fifteen (15) feet above ground. 
Planting materials shall mean living trees, shrubs, ground cover, grasses, forbs and flowering annuals, biennials and perennials. 
Shrub shall mean a perennial plant that is distinguished from a herbaceous plant by its persistent woody stem, and from a tree by a mature height of less than fifteen (15) feet and no distinct elevated crown of foliage. 
Street yard shall mean the area of a lot or parcel located between the street right-of-way line(s) and each building that faces the said street right-of-way. 
Structure shall mean anything constructed or erected, which requires location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings of all types and off-premise ground signs, but exclusive of customary fences or boundary or retaining walls. 
Substantial damage shall mean the cost to repair or replace existing development that is more than 50% of the value of the building or structure before the damage occurred. For the purpose of this definition, the original valuation shall be determined by the county tax records. 
Substitute landscaping plan shall mean a plan submitted for approval that differs from the standard landscaping requirements. Such substitute landscape plan shall clearly denote the differences from the standard required landscaping from the proposed substitute plan. 
Vegetation shall mean any growing plant material. 
Xeriscaping shall mean landscaping through use of slow-growing, native or adaptive vegetation that is drought tolerant. 
(Ord. No. 04-40, § I, 5-11-04; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06)  
Sec. 8-503. - Applicability. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, these regulations shall apply to all property within the city limits. These regulations shall run with the land and shall apply to any subsequent owner thereof. 
(b)  When the requirements of this article conflict with the requirements of other provisions of this code, this article shall prevail; however, the provisions of this article shall be subordinate to regulations pertaining to traffic and pedestrian safety. 
(Ord. No. 04-40, § I, 5-11-04; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06)  
Sec. 8-504. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall be administered by the building official, and shall be enforced by the building official or other official, such as a code enforcement officer, through issuance of stop work orders, or citations or summons. 
(b)  While this ordinance establishes required landscape requirements, the City of Killeen encourages property owners of exempt properties to improve the value of their property, enhance the beauty of the city and assist in sustaining the environment by landscaping. 
(Ord. No. 04-40, § I, 5-11-04)  
Sec. 8-505. - Penalty. 
Unless otherwise stated, violations of this article shall be punishable under the provisions of section 1-8 of the city code of ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 04-40, § I, 5-11-04)  
Sec. 8-506. - Landscaping required. 
(a)  Landscaping is required for any type of new construction, including public owned and used property as follows: 
1.  New construction of one or more new buildings or new parking, loading or vehicle storage space development within a vacant lot. 
Exception. Accessory storage sheds 200 square feet or less shall not be considered new construction. 
2.  Construction of a new building or an addition to an existing building located within an existing developed lot that increases the total sum of all existing building footprint(s) on the lot by thirty percent (30%) or more. 
3.  Construction of any parking, loading or vehicle storage space additions or extensions within an developed lot that increases the total sum of all existing parking, loading or vehicle storage space(s) less than 90,000 square feet by thirty percent (30%) or more. 
Any existing buildings or parking, loading or vehicle storage space areas to be removed for proposed new development shall not be considered for existing building or parking credits. The building footprint shall include the foundation line of the building(s) and include any roof projections at their outer most support lines. Any new development cannot be used as existing development credit until after one (1) year from final city approval of such development. 
(b)  Should there be no land available for landscaping or should the area available for landscaping be severely restricted, the applicant may seek approval from the building official for alteration or modification of these landscaping requirements. It is the intent of the City of Killeen to empower the building official to apply good judgment and common sense in evaluating such requests for alternative plans. 
(c)  Common development that encompasses more than one lot may be treated as one project for the purposes of application of this section. Split ownership, planning in phases, construction in stages, or multiple building permits for a project may not prevent it from being considered a common development, provided that a comprehensive site plan is submitted for all portions of the development being considered as a common development. 
(d)  Upon prior approval from the building official, phased development within a single lot that is 90,000 square feet or more in size may be landscaped in two (2) or more phases. A master landscape plan must be submitted for the entire project at the beginning of the first phase submittal denoting such phases. 
(Ord. No. 04-40, § I, 5-11-04; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06)  
Sec. 8-507. - Exceptions. 
Landscaping is not required for the following development: 
(a)  Any development in existence before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived; 
(b)  Residential development located within lots or parcels within zoning districts "A" agricultural, "A-R1" agricultural single-family residential, "R-1" single-family residential, "R1-A" single-family garden home, "RM-1" residential modular home single-family, "R-2" two-family residential and "R-MS" manufactured housing subdivision; 
(c)  Residential development lots for the construction of a single allowable dwelling structure on a single lot or parcel located within zoning district "R-3" multifamily residential in the form of a building permit or plat submitted to the city before the original effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived; 
(d)  Any commercial development in the form of a building permit submitted to the city before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived; and 
(e)  Restoration of a conforming use building that has been damaged, destroyed or demolished, which does not qualify as substantial improvement. 
(Ord. No. 04-40, § I, 5-11-04; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06, Ord No. 14-010, (b), 2-25-14)  
Sec. 8-508. - Landscape plan required. 
(a)  When a building permit application is required, a landscape plan shall be prepared and submitted to the city. It shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Date, graphic scale, north arrow, title and name of applicant/owner; 
(2)  Location of existing boundary lines and dimensions of the lot or tract; 
(3)  Approximate centerline of existing watercourses or drainageways; location of significant drainage features; and the location and size of existing and proposed streets, alleys, utility and fire lanes, and sidewalks; 
(4)  Location, size, number, and type (tree, shrub, ground cover, grass) of landscaping in proposed areas and location and size of proposed landscaped areas; 
(5)  Information necessary for verifying the required minimum amount of landscaping as well as any substitute landscape comparisons; and 
(6)  Location and size of the proposed bib hose or irrigation system, if required. 
(b)  Persons desiring use of special or unusual plant materials, or unique landscaping materials, as a part of an overall site design shall prepare a substitute landscape plan. Such plan shall include all information required to support the need for substitute landscaping. Artificial planting materials shall not be credited toward the landscaping requirements of this article. 
(c)  Native plant species that conserve water and may have reduced maintenance requirements are suggested for use in landscaping plans. Landscape planning advice may be obtained by contacting the Bell County Extension Office. 
(d)  The landscaping plan shall ensure that all impervious areas are developed and maintained in a manner that employs best management practices to control soil erosion and excess sedimentation. 
(e)  Landscaping provided in vehicular and pedestrian use areas shall be designed so that the maturing of the landscaping will not conflict with the lighting scheme or such traffic areas. 
(Ord. No. 04-40, § I, 5-11-04; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06)  
Sec. 8-509. - Landscaping standards for single-structure use lots located on R-3 multifamily zoned districts. 
(a)  All single-structure use lot located within zoning district "R-3" multifamily residential developed after the original effective date [August 11, 2004] of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall have installed not less than six (6) three-gallon (minimum) shrubs and two (2) two-inch caliper (minimum) trees within the street yard. The remaining portion of the street yard(s) shall be planted in ground cover or grass. 
(b)  Existing landscaping that matches or exceeds the required number, size, and type of landscaping located in the side or rear yards of a three and four-family dwelling lot or parcel may be credited toward the requirements of this section. 
(c)  All required landscaping required by this section shall be in place and in a thriving condition on the date a final inspection and/or certificate of occupancy is issued for the structure or should seasonal planting be an issue, partial landscaping may be delayed to a later date with the approval of the building official. Such request shall be in writing, state the reasons for delay, and present a timeline for completion as required in section 8-514. 
(Ord. No. 04-40, § I, 5-11-04; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06)  
Sec. 8-510. - Landscaping standards for nonresidential, multiple apartment complex development, and commercial use lots and parcels. 
(a)  Landscaping required. Minimum required landscaping shall be determined by this section. Where possible, approximately fifty percent (50%) of the required landscaping should be located in the street yard; however, any reasonable distribution of landscaping in proportion to street frontage may be approved by the building official. 
(b)  Trees. The following requirements shall apply to tree landscaping: 
(1)  The minimum number of required trees shall be calculated by dividing the lot or parcel frontage (i.e., the length in feet of lot lines abutting street frontages) by 25. The resulting quotient, with any remainder rounded up to the next nearest whole number, shall be the total number of trees required. The length of the lot lines for irregular lots shall be the average width or length of the lot. A reduction in the required number of trees shall apply to lots with more than one street frontage by dividing the total lot frontages by 30 instead of 25. 
(2)  Not less than fifty percent (50%) of the required trees planted in the area to be landscaped shall be canopy trees. 
(3)  Newly planted trees shall measure at least two (2) inch caliper and six (6) feet high at the time of planting, and shall be planted in a permeable area not less than three (3) feet in diameter. 
(4)  Existing trees to be used for landscape credit shall be in a healthy physical state, shall measure at least four (4) inch caliper and shall be maintained in an undisturbed area within the drip line of the tree. 
(5)  Should an existing tree used for landscape credit die, it shall be replaced with new landscaping according to the requirements of this section. 
(6)  Recommended plantings include the quality tree species listed in subdivision A. 
(c)  Shrubbery. The following requirements shall apply to shrubbery landscaping: 
(1)  The number of required shrubs shall be calculated by dividing the lot or parcel frontage (i.e., the length in feet of lot lines abutting street frontages) by 5. The resulting quotient, with any remainder rounded up to the next nearest whole number, shall be the total number of shrubs required. 
(2)  Each canopy tree maintained in excess of the total number of trees required by this section may reduce the number of shrubs required by ten (10). Each non-canopy tree maintained in excess of the total number of trees required by this section may reduce the number of shrubs required by six (6). In like manner, 10 shrubs can be substituted for 1 canopy tree and 6 shrubs can be substituted for a non-canopy tree. 
(3)  Each two (2) square feet of planting bed used and maintained for the purpose of rotating live decorative planting materials may reduce the number of shrubs required by one (1). 
(4)  Shrubs shall not be less than three (3) gallons in size. 
(5)  The placement of shrubbery shall take into consideration the plant size at maturity and shall be located so as not to conflict with vehicular or pedestrian traffic visibility. 
(d)  Ground cover. The following requirements shall apply to ground cover landscaping: 
(1)  Ground cover or grass shall be planted in the remaining area of the lot or parcel not planted in trees, shrubbery, planting beds, or covered by structures, pavement or other impervious surfaces. 
(2)  Approved non-vegetative ground cover materials (such as washed gravel, bark mulch, lava rock, sand, rock, or other decorative covers generally used in landscaping) may be used to meet the provisions of this section. Where approved, non-vegetative ground cover shall be porous and form a uniform appearance free from weeds and grasses. 
(e)  Irrigation. All landscaping required by this section shall be irrigated by either an automated system, or a bib hose attachment within one hundred fifty (150) feet of all landscaping. Automated underground irrigation systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with the requirements of other provisions of this code. The building official may waive irrigation requirements where xeriscaping or a substitute landscaping plan is used. 
(Ord. No. 04-40, § I, 5-11-04; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06)  
Sec. 8-511. - Landscaping standards for parking lots. 
(a)  Area required. The minimum amount of landscaped area required for parking, loading or vehicle storage space development within a single lot that is 90,000 square feet or more shall be five percent (5%) of all vehicular use areas, which shall be devoted to landscape islands, peninsulas or medians. 
(b)  Street yard landscape credit. Landscape islands, peninsulas and medians may be included in calculating the minimum required street yard landscaping. 
(c)  Distribution of landscaping. The number, size and shape of landscape islands, peninsulas, and medians, in both street and non-street yards, shall be at the discretion of the applicant. All required islands, peninsulas and medians shall be reasonably distributed throughout parking areas; however, the distribution and location of landscape islands, peninsulas, and medians may be adjusted to accommodate existing trees or other natural features so long as the total landscape area requirement for all parking areas is satisfied. 
(d)  Irrigation. All landscaping required by this section shall be irrigated by either an automated system, or a bib hose attachment within one hundred fifty (150) feet of all landscaping. Automated underground irrigation systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with the requirements of other provisions of this code. The building official may waive irrigation requirements where xeriscaping or a substitute landscaping watering plan is used. 
(Ord. No. 04-40, § I, 5-11-04; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06)  
Sec. 8-512. - Landscaped buffer screening devices. 
(a)  Where approved by the building official, a landscaped buffer may be planted to meet the screening device requirements specified within chapter 31 - zoning regulations, sections 31-250 and 31-280. Such alternate screening shall become applicable only upon a change of land use, property ownership, or building occupancy, or at such time a building permit application is made, except as otherwise specified within this chapter. 
(b)  A landscaped buffer shall provide a visual barrier from adjacent properties and streets. The owner of the property on which the landscaped buffer screening is planted shall permanently and adequately maintain such screening. 
(c)  Landscaped buffer screening shall consist of earthen and planting materials not less than five (5) feet in width and include hedge-like shrubbery or evergreen planting materials capable of obtaining a minimum height of six (6) feet within the first three (3) years of initial planting. 
(d)  Where approved by the building official, an earthen berm with elevated planting materials may be used as a landscaped buffer to meet the requirements of this section. 
(e)  If required, an automatic underground drip irrigation or sprinkler system shall be provided for all landscaped buffer screens. A landscaped buffer shall be continuously maintained in a healthy thriving condition. 
(Ord. No. 04-40, § I, 5-11-04; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06)  
Sec. 8-513. - Public rights-of-way. 
(a)  Landscaping shall not be placed in a public right-of-way without the approval of the building official and city engineer, and in the case of right-of-way controlled by the state, only with the approval of the State Department of Transportation. 
(b)  Landscaping shall not be located or placed so as to obstruct any fire lane, fire hydrant, or similar connection, nor shall landscaping be placed in a manner that obstructs emergency ingress/egress access to any building. 
(c)  Landscaping shall not obstruct views between the street and access drives or parking aisles near street yard entries and exits, nor shall any landscaping obstruct views within the radius of any curb return. 
(d)  Sight triangles shall be maintained for all landscaped property at all driveways and street intersections in accordance with section 28-241, visibility at intersections of the Killeen code of ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 04-40, § I, 5-11-04; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06)  
Sec. 8-514. - Completion and maintenance. 
(a)  The building official shall review all landscaping for compliance with this article. Landscaping shall be completed in compliance with the approved landscape plan before a final inspection and/or certificate of occupancy is issued, unless otherwise provided in this article. In the event that placement of certain or partial landscaping materials is not practicable at the time the final inspection and/or certificate of occupancy is requested, a written placement schedule shall be submitted to the building official for approval before issuance of the certificate of occupancy. Such request cannot exceed forty-five (45) days unless an escrow for the cost of completion is provided. Failure to meet the approved placement schedule and place the required landscaping materials as shown on the landscape plan shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(b)  Dead, damaged, diseased or displaced landscaping shall be promptly replaced or repaired, and in any event, within a reasonable time after notification by the building official. Replaced or repaired landscaping shall be of similar type and character as the material it replaces. 
(c)  Replacement of dead landscaping shall occur within thirty (30) days of the required replacement date issued by the building official or other official, such as a code enforcement officer. In the event that placement of dead landscaping materials is not practicable within thirty (30) days of notification, a placement schedule shall be submitted to the building official for approval. Replacement material shall be of similar type and character as the dead landscaping. Failure to replace dead landscaping, as required by the building official, shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(d)  Should installed landscaping not be maintained or is determined to not be in compliance with this article, the landscaping shall be declared a nuisance and the property owner shall replace it with materials that are in compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 04-40, § I, 5-11-04; Ord. No. 06-18, § I, 2-14-06)  
Sec. 8-515. - Appeals. 
The construction board of appeals shall hear all appeals from the decision of the building official, and requests for variance from the requirements of this article. Any action of the construction board of appeals shall be in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 04-40, § I, 5-11-04)  
Sec. 8-516. - Separate offenses. 
It shall be an offense for a person to park a vehicle on a landscaped area. It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that at the time of the alleged offense the vehicle was parked or left standing due to a mechanical defect that made it unsafe to move, provided that the person having ownership or control of the vehicle obtained consent from the property owner to park the vehicle in that location, and as soon as reasonably possible completed emergency repairs or summoned tow removal equipment, as appropriate. Ten (10) days is considered a reasonable period to complete emergency repairs or remove the disabled vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 04-40, § I, 5-11-04)  
Secs. 8-517—529. - Reserved.  
Subdivision A. - Recommended Tree Plantings 
 
Sec. 8-530. - Recommended quality tree species list. 
Common Name 	Scientific Name 	Type 
Amer. Elderberry 	Sambucus Canadensis 	Small 
Car. Buckthorn 	Frangula caroliniana 	Small 
Callery Pear 	Pyrus calleryana 	Small 
Crape Myrtle 	Lagerstroemia indica 	Small 
Deciduous Holly 	Ilex deciduas 	Small 
Desert Willow 	Chilopsis linearis 	Small 
Eve's Necklace 	Sophora affinis 	Small 
Mesquite 	Prosopis glandulosa 	Small 
Mexican Plum 	Prunus mexicana 	Small 
Purpleleaf Plum 	Prunus cerasifera 	Small 
Rusty Blackhaw 	Viburnum rufidulum 	Small 
Texas Buckeye 	Aesculus arguta 	Small 
Texas Persimmon 	Diospyros texana 	Small 
Texas Redbud 	Cercis canad. 'Texana' 	Small 
Wax Myrtle 	Myrica cerifera 	Small 
Youpon Holly 	Ilex vomitoria 	Small 
Cedar Elm 	Ulmus crassifolia 	Medium 
Chinese Pistache 	Pistachia chinensis 	Medium 
East. Red Cedar 	Juniperus virginianum 	Medium 
Hawthorn 	Crataegus viridis 	Medium 
Jap. Black Pine 	Pinus thunbergii 	Medium 
Lacebark Elm 	Ulmus parvifolia 	Medium 
Little Walnut 	Juglans microcarpa 	Medium 
Afghan Pine 	Pinus eldarica 	Large Non-Canopy 
Bald Cypress 	Taxodium distichum 	Large Non-Canopy 
Black Pine 	Pinus nigra 	Large Non-Canopy 
Eastern Red Cedar 	Juniperus virginiana 	Large Non-Canopy 
Pond Cypress 	Taxodium ascandens 	Large Non-Canopy 
So. Magnolia 	Magnolia grandiflora 	Large Non-Canopy 
American Elm 	Ulmus Americana 	Canopy 
Black Oak 	Quercus veluntina 	Canopy 
Bigtooth Maple 	Acer grandidentatum 	Canopy 
Bur Oak 	Quercus macrocarpa 	Canopy 
Chinquapin Oak 	Quercus muhlenbergii 	Canopy 
Durand Oak 	Quercus durandii 	Canopy 
Green Ash 	Fraxinus pennsylvanica 	Canopy 
Gum Bumelia 	Bumelia lanuginose 	Canopy 
Ken. Coffeetree 	Gymnocladus dioicus 	Canopy 
Live Oak 	Quercus virginiana 	Canopy 
Pecan 	Carya illinoenisis 	Canopy 
Persimmon Diospyros virginiana 	Canopy 	
Red Mulberry 	Morus rubra 	Canopy 
Shumard Oak 	Quercus shumardii 	Canopy 
So. Sugar Maple 	Acer barbatum 	Canopy 
Sugarberry 	Celtis laevigata 	Canopy 
Sweetgum 	Liquidambar styraciflua 	Canopy 
Sycamore 	Plantus occidentalis 	Canopy 
Texas Ash 	Fraxinus texenses 	Canopy 
Texas Red Oak 	Quercus texana 	Canopy 
Trident Maple 	Acer buergerianum 	Canopy 
Water Oak 	Quercus nigra 	Canopy 
West. Soapberry 	Sapindus drummondii 	Canopy 
White Ash 	Fraxinus Americana 	Canopy 
 
(Ord. No. 04-40, § I, 5-11-04)  
Chapter 9 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Health and human services, Ch. 13. 
State Law reference— Cemeteries, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 711.001 et seq.; municipal regulation of cemeteries, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 713.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 9-1—9-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY CEMETERY 
 
Sec. 9-26. - Penalty. 
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-8.  
Sec. 9-27. - Removing, etc., grave marker. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or tamper with any monument or grave marker located in the city cemetery without the express consent of the city council. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 7, art. 12, § 7)  
Chapter 10 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; emergency actions by city officers and employees, § 2-31. 
State Law reference— Emergency management, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Penalty. 
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-8.  
Secs. 10-2—10-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local emergency management agencies, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 10-26. - Liability under article. 
This article is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health and safety, and neither the city, the agents and representatives of the city, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this article, shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of such activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license or privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission, or for loss of or damage to, the property of such person. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 4, art. 1, § 9 [Ord. No. 81-65, § 9, 12-22-81])  
Sec. 10-27. - Composition of organization. 
The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as all organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan. Such plan shall set forth the form of the organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assigns tasks, duties and powers, and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this article. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management of the state and of the federal government. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 4, art. 1, § 5 [Ord. No. 81-65, § 5, 12-22-81])  
Sec. 10-28. - Cooperation within county. 
The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge and the mayors of the other cities in this county in the formation of an emergency management council for the county and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of a joint emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a countywide program of emergency management insofar as such program may affect the city. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 4, art. 1, § 3 [Ord. No. 81-65, § 3, 12-22-81])  
Sec. 10-29. - Emergency management director and coordinator generally. 
There exists the office of emergency management director of the city, which shall be held by the mayor in accordance with state law. 
(1)  An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director. 
(2)  The director shall be responsible for conducting a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in section 10-31. He may delegate authority for execution of these duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the director. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 4, art. 1, § 1 [Ord. No. 81-65, § 1, 12-22-81])  
Sec. 10-30. - Powers and duties of director generally. 
The powers and duties of the director shall include an on-going survey of actual or potential major hazards which threaten life and property within the city; and an on-going program of identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur. As part of his responsibility in hazard mitigation, the director shall supervise the development of an emergency management plan for the city, and shall recommend that plan for adoption by the city council along with any and all mutual aid plans and agreements which are deemed essential for the implementation of such emergency management plan. The powers of the director shall include the authority to declare a state of disaster, but such action may be subject to confirmation by the city council at its next meeting. The duties of the director shall also include the making of a survey of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for herein, as well as a continuing study of the need for amendments and improvements in the emergency management plan. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 4, art. 1, § 2 [Ord. No. 81-65, § 2, 12-22-81])  
Sec. 10-31. - Duties, responsibilities of director enumerated. 
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following: 
(1)  The direction and control of the actual disaster operations of the county emergency management organization as well as the training of emergency management personnel. 
(2)  The determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization of the city. 
(3)  The maintenance of necessary liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional, federal or other emergency management organizations. 
(4)  The marshaling, after declaration of a disaster as provided for above, of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan. 
(5)  The issuance of all necessary proclamations as to the existence of a disaster and the immediate operational effectiveness of the city emergency management plan. 
(6)  The issuance of reasonable rules, regulations or directives which are necessary for the protection of life and property in the city. Such rules and regulations shall be filed in the office of the city secretary and shall receive widespread publicity unless publicity would be of aid and comfort to the enemy. 
(7)  The supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which the city is located and with other municipalities within the county, for the countywide coordination of emergency management efforts. 
(8)  The supervision of, and final authorization for, the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city. 
(9)  The authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 4, art. 1, § 4 [Ord. No. 81-65, § 4, 12-22-81])  
Sec. 10-32. - Precedence of emergency orders, rules, etc. 
At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 4, art. 1, § 7 [Ord. No. 81-65, § 7, 12-22-81])  
Sec. 10-33. - Conflicts with law, rules, regulations. 
This article shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or naval order, rule or regulation. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 4, art. 1, § 8 [Ord. No. 81-65, § 8, 12-22-81])  
Sec. 10-34. - Approval of expenditures, contracts, etc., by city council. 
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this article without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 4, art. 1, § 10 [Ord. No. 81-65, § 10, 12-22-81])  
Sec. 10-35. - Unlawful acts enumerated. 
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article, or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this article. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 4, art. 1, § 11 [Ord. No. 81-65, § 11, 12-22-81])  
Sec. 10-36. - Oaths required. 
Each employee or any individual that is assigned a function or responsibility under this article shall solemnly swear or affirm to support and defend the Constitution of the United States, laws of the state and the ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 4, art. 1, § 12 [Ord. No. 81-65, § 12, 12-22-81])  
Sec. 10-37. - Orders by mayor upon declaration of local disaster or emergency. 
(a)  Pursuant to Texas Government Code section 418.108, city ordinance no. 81-65 (adopting and approving the emergency management base plan), and the code of ordinances of the city, the mayor of the city is authorized to declare the existence of a local state of disaster or emergency. Such a declaration shall be effective for not more than seven (7) days, subject to city council modification, extension and/or vacation. A suggested form for such a declaration and proclamation is appended to ordinance no. 95-23 and incorporated in this section by reference, but is not intended to prohibit the use of any other form which may be available at the time of the disaster or emergency. 
(b)  Upon declaring a local state of disaster or emergency, the mayor is further authorized to implement the following provisions, as conditions may require, by mayoral proclamation: 
(1)  Curfew. To proclaim it unlawful for any person, without proper authority, to be upon the public streets or rights-of-way within the city between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following morning. Such curfew may be imposed either city-wide or be limited to a particular defined area(s) of the city most affected by the disaster or emergency, as specified in the mayor's order. Persons with "proper authority" to be out during curfew hours means only those persons going to or from a place of work directly involved in providing medical, law enforcement, fire, rescue, relief, evacuation, or utility services, or is a bona fide member of the news media bearing press credentials. Such curfew and the hours of it may be altered, extended, or lifted by proclamation of the mayor at any time within the seven (7) days after the declaration of local disaster or emergency, or by the city council. 
(2)  Price controls. To proclaim it unlawful for any vendor, merchant, landlord, or other person selling or offering to sell, whether retail or wholesale, goods or services at a rate or price in excess of those rates or price prevailing in the county on the last day of the calendar month preceding the month in which the disaster or emergency occurs. Such price controls shall remain in effect from the time of mayoral proclamation imposing same until midnight of the last day of the second calendar month following the calendar month in which the disaster or emergency occurs. Such price controls and the duration of same may be altered, changed, or lifted by proclamation of the mayor at any time within the seven (7) days after the declaration of local disaster or emergency, or by the city council. 
(3)  Other. Such other rules and orders as allowed by law and deemed to be reasonably necessary for the immediate protection of the health, safety, and welfare of persons and property in the city, or to restore or maintain good and lawful order within the city during the disaster or emergency and the immediate aftermath. 
(c)  Upon declaring a state of local emergency or disaster, the mayor may also exercise the following powers if he/she deems it reasonable or necessary for the public welfare or protection: 
(1)  To temporarily place any city officers, employees, services, equipment, or properties under the direction or control of an office or officer of the federal, state, or county governments, including the military services and duly constituted offices of the civil defense. 
(2)  To reestablish the seat of the city's government at another place if the current seat of government is rendered inaccessible or unusable by the disaster or emergency; provided, however, if such place is outside the city's territorial limits, it shall be at the nearest place thereto which is suitable and practical. 
(d)  A declaration of local disaster or emergency, together with any proclamation imposing a curfew, price controls, or other reasonably necessary lawful orders, shall be given prompt and general publicity and filed with the city secretary as soon as possible under the then prevailing conditions. 
(Ord. No. 95-23, § I, 3-14-95)  
Chapter 11 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Fire department authorized, § 27(13). 
Cross reference— Building and construction regulations, Ch. 8. 
State Law reference— Authority to enforce ordinances necessary to protect and preserve health, property, good government and order, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.004; state fire marshal, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 417.001 et seq.; fire safety generally, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 791.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 11-1. - Penalty. 
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-8.  
Sec. 11-2. - Definition. 
As used in this chapter the words or offices of the fire chief and fire marshal and their duly authorized representatives shall be deemed to be equivalent statements. Any duty to be performed by one may legally be performed by another. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 6, art. 10, § 1 [Ord. No. 75-2, § 3, 1-28-75]; Ord. No. 02-25, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 09-015, § I, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 11-3. - Arson reward. 
(a)  Any person who shall hereafter supply information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person found guilty of committing the crime of arson within the city shall be offered a reward of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(b)  This offer shall be a standing offer of reward which shall be paid out of the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 6, art. 5, § 1 [Ord. of 11-26-63, § 2]; Ord. No. 02-25, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 09-015, § I, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 11-010, § I, 2-8-11)  
Sec. 11-4. - Use of fire hydrants. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any fire hydrant in the city without first obtaining the consent of the utility collections manager of the city. Any time a fire hydrant is used in the city by any person other than the fire department of the city, the turning on and turning off of a fire hydrant shall be under the direct supervision of the director of utility services of the city or his/her designee. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 6, art. 2, § 5; Ord. No. 02-25, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 09-015, § I, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 11-5. - Fireworks—Prohibited use. 
(a)  Except as hereinafter provide in section 11-6, it shall be unlawful for any person to possess, store, offer for sale, sell at retail, or use or explode any fireworks within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  The fire chief shall seize, take, remove, or cause to be destroyed, at the expense of the owner, any fireworks offered or exposed for sale, stored, or held in violation of this section and section 11-6. 
(c)  Any firefighter, police officer or other peace officer is empowered to detain any fireworks found being transported illegally or to close any building while any fireworks are found stored illegally until the fire department can be notified in order that such fireworks may be seized and destroyed. 
(d)  The city attorney is authorized to file suit on behalf of the city for such injunctive relief as may be necessary to prevent unlawful storage, transportation, keeping or using fireworks within the jurisdiction of the city and to prevent any person from interfering or attempting to interfere with the seizure and destruction of such fireworks; provided, however, that it shall not be necessary to obtain such injunctive relief as a prerequisite to such seizure and destruction. 
(e)  In any instance where the fire chief or any of his duly authorized assistants have probable cause to believe that fireworks are being stored in a building, they shall promptly enter the building for the purposes of inspection. It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee or person otherwise in charge of such building or their agents or employees to open and permit entry into the building by persons charged with the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 6, art. 3, §§ 1, 2; Ord. 73-53, § 1, 11-26-73; Ord. No. 84-65, § 3, 9-11-84; Ord. No. 95-12, § I, 2-14-95; Ord. No. 02-25, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 09-015, § I, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 18-047 , § I, 12-18-18) 
State Law reference— Fireworks generally, V.A.T.S. Insurance Code art. 5.43-4; local regulation of fireworks, V.A.T.S. Insurance Code § 5.43-4, § 3; extraterritorial jurisdiction, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 42.001 et seq.  
Sec. 11-6. - Same—Permitted use. 
(a)  The city council may permit the use of fireworks for public displays within the corporate limits of the city and within the area immediately adjacent and contiguous to the city limits and extending outside the city limits for a distance of five thousand (5,000) feet, unless such area is within the corporate limits of another municipality. Nothing in this section shall permit the use of common class C fireworks by members of the general public. 
(b)  Applications for permits shall be made in writing to the city manager at least twenty-one (21) days in advance of the date of the outdoor display. The city manager shall forward the application to the fire chief, who shall cause a site investigation to be made to determine whether the proposed fireworks display is of a nature or in a location that may be hazardous to property or dangerous to any persons. The fire chief shall forward his or her recommendation of approval or disapproval, along with any reasonable conditions that he or she recommends should be placed on the permit by the city council. The application shall also be forwarded to the police chief, who shall also forward his or her recommendations to the city manager. 
(c)  The application shall set forth the following: 
(1)  The name of the individual, group, or organization sponsoring the outdoor fireworks display, together with the names of persons actually in charge of the firing of the display; 
(2)  Evidence of financial responsibility in accordance with the requirements of V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2154.205, as may hereafter be amended and naming the city as an additional insured; 
(3)  The date and time of day at which the outdoor fireworks display is to be held and any alternate date; 
(4)  Confirmation of the State of Texas issued license of the operator and the number of assistants that will be present; 
(5)  Copies of the State of Texas issued public display permit if required; 
(6)  The approximate number and kinds of fireworks to be discharged; 
(7)  The manner and place of storage of such fireworks prior to delivery to the outdoor fireworks display site; and 
(8)  A diagram of the grounds on which the outdoor fireworks display is to be held showing the point at which the fireworks are to be discharged, the location of all buildings, highways and other lines of communication, the lines behind which the audience will be restrained, and the location of other possible overhead obstructions. 
(d)  Upon authorization of the city council, and in addition to any conditions placed on the permit holder by the city council, the permit holder must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Comply with the provisions of NFPA 1123 and Title 37, Texas Administrative Code, chapter 591, and any amendments thereto; and 
(2)  Immediately dispose of any fireworks that remain unfired after the display is concluded in a way safe for the particular type of fireworks remaining. 
(e)  Any permit issued by the city council is not transferable and is valid for only one (1) outdoor display to be held during the hours authorized on the approved date, or alternate date. 
(Ord. No. 95-12, § II, 2-14-95; Ord. No. 02-25, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 09-015, § I, 2-24-09)  
Secs. 11-7—11-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE MARSHAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Officers and employees generally, § 2-31 et seq. 
 
Sec. 11-31. - Office created. 
The office of fire marshal is hereby created. Such office shall be independent of other departments within the fire department. The fire marshal shall report directly to the fire chief. The fire marshal shall be properly qualified for the duties of his office. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 6, art. 1, § 1 [Ord. No. 75-2, § 9, 1-28-75]; Ord. No. 02-25, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 04-61, § I, 8-10-04)  
Sec. 11-32. - General duties. 
(a)  The fire marshal or other qualified designated representative shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring within this city by which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire was the result of carelessness or design. The fire marshal shall keep in his office a record of all fires, together with all facts, statistics and circumstances, including the origin of the fires and the amount of the loss, which may be determined by the investigation required by this article. 
(b)  In addition to his other duties, the fire marshal shall be the head of the fire marshal's office and responsible for its accomplishment of all of the tasks delegated to it by the fire chief. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 6, art. 1, § 2 [Ord. No. 75-2, § 10, 1-28-75]; Ord. No. 02-25, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 09-015, § I, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 11-010, § I, 2-8-11; Ord. No. 15-061 , § II, 10-27-15)  
Sec. 11-33. - Testimony of witnesses; evidence of crimes. 
The fire marshal, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the testimony, on oath, of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in relation to the matter under investigation, and shall cause the same to be reduced to writing. If he shall be of the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson, or the attempt to commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud, or other criminal conduct, he shall cause such person to be lawfully arrested and charged with such offense or either of them, and shall furnish to the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the names of witnesses and all of the information obtained by him, including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 6, art. 1, § 3; Ord. No. 02-25, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 11-010, § I, 2-8-11)  
Sec. 11-34. - Power to summons witnesses. 
The fire marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which is by the provisions of this article a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any book, paper or document deemed pertinent thereto. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 6, art. 1, § 4; Ord. No. 02-25, § I, 5-28-02)  
Sec. 11-35. - Refusal of witness. 
Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear or testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of the fire marshal, or who disobeys, fails or refuses to produce any book, paper or document touching any matter under examination, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter under investigation, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 6, art. 1, § 5; Ord. No. 02-25, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 09-015, § I, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 11-36. - Investigation may be private. 
All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire marshal may, in his discretion, be private, and persons other than those required to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held. Witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other until they have been examined. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 6, art. 1, § 6; Ord. No. 02-25, § I, 5-28-02)  
Sec. 11-37. - Right to enter premises. 
The fire marshal shall have the authority at all times of day or night, when necessary, in the performance of the duties imposed upon him by the provisions of this article, to enter upon and examine any building or premises where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the same, which authority shall be exercised only with reason and good discretion. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 6, art. 1, § 7; Ord. No. 02-25, § I, 5-28-02)  
Sec. 11-38. - Investigations and orders. 
The fire marshal, for good cause, shall have a right at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination, to enter into and upon all buildings and premises within the city. It shall be his duty to enter upon and make or cause to be entered and made, a thorough examination of a mercantile, manufacturing and public buildings, together with the premises belonging thereto. At the end of each month the fire marshal shall report to the state fire marshal a report on each fire in the city during the month. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 6, art. 1, § 8 [Ord. No. 75-2, § 6, 1-28-75]; Ord. No. 02-25, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 09-015, § I, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 11-010, § I, 2-8-11)  
Secs. 11-39—11-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 
 
Sec. 11-61. - Adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of prescribing regulations consistent with nationally recognized practices for the reasonable protection of life and property from the hazards of fire and explosion within the city, that certain code known as the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, together with Appendices B [Fire-Flow Requirements For Building], D [Fire Apparatus Access Roads], E [Hazard Categories], F [Hazard Ranking], G [Cryogenic Fluids - Weight and Volume Equivalents] thereto, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended. Such code shall be controlling within the limits of the city and shall become a part of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 02-25, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 06-19, § I, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 09-015, § I, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 11-010, § I, 2-8-11; Ord. No. 18-042 , § I, 11-27-18)  
Sec. 11-62. - Amendments. 
The fire prevention code adopted by this article is hereby amended and changed in the following respects: 
(1)  Section 202 of the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, is amended by adding the definition to read as follows: 
"Standby personnel is qualified fire service personnel, approved by the fire chief. When utilized, the number required shall be as directed by the fire chief. Charges for utilization shall be as normally calculated by the jurisdiction." 
(2)  Section 307.1 of the International Fire Code 2018 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
"A person shall not kindle or maintain or authorize to be kindled or maintained any open burning unless conducted and in accordance with this section. Burning shall be commenced and completed between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. The fire department shall be notified before the fire is kindled and when the fire is exhausted or extinguished." 
(3)  Section 307.2 of the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
"307.2 Permit required. A permit shall be obtained from the code official in accordance with section 105.6 prior to kindling a fire for recognized land development or silvicultural or range or wildlife management practices, prevention or control of disease or pests, or a bonfire. A permit shall likewise be obtained prior to kindling a fire for land clearing, farming, or agricultural purposes, which shall be permitted only on tracts zoned and used A (agricultural) or A-R1 (agricultural single-family residential). Application for such approval shall only be presented by and permits issued to the owner of the land upon which the fire is to be kindled." 
(4)  Section 307.4 of the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
"307.4 Location. The location for open burning shall not be less than 300 feet (91440 mm) from any structure, and provisions shall be made to prevent the fire from spreading to within 300 feet (91440 mm) of any structure." 
(5)  Section 503.1.1 of the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, is amended by deleting the exceptions. 
(6)  Section 503.2.1 of the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
"503.2.1 Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 20 feet (6,096 mm), except for approved security gates in accordance with section 503.6, and an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 14 feet 0 inches (4,752 mm)." 
(7)  Section 503.2.3 of the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, is deleted in its entirety. 
(8)  Section 507.5.1 of the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
"507.5.1 Where required. Fire hydrants and mains shall be provided where required by local ordinance." 
(9)  Section 913 of the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
"913 Fire pump system supervision. The fire-pump system shall be supervised for 'loss of power,' 'phase reversal' and 'pump running' conditions by the supervisory signal on distinct circuits." 
(10)  Section 5601.1.3 of the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, is amended to read as follows: 
"5601.1.3 Fireworks. The possession, manufacture, storage, sale, handling and use of fireworks are prohibited. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Storage and handling of fireworks as permitted in section 5604. 
2.  Manufacture, assembly and testing of fireworks as permitted in section 5605. 
3.  The use of fireworks for display as permitted by local ordinances." 
(11)  Section 5608 of the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, is amended by deleting sections 5608.2 through 5608.10 and amending section 5608.1 to read as follows: 
"5608.1 General. The display of fireworks, including proximate audience displays and pyrotechnic special effects in motion picture, television, theatrical, and group entertainment productions shall comply with local ordinances and NFPA 1123 or NFPA 1126." 
(Ord. No. 02-25, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 04-62, § I, 8-10-04; Ord. No. 06-19, § I, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 09-015, § I, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 11-010, § I, 2-8-11; Ord. No. 15-061 , § II, 10-27-15; Ord. No. 18-042 , § I, 11-27-18)  
Secs. 11-63—11-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS 
 
Sec. 11-86. - Application of article. 
This article shall apply to all storage and handling of liquefied petroleum gas and the installation of all equipment pertinent to systems for such uses. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 6, art. 6, § 1 [Ord. No. 69-6, § 1, 2-24-69]; Ord. No. 02-25, § I, 5-28-02)  
Sec. 11-87. - Regulations. 
Any and all aspects or phases of the liquefied petroleum gas industry shall be governed by V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code ch. 113 and the acts amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto, now or hereafter enacted and any and all rules promulgated thereunder by the Railroad Commission of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 88-54, § III(6-6-2), 6-28-88; Ord. No. 02-25, § I, 5-28-02)  
Secs. 11-88—11-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - FIRE HYDRANTS AND FIRE LANES 
 
Sec. 11-111. - Authority. 
The location of fire hydrants and fire lanes shall be determined by the chief of the fire department or his designated representative, in conformity with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 6, art. 7, § 1 [Ord. No. 73-56, § 1, 12-20-73]; Ord. No. 09-015, § I, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 18-042 , § I, 11-27-18)  
Sec. 11-112. - Fire hydrants—Location. 
(a)  All residential zoned property and use. As property is developed, fire hydrants shall be located at a maximum spacing of six hundred (600) feet as measured along the length of the roadway(s) and no part of the structure shall be farther than five hundred (500) feet from the fire hydrant as measured by the route that a fire hose would be laid. 
(b)  All nonresidential zoned property or use. As the property is developed, fire hydrants shall be located at a maximum spacing of three hundred (300) feet as measured along the length of the roadway(s) and no part of the structure shall be farther than five hundred (500) feet from the fire hydrant as measured by the route that a fire hose is laid. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 6, art. 7, § 2 [Ord. No. 73-56, § 1, 12-20-73]; Ord. No. 02-25, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 15-061 , § II, 10-27-15)  
Sec. 11-113. - Same—Restrictions. 
(a)  All required fire hydrants shall be of the national standard three-way breakaway type no less than five and one-fourth (5-1/4) inches in size and shall conform to the provisions of the latest A.W.W.A. specifications C-502 and shall be placed upon water mains of no less than six (6) inches in size. 
(b)  Valves shall be placed on all fire hydrant leads. 
(c)  Required fire hydrants shall be installed so the breakaway point will be no less than three (3) inches, and no greater than five (5) inches above the grade surface. 
(d)  A spacing of no less than six (6) inches shall be provided between the bottom of the barrel of the large steamer connection and the grade surface. 
(e)  No fire hydrant located more than one thousand eight hundred (1,800) feet on a six-inch dead-end water main shall be considered as a required fire hydrant in the enforcement of this article. 
(f)  No fire hydrant on a six-inch looped water main exceeding three thousand five hundred (3,500) feet in length shall be considered as a required fire hydrant in the enforcement of this article. 
(g)  Except when it is determined by the fire chief that the required maximum hour demand plus the needed fire flow demand will be met, fire hydrants shall be installed on a separate water main when required on private property. 
(h)  Fire hydrants when located on public property shall be located a minimum of two (2) feet and a maximum of six (6) feet behind the curb line. 
(i)  All required fire hydrants placed on private property shall be adequately protected by either curb stops or concrete posts or other methods as approved by the fire chief, such stops or posts to be the responsibility of the landowner on which the fire hydrant is placed. 
(j)  All required fire hydrants shall be installed so that the steamer connection will face the fire lane or street. 
(k)  Fire hydrants, when placed at intersections or access drives to parking lots, when practical shall be placed so that no part of the fire truck will block the intersection or parking lot access when connections to the fire hydrant are made. 
(l)  Fire hydrants required by this article located on private property shall be accessible to the fire department at all times. 
(m)  The fire chief may, for cause, increase the distance of fire hydrants within ten (10) percent of the footage given in section 11-112. 
(n)  All required fire hydrants shall be approved by the fire marshal and installed by the contractor prior to any construction above the structure's foundation. The building official may issue foundation permits prior to the installation and approval of all required fire hydrants. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 6, art. 7, § 3; Ord. No. 73-56, § 1, 12-20-73; Ord. No. 86-9, § 1, 2-11-86; Ord. No. 86-59, § 1, 8-26-86; Ord. No. 09-015, § I, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 11-114. - Fire lanes—Location. 
No building used for any purpose other than single-family or two-family dwellings shall be constructed so that any part of the perimeter of the structure is greater than one hundred fifty (150) feet from a public street or highway unless the owner constructs and maintains a fire lane having a minimum width of twenty (20) feet and a minimum height throughout of no less than fourteen (14) feet and terminating within one hundred fifty (150) feet from the farthest point of such structure. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 6, art. 7, § 4; Ord. No. 73-56, § 1, 12-20-73; Ord. No. 18-042 , § I, 11-27-18)  
Sec. 11-115. - Same—Restrictions. 
(a)  Required fire lanes when not connected at both ends to a public street shall terminate in a turnaround having a minimum radius of fifty (50) feet or approved hammerheads as seen in the International Fire Code, 2018 edition Appendix D figure D 103.1. 
(b)  All required fire lanes shall be all-weather surfaced. For the purposes of this article, "all-weather surface" means asphalt or concrete. 
(c)  Fire lanes shall be installed prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
(d)  All required fire lanes shall be approved by the fire marshal. 
(e)  All required fire lanes shall not be used as loading zones. 
(f)  There shall be no parking in any fire lane at any time. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 6, art. 7, § 5; Ord. No. 73-56, § 1, 12-20-73; Ord. 86-59, § 1, 8-26-86; Ord. No. 02-25, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 06-19, § I, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 09-015, § I, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 11-010, § I, 2-8-11; Ord. No. 15-061 , § II, 10-27-15; Ord. No. 18-042 , § I, 11-27-18)  
Sec. 11-116. - Maintenance. 
(a)  All fire hydrants shall be inspected, flushed and painted at least once yearly and such inspection, flushing and painting shall be the responsibility of the public works department. 
(b)  Any maintenance or repairs required to keep fire hydrants in proper working order, other than the once yearly inspection, flushing and painting done by the public works department, shall be the responsibility of the owner, or owners of the property on which the fire hydrant, or hydrants, are located. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 6, art. 7, § 6; Ord. No. 73-56, § 1, 12-20-73; Ord. No. 09-015, § I, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 11-117. - Posting of signs and markings. 
(a)  All required fire lanes shall be conspicuously marked as follows: 
Striping—All fire lanes shall be marked by painted lines of red traffic paint six (6) inches in width to show the boundaries of the fire lane. The words "NO PARKING FIRE LANE" or "FIRE LANE NO PARKING" shall appear in four inch (4") white letters at a maximum spacing of thirty (30) feet intervals on the red border markings along both sides of the fire lanes. Where a curb is available, the stripping shall be on the vertical face of the curb. 
Signs—When approved by the code official, signs shall read "NO PARKING FIRE LANE" or "FIRE LANE NO PARKING" and shall be twelve inches (12") wide and eighteen inches (18") high. Signs shall be painted on a white background with letters and borders in red, using not less than two-inch (2") lettering. Signs shall be permanently affixed to a stationary post or structure's wall and the bottom of the sign shall be six feet six inches (6'6") above finished grade. Signs shall be spaced no less than thirty (30) feet and no greater than forty (40) feet apart. 
(b)  Required fire hydrant markings shall be placed on both sides of a distance no less than fifteen (15) feet. 
(c)  All required fire lane signs and fire hydrant markings shall be maintained in good condition and legible at all times, and shall be the responsibility of the owner, or owners, on whose property they are located. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 6, art. 7, § 7; Ord. No. 73-56, § 1, 12-20-73; Ord. No. 02-25, § I, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 09-015, § I, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 11-118. - Abandonment of fire lanes. 
No owner or person in charge of any premises served by a required fire lane shall abandon or close any such fire lane without first complying with the following procedure: 
(1)  A request shall be made in writing by the owner to the fire chief stating his reasons for abandoning the fire lane. 
(2)  Verification shall be obtained by the fire chief from the building official that such property is no longer subject to the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 6, art. 7, § 7; Ord. No. 73-56, § 1, 12-20-73; Ord. No. 09-015, § I, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 11-119. - Required extensions. 
The fire chief may require that an individual extend a six-inch or larger water main, and maintain a hydrant in the case of a structure that will be situated farther than the maximum distance from the hydrant as set forth in section 11-112, but in no case shall such extension be greater than three hundred (300) feet in length as measured along the length of the roadway. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 6, art. 7, § 9; Ord. No. 73-56, § 1, 12-20-73; Ord. No. 09-015, § I, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 11-120. - Applicability. 
All construction within the city shall be undertaken in conformance with the provisions of this article and only after the approval of the authority. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 6, art. 7, § 10 [Ord. No. 73-56, § 1, 12-20-73])  
Sec. 11-121. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any violation of the provisions of any part of this article shall be punishable as provided in section 1-8. 
(b)  Failure to remedy any violation of this article after notice of violation, and each subsequent notice of violation thereafter given prior to the remedy of the violation, shall constitute a separate violation of this article by the person responsible for the remedy of such violation. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 6, art. 7, § 11 [Ord. No. 73-56, § 1, 12-20-73])  
Sec. 11-122. - Variances. 
(a)  Jurisdiction. The board of adjustments and appeals as established in the fire prevention code adopted in this chapter may vary the application of any provision of this article, except section 11-115(b) and section 11-121, to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice, and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this chapter or public interest, or when, in its opinion, the interpretation of the fire marshal should be modified or reversed. 
(b)  Notice of appeal. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed with the fire marshal within thirty (30) days after the decision is rendered by the fire marshal. 
(c)  Action. The board of adjustments and appeals shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the board of adjustments and appeals shall also include the reasons for the decision. If a decision of the board of adjustments and appeals reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the fire marshal, or varies the application of any provision of this article, the fire marshal shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. 
(d)  Decisions are final. Every decision of the board of adjustments and appeals shall be final, subject however to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(Code 1963, § 6-7-12 [Ord. No. 73-56, § 1, 12-20-73]; Ord. No. 89-43, § I, 6-13-89; Ord. No. 09-015, § I, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 11-010, § I, 2-8-11)  
Secs. 11-123—11-132. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - FIREMEN'S RELIEF AND RETIREMENT FUND BOARD 
 
Sec. 11-133. - Created. 
(a)  There is hereby created and recognized as an official board of the city that certain body previously established under the laws of Texas as the board of directors of the city of Killeen firemen's relief and retirement fund. 
(b)  The board of directors shall be established in accordance with Article 6243e of the Texas Revised Civil Statutes, commonly referred to as the Texas Local Fire Fighters Retirement Act, as that article provides at the time this section is enacted, and as said article from time to time thereafter may be revised or amended. The members of such board shall be of the number, and possess the qualifications required by state law. 
(c)  The persons serving as trustees of such board as of July 9, 1991, shall continue in office and thereafter be replaced, as necessary, as provided for by state law. 
(Ord. No. 91-40, § I, 7-9-91) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees generally, § 2-31 et seq.  
Secs. 11-134—11-139. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - FALSE FIRE ALARMS 
 
Sec. 11-140. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this section the following definitions shall apply: 
Alarm site means a single premises or location (one street address) served by a fire alarm system or systems that are under the control of one owner. 
Fire alarm system(s) means any equipment, device or devices arranged to signal the presence of fire, smoke, heat or other hazards requiring urgent attention and to which the fire department is expected to respond. 
Fire alarm system user means the owner, agent or person in control of the property on which a fire alarm system or systems is maintained within the corporate limits of the city. 
Automatic dialing device means a fire alarm system which automatically sends over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a pre-recorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of the emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect. 
False alarm means any fire alarm, which was discharged falsely, accidentally, through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, lack of maintenance, or by negligence of the owner or lessee of the alarm system or of his and/or her employees or agents. False alarms shall not include: 
1.  Alarms that occur during electrical storms, tornadoes, hurricanes, ice storms, earthquakes, other natural disaster or Acts of God. 
2.  Disruption of the telephone circuits beyond the control of the alarm company and/or the alarm user. 
3.  Electrical power disruption or any failure not caused by the user. 
4.  Alarms which occur as a result of an actual fire or emergency condition. 
5.  Alarms designed to alert only the inhabitants of a premise. 
Fire department response means the dispatching of a fire unit to investigate a fire alarm. 
Health care occupancies are those occupancies used for the purposes of treatment or care of persons suffering from physical or mental illness, disease or infirmity; or the care of infants, convalescents or aged persons. Health care occupancies provide sleeping facilities for the occupants and are occupied by persons who are mostly incapable of self-preservation because of age, physical or mental disability, or because of security measures not under the occupant's control. 
Non-residential occupancies are those occupancies used for or engaged in commerce, business, or manufacturing. 
Permit means a certificate of authorization issued by the fire marshal's office to the owner, agent, or person in control of the property, which authorizes the operation of a fire alarm system or systems at an alarm site. 
Permit holder means any individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity to which an alarm system permit is issued. 
Person means any individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity. 
Residential occupancies are those private occupancies that provide living accommodations for persons not under medical care. 
(Ord. No. 09-015, § I, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 11-141. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article apply to all fire alarm systems installed within the corporate limits of the city of Killeen, except for those fire alarm systems installed upon the premises occupied by the United States Government, the state of Texas, the city of Killeen, or any county government. 
(Ord. No. 09-015, § I, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 11-142. - Permit application issuance. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, cause to be operated, or permit the operation of a fire alarm system or systems at an alarm site unless a valid permit has been issued by the fire marshal's office for such system. Alarm sites in existence before the effective date of this article must be permitted within one hundred eighty (180) days of the effective date of this article. A fire alarm system user shall be in violation of this article if he permits the operation of such system without a proper permit. 
(b)  A fire alarm system user or his agent shall obtain a permit for each alarm site. 
(c)  Application for a permit for the operation of a fire alarm system or systems at an alarm site shall be made with the fire marshal's office by the owner, agent, or person having control over the property on which the fire alarm system is to be installed and operated. Application shall be made in writing on a form designated by the city. On such application form, the applicant shall set forth: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number of the owner, agent, or person in control of the property to be protected; 
(2)  The street address of the property on which the alarm system is to be installed and operated; 
(3)  A brief description of the type of property to be protected (i.e. commercial, residential, or industrial, etc.); 
(4)  Any business name or title used for the premises on which the alarm system is to be installed and operated; 
(5)  Name, address, and telephone number of the alarm company or person who will install and service the alarm system; 
(6)  Names and telephone numbers of two or more persons who are able to and have agreed to receive notification at any time from the fire department in order to deactivate the alarm system if it becomes necessary; 
(7)  Any other pertinent information required by the fire department or the fire marshal's office, which is necessary for the enforcement of this article. 
(d)  The fire marshal's office shall issue a permit to the individual, corporation or other legal entity in control of the property to be protected upon submission in person or by mail of a completed application and payment of the appropriate fee, unless any statement made in the application is incomplete or false. 
(e)  The fire marshal's office shall treat all information on the application as confidential within the limits of state law. 
(f)  Any permit issued pursuant to this article shall be applicable only to the permit holder and is not transferable. 
(g)  Each permit issued to a fire alarm system user shall be valid for the duration of the permit unless one of the following occurs earlier: 
(1)  Control of protected property is transferred from the permit holder; 
(2)  Permit holder voluntarily discontinues services provided by a particular alarm protective service, and/or disconnects an alarm system not required by the fire code; 
(3)  Revocation of the permit by the fire marshal's office pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 09-015, § I, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 11-143. - Permit fee. 
The fee for a permit issued pursuant to this article shall be as provided in the adopted fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 09-015, § I, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 19-047 , § V, 9-17-19)  
Sec. 11-144. - Service fee for fire department responses to excessive false alarms. 
(a)  The user of any fire alarm system, which upon activation elicits a fire department response from the fire department, shall be subject to the following answering fee schedule for each false alarm in the calendar year. 
(b)  The fire marshal's office shall impose a service fee for each fire department response to any false alarm. The owner of the property shall be subject to the fee schedule below. The fee schedule for each premises shall be as follows in each calendar year: 
(1)  First and second false alarms: no charge. 
(2)  Third and fourth false alarms: $100.00 each. 
(3)  Fifth through tenth false alarms: $200.00 each. 
(4)  Eleventh and subsequent false alarms: $500.00 each. 
(c)  The service fee shall be imposed whether the fire department received the alarm by direct connection or through an intermediary, such as an answering service or modified central station. 
(d)  If the fire marshal's office is notified in writing prior to the day of installation of a new alarm system, the fee imposed by this section shall be waived for a thirty (30) day period beginning with the date of the installation. 
(e)  All service fees authorized in this article shall be billed and collected by the finance department, according to its procedures. 
(Ord. No. 09-015, § I, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 11-145. - Duty to respond. 
It shall be a violation of this article if a fire alarm system user cannot be contacted or refuses to respond to the alarm site within one-half hour after receiving a request by fire department or the fire marshal's office, unless there is a bona fide emergency preventing response as determined by the fire marshal's office. Fire alarm system user may be subject to a fine for failure to respond under the penalty section of this ordinance in addition to any applicable service fee. 
(Ord. No. 09-015, § I, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 11-146. - Revocation of permits. 
(a)  The fire marshal may revoke a fire alarm system permit if he determines that: 
(1)  There is a false statement of a material matter on the application for a permit; 
(2)  The permit holder has violated this article or any of its provisions; 
(3)  The permit holder has failed to make timely payment of a service fee. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an alarm system during the period in which his alarm permit is revoked. 
(Ord. No. 09-015, § I, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 11-147. - Appeal of service fee; denial or revocation of a permit. 
(a)  Any permit holder aggrieved by the decision to assess a service fee by the fire marshal as provided for in section 11-144 may appeal the decision to the fire appeals board. The permit holder may appeal by filing with the fire marshal a written request for a hearing, setting forth the reasons for the appeal, within ten (10) days after the fire marshal or his designated representative renders the decision. 
(b)  If the fire marshal refuses to issue or revokes a permit, he shall send to the applicant or permit holder by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his action and a statement of the right to an appeal. The applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision of the fire marshal to the fire appeals board by filing with the fire marshal a written request for a hearing, setting forth the reasons for the appeal, within ten (10) days after receipt or the notice from the fire marshal. 
(c)  The filing of a request for an appeal hearing with the board stays an action of the fire marshal in assessing a service fee, refusing to issue a permit or in revoking a permit until the board makes a final decision. If a request for an appeal hearing is not made within the ten (10) day period, the action of the fire marshal is final. 
(d)  If revoked, the revoked permit holder may reapply when conditions which caused the action have been corrected and if the fire marshal's office determines that the alarm system is likely to be maintained and operated in a responsible manner in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 09-015, § I, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 11-148. - Defense of prosecution. 
It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this article that: 
(1)  The activation of the fire alarm system was a result of an actual fire or emergency. 
(2)  The alarm system was sounded solely for the purpose of testing the alarm and the person who tested the alarm took reasonable precautions to avoid any request being made to the fire department to respond to such alarm. This section shall not apply to conduct which is in violation of section 42.06 of the Penal Code of the state of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 09-015, § I, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 11-149. - Penalty for violation of section. 
Any violation of any provision of this article shall be deemed a Class C Misdemeanor and any person convicted of any such violation shall be fined not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day and every day that such violation shall continue shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 09-015, § I, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 11-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - FIRE SERVICE FEE RECOVERY 
 
Sec. 11-151. - Definitions. 
Emergency incident means a situation that requires the response of the fire department. 
Fire service fees means charges imposed for services provided during an emergency incident that requires a fire department response. 
Person means a natural person, corporation, partnership or other entity with legal capacity. 
Response means an arrival at the scene of an emergency incident by fire department vehicles to provide fire services. 
(Ord. No. 10-055, § I, 9-14-10)  
Sec. 11-152. - Fee Recovery. 
The fire department shall have the authority to bill a person, including an insurance company that provides insurance coverage to a person, for the reasonable costs related to the use, loss, damage, and wear and tear to fire department apparatus, tools equipment, and materials necessary to provide fire services and 911 response to a person involved in an emergency incident, subject to the conditions and limitations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-055, § I, 9-14-10)  
Sec. 11-153. - Billing. 
(a)  The fire department shall bill for such fire response services by and through its EMS billing department. The fire department shall use incident report information as the basis for the charge and recovery of fire service fees for each incident. 
(b)  The EMS billing department shall submit an invoice for the fire services provided to the person or relevant insurance company of a person determined to be at fault by the fire or police department in an emergency incident. If it can be reasonably determined that there is insurance coverage for a particular emergency incident, the EMS billing department shall attempt to recover any such fees from the insurance company before seeking payment from the person. The billing department shall also be authorized to act as an agent and bill for, at the approved rate, any authorized responding mutual aid fire department upon the request of an authorized Incident Command Officer of the fire department to provide for reimbursement of services and reimbursable consumable products provided in the service to the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 10-055, § I, 9-14-10)  
Sec. 11-154. - Schedule of Fire Service Fees. 
The following fees are hereby established for recovery of fire services provided in an emergency incident: 
(a)  Fire and Rescue Services Billing Fees (Non-hazardous materials incidents) 
(1)  LEVEL 1 RESPONSE 
A fire service fee of $150 shall be collected for Level 1 Response, which shall include: 
(a)  Basic response by one Class A Engine/Ladder Truck or Rescue Truck, to include: 
1.  Assessment of the injuries to persons involved in the emergency incident accident prior to arrival of an EMS unit, providing patient care until the arrival of an EMS unit, assisting an EMS crew with patient care, and traffic and crowd control to prevent further emergency incidents for up to 15 minutes; and 
2.  Checking for fire hazard at an emergency incident, disconnecting the battery on damaged vehicles to prevent fires, and checking for spills or leaking fluids. 
(2)  LEVEL 2 RESPONSE 
A fire service fee of $300 shall be collected for Level 2 Response, which shall include any Level 1 Response, plus any of the following: 
(a)  Traffic and crowd control from 16 minutes to one hour; 
(b)  Application of absorbent to absorb leaking fluids or spills at an emergency incident; 
(c)  Clean scene of any emergency incident of any debris, pick up vehicle parts and/or glass from roadway; 
(d)  Assist in vehicle removal; 
(e)  Wash down of spilled or leaked fluids from vehicles involved in an emergency incident; and 
(f)  Response of an additional Class A Engine/Ladder Truck. 
(3)  LEVEL 3 RESPONSE 
A fire service fee of $400 shall be collected for Level 3 Response, which shall include any Level 1 or 2 Response, plus any of the following: 
(a)  Traffic and crowd control of more than one hour but less than two hours; 
(b)  Extrication of a single trapped patient; 
(c)  Response of three or more Class A Engines, Ladder Trucks or Rescue Trucks; 
(d)  Establishment of a landing zone for air medical response; and 
(e)  Response of a Command Vehicle (maximum of one). 
(4)  LEVEL 4 RESPONSE 
A fire service fee of $500 shall be collected for Level 4 Response, which shall include any Level 1, 2, or 3 Response, plus any of the following: 
(a)  Extrication of multiple patients in a single vehicle; 
(b)  Manpower involved in use of power or hand tools including K-12 saw, Chain Saw, Reciprocating Saw, Drill, Acetylene Cutting Torch, Air Bags, SCBA Cylinder, Vehicle Stabilization System, plus charge for the tool as listed below; 
(c)  Traffic and crowd control in excess of two hours; 
(d)  Assisting Police Department with incident reconstruction; 
(e)  Extrication of multiple patients in the same emergency incident; 
(f)  Extrication of a single patient that takes more than one hour; and 
(g)  Emergency incidents involving more than two vehicles with more than two patients requiring patient care. 
(b)  In all cases, the following fees may be billed for each vehicle involved in an emergency incident in addition to service fees listed in subsection (a) above: 
Rescue Equipment 
(1)  Vehicle Stabilization $150 
(2)  K-12 saw $60 
(3)  K-tool $25 
(4)  Chain Saw $50 
(5)  Sawzall $60 
(6)  Windshield Tool $20 
(7)  Rescue Blanket $35 
(8)  Rope $25 
(9)  SCBA refill (one fee) $25 
(10)  Medical Disposables from an engine or rescue truck $25 
Fire Equipment 
(11)  Flares $5 (per unit) 
(12)  AFFF/6% foam $75 (per 5 gallons) 
(13)  AFFF/1% foam $200 (per 5 gallons) 
(14)  Class A foam $75 (per 5 gallons) 
(15)  AR foam $200 (per 5 gallons) 
(16)  Salvage cover $50 (per unit) 
(17)  Water/Foam Extinguisher $25 (per unit) 
(18)  Dry Chemical Extinguisher $50 (per unit) 
(19)  CO2 Extinguisher $50 (per unit) 
(20)  Plug and Dike $75 (per incident) 
(21)  Barricade Tape $25 (per incident) 
(Ord. No. 10-055, § I, 9-14-10)  
Chapter 12 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Building and construction regulations, Ch. 8; mobile homes and mobile home parks, Ch. 17; planning and development, Ch. 21; subdivisions and other developments, Ch. 26; zoning, Ch. 31. 
State Law reference— Local participation in national flood insurance program, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 16.311 et seq.; authority to enforce ordinances necessary to protect and preserve health, property, good government and order, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.004. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 12-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. These definitions are derived from Title 44, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), part 59, section 59.1. 
100-year flood. See "base flood." 
Administrator shall mean the Federal Insurance Administrator (FIA). 
Alluvial fan flooding shall mean flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment, transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. 
Apex shall mean a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
Appeal shall mean a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a variance. 
Appurtenant structure shall mean a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
Area of shallow flooding shall mean a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one (1) percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard shall mean the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-30, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V. For purposes of these regulations, the term "special flood hazard area" is synonymous in meaning with the phrase "area of special flood hazard." 
Base flood shall mean the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. See "base flood elevation (BFE)." 
Base flood elevation (BFE) shall mean the elevation shown on the FIRM and found in the accompanying FIS for Zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a one (1) percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. See "base flood." 
Basement shall mean any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Breakaway wall shall mean a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended, through its design and construction, to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
Building. See "structure." 
Community shall mean the city of Killeen corporate city limits, in which the city has the authority to adopt and enforce flood plain management regulations for the areas within its jurisdiction. 
Critical feature shall mean an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
Development shall mean any man-made change in improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials. 
Drainage design manual shall mean the city's drainage design manual adopted under chapter 26 of the code of ordinances, as amended. 
Elevated building shall mean a non-basement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
Elevation certificate shall mean the official document under the same name issued by the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) used to provide elevation information necessary to ensure compliance with the community floodplain management ordinances, to determine the proper insurance premium rate, and to support a request for a Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) or Letter of Map Revision based on Fill (LOMR-F). 
Existing construction shall mean, for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall mean a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) are completed before February 14, 1978. 
Existing structures. See "existing construction." 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall mean the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or pouring of concrete pads). 
Flood or flooding shall mean a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood elevation study shall mean an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) shall mean an official map of a community, issued by the Administrator, where the boundaries of the flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion areas having special hazards have been designated as Zones A, M, and/or E. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) shall mean an official map of a community, on which the federal emergency management agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study (FIS) shall mean the official report provided by the federal emergency management agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the flood boundary-floodway map. See "flood elevation study." 
Floodplain or flood-prone area shall mean any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See "flood" or "flooding." 
Floodplain administrator shall mean the building official of the city as designated under section 12-36 of this article. 
Floodplain development permit shall mean a permit required to be obtained prior to development as defined hereunder. 
Floodplain management shall mean the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measure for reducing flood damage, including but no limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
Floodplain management regulations shall mean zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance, and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, or any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
Flood protection system shall mean those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
Flood proofing shall mean any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway (regulatory floodway) shall mean the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard shall mean a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected sized flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Functionally dependent use shall mean a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade shall mean the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure shall mean any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Resister; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified, either by the approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or directly by the Secretary of the Interior. 
Improved drainage course shall mean any drainage course which, when altered in any manner, changes the boundaries of the floodplain. 
Levee shall mean a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee system shall mean a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
Lowest floor shall mean the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
Manufactured home shall mean a structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreation vehicle." 
Manufactured home park or subdivision shall mean a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Map shall mean the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) or the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) for a community issued by the federal emergency management agency. 
Mean sea level shall mean, for purposes of the national flood insurance program, the North American vertical datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) are referenced. 
New construction shall mean, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structure. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision shall mean a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by the community. 
Person shall mean any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, or any other entity, including state and local governments and agencies. 
Recreational vehicle shall mean a vehicle that is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled, or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
Riverine shall mean relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
Special flood hazard area. See "area of special flood hazard." 
Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)), includes substantial improvement and shall mean the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation of or for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a "substantial improvement," the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure shall mean, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Substantial damage shall mean damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damage conditions would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement shall mean any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure, before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or 
(2)  Any alteration of a structure listed on the national register of historic places or a state inventory of historic places provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Variance shall mean a grant of relief by a community to a person from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full requirements, see 44 CFR section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations). 
Violation shall mean the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR, section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Water surface elevation shall mean the height, in relation to the North American vertical datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 6, § 2 [Ord. No. 87-20, § I, 4-14-87; Ord. No. 87-73, § I, 10-13-87]; Ord. No. 08-081, § I, 9-23-08; Ord. No. 11-107, § IV, 11-8-11) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 12-2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 6, § 1(B) [Ord. No. 87-20, § I, 4-14-87])  
Sec. 12-3. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Ensure that data are made available that will allow potential buyers to determine whether property is located in a floodplain. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 6, § 1(C) [Ord. No. 87-20, § I, 4-14-87]; Ord. No. 08-081, § I, 9-23-08)  
Sec. 12-4. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which service such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(6)  Verify applicant's compliance with the city's adopted drainage design manual and the provisions of this chapter. If conflicts exist, the most stringent shall control. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 6, § 1(D) [Ord. No. 87-20, § I, 4-14-87]; Ord. No. 11-107, § IV, 11-8-11)  
Sec. 12-5. - Application of chapter. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 6, § 3(A) [Ord. No. 87-20, § I, 4-14-87]; Ord. No. 08-081, § I, 9-23-08)  
Sec. 12-6. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall be located, altered or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 6, § 3(D) [Ord. No. 87-20, § I, 4-14-87])  
Sec. 12-7. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study, Bell County, Texas," dated September 26, 2008, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary-floodway maps (FIRMs and FBFM) and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 6, § 3(B) [Ord. No. 87-20, § I, 4-14-87]; Ord. No. 08-081, § I, 9-23-08)  
Sec. 12-8. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 6, § 3(E) [Ord. No. 87-20, § I, 4-14-87]; Ord. No. 08-081, § I, 9-23-08)  
Sec. 12-9. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the city council; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 6, § 3(F) [Ord. No. 87-20, § I, 4-14-87])  
Sec. 12-10. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 6, § 3(G) [Ord. No. 87-20, § I, 4-14-87])  
Secs. 12-11—12-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 12-36. - Floodplain administrator—designation. 
The building official is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 6, § 4(A) [Ord. No. 87-20, § I, 4-14-87])  
Sec. 12-37. - Same—duties and responsibilities. 
The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Review permit applications to determine whether the proposed building site will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this chapter and this code of ordinances. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendment of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agencies which are the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB) and the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), or successor agencies, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the federal emergency management agency. 
(7)  Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 12-7, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of article III of this chapter. 
(9)  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated (through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses) that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. 
(10)  Under provisions of 44 CFR, chapter 1, section 65.12 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE, or AH on the community's FIRM, which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one (1) foot, provided that the community first applies for and obtains a conditional FIRM revision through the federal emergency management agency. Permittee shall incur all expenses associated with the preparation, design, application, and obtainment of the conditional FIRM revision. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 6, § 4(B) [Ord. No. 87-20, § I, 4-14-87]; Ord. No. 08-081, § II, 9-23-08; Ord. No. 11-107, § IV, 11-8-11)  
Sec. 12-38. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. No development shall occur without first obtaining a floodplain development permit. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 6, § 3(C) [Ord. No. 87-20, § I, 4-14-87]; Ord. No. 08-081, § II, 9-23-08)  
Sec. 12-39. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Application for a development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures. 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed. 
(3)  A certificate from a Texas registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 12-62(2). 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(5)  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 12-37(1). 
(b)  Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter, other applicable sections of this code of ordinances, and the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage. 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner. 
(3)  The danger that the materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others. 
(4)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development. 
(5)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles. 
(6)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems. 
(7)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site. 
(8)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable. 
(9)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
(10)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan, to include the city's various comprehensive plans including, but not limited to, the drainage master plan and the water and wastewater master plan, as amended, for the area. 
(11)  Technical review of permits for sound engineering practices may be performed by the city engineer or by an appointed Texas registered professional engineer. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 6, § 4(C) [Ord. No. 87-20, § I, 4-14-87]; Ord. No. 08-081, § II, 9-23-08; Ord. No. 11-107, § IV, 11-8-11)  
Sec. 12-40. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The zoning board of adjustment as established by the city council shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The zoning board of adjustment shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the federal emergency management agency upon request. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the national register of historic places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter. 
(f)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in section 12-39(b) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(g)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the zoning board of adjustments may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this chapter. 
(h)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(i)  The prerequisites for granting variances under this section shall be as follows: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
a.  Showing a good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expenses, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(j)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvement and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: 
(1)  The criteria outlined in (a) through (i) above are met, and 
(2)  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 6, § 4(D) [Ord. No. 87-20, § I, 4-14-87])  
Secs. 12-41—12-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
 
Sec. 12-61. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 6, § 5(A) [Ord. No. 87-20, § I, 4-14-87; Ord. No. 87-73, § II, 10-13-87])  
Sec. 12-62. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section 12-7, section 12-37(8), or section 12-63(c), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated at least two (2) feet above the base flood elevation. A Texas registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this section as proposed in section 12-39(a)(1), and the standards of the city's adopted drainage design manual is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least two (2) feet above the base flood level (confirmed by an elevation certification submitted by a Texas registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor) or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A Texas registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection and the standards of the city's adopted drainage design manual. A record of such certification, which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood force on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a Texas registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purpose of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.  Require that all manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated two (2) feet above the base flood elevation; and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement on sites located: 
1.  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 
2.  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
3.  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
4.  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood. 
c.  Require that manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of this section be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is two (2) feet above the base flood elevation or higher, or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
b.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreations vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has had no permanently attached additions; or 
c.  Meet the permit requirements of section 12-39 of this chapter, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in this section. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 6, § 5(B) [Ord. No. 87-20, § I, 4-14-87; Ord. No. 87-73, § II, 10-13-87; Ord. No. 89-62, § 1, 8-8-89]; Ord. No. 08-081, § III, 9-23-08; Ord. No. 11-107, § IV, 11-8-11)  
Sec. 12-63. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals including manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with sections 12-2, 12-3 and 12-4. 
(b)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet the floodplain development permit requirement of sections 12-38, 12-39, and the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, which are greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 12-7 or section 12-37(8). 
(d)  All subdivision proposals including manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards and to comply with the requirements of the city's adopted drainage design manual. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals including manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 6, § 5(C) [Ord. No. 87-20, § I, 4-14-87; Ord. No. 87-73, § II, 10-13-87]; Ord. No. 08-081, § III, 9-23-08; Ord. No. 11-107, § IV, 11-8-11)  
Sec. 12-64. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 12-7 are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvement of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least two (2) feet higher than the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified). 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall: 
a.  Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least two (2) feet higher than the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified); or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  A Texas registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 12-39, and the standards of the city's adopted drainage design manual, are satisfied. 
(4)  Require within Zone AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 6, § 5(D) [Ord. No. 87-20, § I, 4-14-87; Ord. No. 87-73, § II, 10-13-87] Ord. No. 08-081, § III, 9-23-08; Ord. No. 11-107, § IV, 11-8-11)  
Sec. 12-65. - Floodways. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 12-7 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development, unless certification by a Texas registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating (through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses and compliance with the city's adopted drainage design manual) that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If (1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article. 
(3)  Under provisions of 44 CFR, chapter 1, section 65.12 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first applies for and obtains a conditional FIRM and floodway revision through the federal emergency management agency. Permittee shall incur all expenses associated with the preparation, design, application, and obtainment of the conditional FIRM and floodway revision. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 6, § 5(E) [Ord. No. 87-20, § I, 4-14-87; Ord. No. 87-73, § II, 10-13-87] Ord. No. 08-081, § III, 9-23-08; Ord. No. 11-107, § IV, 11-8-11)  
Sec. 12-66. - Improved drainage courses and structures. 
(a)  Design. All improvements to open drainage courses and enclosed drainage structures in areas of special flood hazard shall be designed by a Texas registered professional engineer in accordance with the adopted drainage design manual, as amended, and constructed to accommodate the one-hundred-year flood event. 
(1)  Upon completion, the design engineer shall certify in writing that the improvements made comply with those designed. 
(2)  Improved drainage courses and structures in areas of special flood hazard may be of earthen channel or concrete-lined channel, provided the type of channel used satisfies the design criteria (velocity/type of soil, etc.) in accordance with the adopted drainage design standards, as amended. 
(3)  The design and construction of improved drainage courses and structures shall provide for adequate access to such drainage courses for the performance of necessary maintenance. 
(b)  Dedication. All improved drainage courses and structures in areas of special flood hazard shall be dedicated to the city and accepted for maintenance by the city in accordance with the provisions of chapter 26 of this code of ordinances. 
(c)  Maintenance. The city shall maintain all improved open drainage courses and enclosed drainage structures in areas of special flood hazard provided that the requirements of section 12-66(a) and (b) are satisfied. The areas of special flood hazard shall be inspected on an annual basis under the supervision of the city engineer or his designee to determine if required maintenance is being performed. Maintenance required by this section shall be performed as often as necessary to keep the area free of debris and any rank growth above the height of eighteen (18) inches above the finished grade of the improved drainage courses. Inspection for sedimentation shall be conducted as determined by the city engineer or his designee. Maintenance will be performed as often as necessary to keep the sedimentation from exceeding twelve (12) inches in depth above the finished grade of the improved drainage courses. All bottom profile inspections to determine the depth of sedimentation will be coordinated and reviewed by the city engineer or his designee. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 6, § 5(F) [Ord. No. 87-20, § I, 4-14-87; Ord. No. 87-73, § II, 10-13-87] Ord. No. 08-081, § III, 9-23-08; Ord. No. 11-107, § IV, 11-8-11)  
Sec. 12-67. - Violations, stop work orders, and penalty clause. 
(a)  Violations and stop work orders. 
(1)  Violations. It shall be unlawful and considered a violation of this chapter for any person or entity to commence or continue development (as defined in this chapter) or cause the same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Notice of violation and stop work order. The floodplain administrator is authorized to serve a notice of a violation or a stop work order on the person or entity responsible for any violation under this chapter, or in violation of a floodplain permit issued under the provisions of this chapter. Any such notice of violation shall direct the discontinuance of the violation or condition and the abatement of the violation. 
Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason(s) for the order, and the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume. Any person or entity who shall continue any work after having been served a stop work order, except such work as that person or entity is directed to perform to remove a violation of unsafe condition (provided that such person or entity shall remain responsible for advising the floodplain administrator and removing any unsafe condition, pursuant to the direction of the floodplain administrator, that is known to exist but is not readily determinable by the floodplain administrator), shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
(3)  Prosecution of violation. If a notice of violation is not complied with within three (3) calendar days, or an extension requested and granted by the floodplain administrator, or the stop work order complied with immediately, the floodplain administrator is authorized to request that the city attorney institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to enforce compliance with the terms of a stop work order. Failure to comply with a stop work order shall be immediately prosecutable as a violation. 
(b)  Penalties. Unless stated otherwise, violations of this chapter shall be punished as a safety violation as provided in section 1-8 of this code. A violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor. A person convicted of a violation of this code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day of any such violation shall constitute a separate offense. Proof of a culpable mental state shall not be required for a conviction under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 08-081, § III, 9-23-08)  
Chapter 13 - HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; ambulances, Ch. 4; animals, Ch. 6; cemeteries, Ch. 9; mobile homes and mobile home parks, Ch. 17; nuisances, Ch. 18; solid waste, Ch. 24; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 30. 
State Law reference— Health, powers of home-rule municipalities, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code §§ 122.066, 341.081, 342.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 13-1. - Penalty. 
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-8.  
Sec. 13-2. - Regulations for food service. 
All owners or operators of food service establishments and all food service establishment employees shall comply with all applicable county health department and state rules and regulations. 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 15.  
Secs. 13-3—13-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - KILLEEN HOSPITAL AUTHORITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal hospital, §§ 14, 15. 
Cross reference— Boards and commissions, § 2-116 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal hospital authorities, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 262.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 13-26. - Created; name. 
It is to the best interest of the city and its inhabitants to create a hospital authority to be comprised of the territory included within the boundaries of the city, and such hospital authority is hereby created. The same shall be a body politic and corporate under the name of Killeen Hospital Authority which is hereby designated as the name by which such authority shall be known. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 8½, art. 1, § 1 [Ord. No. 68-40, § 1, 12-23-68]) 
State Law reference— Authority to create hospital authority V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 262.003.  
Sec. 13-27. - Membership. 
The hospital authority shall be governed by a board of directors consisting of seven (7) members. Each director shall, unless other provision is made in the bond resolution or indenture in connection with the issuance of bonds, serve for a term of two (2) years from the date hereof and until their successors have been appointed by the city council and have duly qualified. Each director shall qualify by executing the oath of office required of appointed officials of the state. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 8½, art. 1, § 2 [Ord. No. 68-40, § 1, 12-23-68; Ord. No. 76-58, § 1, 9-28-76]) 
State Law reference— Board of directors, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 262.011 et seq.  
Secs. 13-28—13-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Building and construction regulations, Ch. 8; licenses, permits and mis-cellaneous business regulations, Ch. 15; taxicabs, § 29-26 et seq.; signs and outdoor advertising displays, § 31-501 et seq. The original ordinance #91-14, adopted 4-9-91, was replaced in its entirety on 2-10-09. 
 
Sec. 13-41. - Definitions. 
In this article: 
Bar means an establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages. In this article, "bar" does not include an establishment or area located within a hotel, motel or other similar transient occupancy establishment, a restaurant or an enclosed mall. 
Employee means a person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and a person who volunteers his or her services for a non-profit entity. 
Employer means a person who employs the services of one or more individuals. 
Enclosed area means a space that is enclosed on all sides by solid walls that extend from the floor to the ceiling, exclusive of windows and doors. 
Fraternal organization means a non-profit organization that: 
(1)  is chartered by a national organization; 
(2)  is tax exempt under section 501(c)(8), (10), or (19) of the Internal Revenue Code; 
(3)  operates under a lodge system with a representative form of government; and 
(4)  is organized for the exclusive benefit of the members of the organization and their dependents. 
Operator, manager or owner means the owner or person in charge of a public place or workplace, including an employer. 
Pool hall means an establishment that: 
(1)  has as its primary purpose and activity the playing of pool; and 
(2)  does not allow children under the age of eighteen to enter the establishment other than directly into an enclosed non-smoking area that is mechanically ventilated to ensure that smoke from the smoking area does not enter the non-smoking area. 
Public place means an enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including but not limited to, banks, educational facilities, health care facilities, laundromats, public transportation facilities, reception areas, restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, shopping malls, sports arenas, theaters, and waiting rooms. A private residence is not a "public place" unless it is used as a child care, adult day care, or health care facility. 
Retail tobacco store means a retail store used primarily for the sale of tobacco products, or weeds and/or plants intended for legal consumption by inhaling or exhaling, and accessories and in which the sale of other non-tobacco products, and other weed or plant products not intended for legal consumption, is incidental, and: 
(1)  the store is in a separately leased or owned retail area separate from other businesses, and shares no common areas with other businesses, provided that smoke from the subject store does not infiltrate areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article; and 
(2)  where sales of incidental products shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of total gross sales; sales of incidental products shall not include the sale of alcohol regardless of percentage of total gross sales; and 
(3)  where no alcohol is consumed on the premises. 
Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, weed, plant, or other combustible substance in any manner or in any form. 
Workplace means an enclosed area in which employees work or have access during the course of their employment. 
(Ord. No. 09-009, § I, 2-10-09)  
Sec. 13-42. - Smoking prohibited. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person smokes in a public place. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person smokes in an enclosed area in a building, facility or vehicle owned, leased, or operated by the city. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if the person smokes in an enclosed area of a workplace. 
(d)  A person commits an offense if the person smokes within 15 feet from an entrance, operable window or ventilation system of an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited. This provision does not prohibit smoking within a public roadway. 
(Ord. No. 09-009, § I, 2-10-09)  
Sec. 13-43. - Proprietor responsibilities. 
If the owner, operator or manager of a public place regulated by this article observes a person violating this ordinance, he or she shall immediately direct the person in violation to stop smoking. If the person violating this article does not comply with this request, the owner, operator or manager shall ask the person to leave the premises. If the person in violation refuses to leave, the owner, operator or manager shall report the violation to the building official, police department or fire department. 
(Ord. No. 09-009, § I, 2-10-09)  
Sec. 13-44. - Prohibition of smoking at public outdoor places and events. 
Smoking shall be prohibited: 
(a)  in the seating areas, bleachers or grandstands of outdoor arenas, stadiums, amphitheaters, or facilities used for viewing sporting or other public events, and in the dining or concession areas, restrooms or service lines of such facilities; 
(b)  in the outdoor patio area of the Stonetree golf club house; 
(c)  inside the fenced area of a public swimming pool; and 
(d)  in playgrounds in public parks. 
(Ord. No. 09-009, § I, 2-10-09)  
Sec. 13-45. - Exceptions. 
This article does not apply to: 
(a)  a dwelling, as defined in section 31-2 (definitions); 
(b)  a hotel or motel room designated as a smoking room and rented to a person, provided that the hotel or motel complies with section 13-46 (designation of smoking rooms by hotel and motel restricted), or a hotel or motel room designated as a smoking/cigar room provided that the room is ventilated to prevent smoke from entering into a non-smoking area and no one under the age of twenty-one (21) is allowed to enter; 
(c)  a retail tobacco store, as defined in section 13-41 (definitions); 
(d)  a private or semi-private room in a nursing home or long-term care facility that is occupied by individuals who smoke and have requested in writing to be placed in a room where smoking is permitted; 
(e)  an outdoor area of a workplace that is not in the areas described by section 13-42(D) (smoking prohibited) or 13-44 (prohibition of smoking at public outdoor places and events); 
(f)  a bingo facility operated under the Bingo Enabling Act, chapter 2001 of the Occupations Code, if: 
(1)  an enclosed non-smoking area is provided; 
(2)  the smoking area is mechanically ventilated to prevent smoke from entering a non-smoking area; and 
(3)  no one under the age of 18 is admitted to the smoking area; 
(g)  a facility operated by a fraternal organization for a charitable, benevolent, or educational function if the premises is controlled by the organization and only when not open to the general public; 
(h)  a bar, as defined in section 13-41 (definitions); 
(i)  a pool hall, as defined in section 13-41 (definitions); and 
(j)  a bowling alley only during adult league play. 
(Ord. No. 09-009, § I, 2-10-09)  
Sec. 13-46. - Designation of smoking rooms by hotel and motel restricted. 
A hotel and motel may not designate more than 25 percent of its rooms that are rented for temporary overnight occupation by the public as smoking rooms. 
(Ord. No. 09-009, § I, 2-10-09)  
Sec. 13-47. - Employer responsibilities. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b), an employer shall provide a smoke-free workplace for employees. 
(b)  If an employer requires employees to work in an area described in subsection 13-45(b) through (i) (exceptions), the employer shall make reasonable accommodations for an employee who requests assignment to a smoke-free area. 
(c)  An employer shall notify each employee and applicant for employment in writing that: 
(1)  smoking in the workplace is prohibited; or 
(2)  smoking is permitted in an area in the workplace under section 13-45 (exceptions). 
(Ord. No. 09-009, § I, 2-10-09)  
Sec. 13-48. - Voluntary designation of a non-smoking facility. 
Nothing in this chapter implies that the operator of an enclosed or outdoor public place is prohibited from designating the entire facility as non-smoking. 
(Ord. No. 09-009, § I, 2-10-09)  
Sec. 13-49. - Designation of taxicabs as non-smoking. 
(a)  The holder of a taxicab service franchise shall designate all taxicabs operated under the franchise as non-smoking. 
(b)  The holder of a taxicab service franchise shall conspicuously post a sign in each taxicab that smoking is prohibited in the taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 09-009, § I, 2-10-09)  
Sec. 13-50. - Signs required and smoking accessories to be removed. 
(a)  The operator, manager, owner or other person having control of a public place or place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this article shall conspicuously post a sign clearly stating "no smoking" and consisting of bold lettering not less than 1 inch in height or displaying the international "no smoking" symbol (depiction of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it): 
(1)  in each public place and workplace where smoking is prohibited by this chapter; and 
(2)  at each entrance to a public place or workplace. 
(b)  The operator, manager, owner or other person having control of a public place shall conspicuously post signs in areas where smoking is permitted under section 13-45 (exceptions). 
(c)  The operator, manager, owner or other person having control of a public place and an employer shall remove any ashtray or other smoking accessory intended for use on the premises from a place where smoking is prohibited. 
(d)  It is not a defense to prosecution under this chapter that an operator, manager, owner, or other person having control of a public place failed to post a sign required under this section. 
(Ord. No. 09-009, § I, 2-10-09)  
Sec. 13-51. - Retaliation prohibited. 
A person commits an offense if the person discharges, refuses to hire, or retaliates against a customer, employee, or applicant for employment because the customer, employee or applicant for employment reports a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 09-009, § I, 2-10-09)  
Sec. 13-52. - Enforcement. 
(a)  A person may report a violation of this chapter to the building official or his designee, to the police department or the fire department. 
(b)  The city manager may authorize a city employee conducting an inspection under any provision of the code to also inspect for compliance with this chapter and issue a citation for a violation of this chapter. 
(c)  The city of Killeen may enforce this chapter and may seek injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 09-009, § I, 2-10-09)  
Sec. 13-53. - Violation and penalty. 
(a)  A person who violates the provisions of this chapter commits a Class C misdemeanor, punishable under section 1-8 (general penalty; continuing violations; citation authority) by a fine not to exceed $500. A culpable mental state is not required for a violation of this chapter, and need not be proved. 
(b)  Each day an offense occurs is a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 09-009, § I, 2-10-09)  
Sec. 13-54. - Governmental agency cooperation. 
The city manager shall annually request that each federal, state, county, and school district agency with a facility in the city adopt local operating procedures and update its existing smoking control regulation in compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 09-009, § I, 2-10-09)  
Sec. 13-55. - No duty or obligation. 
In undertaking the enforcement of this article, the city is assuming an undertaking only to promote the general health, safety and welfare of its citizens. The city is not assuming any duty or obligation, nor is it imposing any duty and/or obligation on its officers and/or employees, nor is it liable in money damages or otherwise to any person who claims that the city and/or one of its officers and/or employees breached any such obligation and the breach proximately caused the injury. 
(Ord. No. 09-009, § I, 2-10-09)  
Sec. 13-56. - Application of other law. 
This article is cumulative of other laws that regulate smoking (section 1-8, general penalty; continuing violations; citation authority). 
(Ord. No. 09-009, § I, 2-10-09)  
Sec. 13-57. - Effective date. 
This article shall become effective on June 1, 2009, after passage by the city council and publication according to law. 
(Ord. No. 09-009, § I, 2-10-09)  
Chapter 14 - HUMAN RELATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Commission on Human Rights Act, V.A.C.S. art. 5221k. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 14-1—14-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - HOUSING DISCRIMINATION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Building and construction regulations, Ch. 8; licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 15. 
State Law reference— Texas Fair Housing Act, V.A.C.S. art. 1f; local antihousing discrimination ordinances, V.A.C.S. art. 5221k, § 4.01. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Discriminatory housing practice shall mean an act prohibited by division 3 of this article. 
Dwelling shall mean: 
(1)  Any building, structure or part of a building or structure that is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residency by one (1) or more families; or 
(2)  Any vacant land that is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location of a building, structure, or part of a building or structure described by (1) above. 
Family shall include a single individual. 
Handicap shall mean a mental or physical impairment that substantially limits at least one (1) major life activity, a record of such an impairment, or being regarded as having such an impairment. The term does not include current illegal use of or addiction to any drug or illegal or federally controlled substance. In this article, a reference to "an individual with a handicap" or to "handicap" does not apply to an individual because of that individual's sexual orientation or because that individual is a transvestite. 
Person shall mean one (1) or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in cases under Title 11, receivers and fiduciaries. 
To rent shall include to lease, to sublease and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy a premises not owned by the occupant. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 5½, art. II, § 1 [Ord. No. 78-56, § 1, 8-22-78]) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 1f, § 1.03.  
Sec. 14-27. - Violation of provisions. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 for each violation. Each day a violation continues after passage of seventy-five (75) days from the date of the filing of the initial complaint with the administrator shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 5½, art. II, § 13 [Ord. No. 78-56, § 13, 8-22-78])  
Sec. 14-28. - Certain sales and rentals exempted. 
(a)  Subject to (b) below, division 3 of this article does not apply to: 
(1)  The sale or rental of a single-family house sold or rented by an owner if: 
a.  The owner does not: 
1.  Own more than three (3) single-family houses at any one (1) time; or 
2.  Own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to any part of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three (3) single-family houses at any one (1) time; and 
b.  The house was sold or rented without: 
1.  The use of the sales or rental facilities or services of a real estate broker, agent, or salesman licensed under The Real Estate License Act (Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6573a), or of an employee or agent of a licensed broker, agent, or salesman, or the facilities or services of the owner of a dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by five (5) or more families; or 
2.  The publication, posting, or mailing of a notice, statement, or advertisement prohibited by section 14-63; or 
(2)  The sale or rental of rooms or units in a dwelling containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four (4) families living independently of each other if the owner maintains and occupies one (1) of the living quarters as the owner's residence. 
(b)  The exemption in subsection (a)(1) of this section applies to only one (1) sale or rental in a twenty-four-month period if the owner was not the most recent resident of the house at the time of the sale or rental. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 5½, art. II, § 5 [Ord. No. 78-56, § 5, 8-22-78]) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1f, § 1.05.  
Sec. 14-29. - Religious organization and private club exemption. 
(a)  This article does not prohibit a religious organization, association, or society, or a nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society, from: 
(1)  Limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings that it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion; or 
(2)  Giving preference to persons of the same religion, unless membership in the religion is restricted because of race, color, or national origin. 
(b)  This article does not prohibit a private club not open to the public that, as an incident to its primary purpose, provides lodging that it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose from limiting the rental or occupancy of that lodging to its members or from giving preference to its members. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 5½, art. II, § 5 [Ord. No. 78-56, § 5, 8-22-78]) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1f, § 1.06.  
Sec. 14-30. - Housing for elderly exempted. 
(a)  The provisions of this article relating to familial status do not apply to housing for older persons. 
(b)  In this section, "housing for older persons" means housing: 
(1)  That the state commission on human rights determines is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons under a federal or state program; 
(2)  Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons sixty-two (62) years of age or older; or 
(3)  Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one (1) person fifty-five (55) years of age or older per unit as determined by rules of the state commission on human rights. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 5½, art. II, § 5 [Ord. No. 78-56, § 5, 8-22-78]) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1f, § 1.07.  
Sec. 14-31. - Appraisal exemption. 
This article does not prohibit a person engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real property from taking into consideration factors other than race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 5½, art. II, § 5 [Ord. No. 78-56, § 5, 8-22-78]) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1f, § 1.08.  
Sec. 14-32. - Effect on other law. 
(a)  This article does not affect a reasonable local or state restriction on the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling or restriction relating to health or safety standards. 
(b)  This article does not affect a requirement of nondiscrimination in any state or federal law. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 5½, art. II, § 5 [Ord. No. 78-56, § 5, 8-22-78]) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1f, § 1.09.  
Sec. 14-33. - Unlawful intimidation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to harass, threaten, harm, damage or otherwise penalize any individual, group or business because he has complied with the provisions of this article, because he has exercised his rights under this article, or enjoyed the benefits of this article, or because he has made a charge, testified or assisted in any manner in any investigation, or in any proceeding hereunder or have made any report to the administrator. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 5½, art. II, § 10 [Ord. No. 78-56, § 10, 8-22-78])  
Secs. 14-34—14-45. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 14-46. - Fair housing administrator. 
The director of planning and community development is herein designated as the fair housing administrator and shall have the responsibility for implementing this article. The administrator may delegate his authority to investigate and conciliate complaints to other city employees under his direction. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 5½, art. II, § 6 [Ord. No. 78-56, § 6, 8-22-78])  
Sec. 14-47. - Complaints. 
(a)  Only the person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice, who believes he will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that has occurred or is occurring (hereafter referred to as "person aggrieved"), may file a complaint with the administrator. Such complaints shall be in writing and shall identify the person alleged to have committed or alleged to be committing a discriminatory housing practice and shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based. The administrator shall prepare complaint forms and furnish them without charge to any person, upon request. 
(b)  If at any time the administrator shall receive or discover credible evidence and shall have probable cause to believe that any person has committed or is committing a discriminatory housing practice as to which no complaint has been filed, the administrator may prepare and file a complaint upon his own motion and in his own name and such complaint shall thereafter be treated in the same manner as a complaint filed by a person aggrieved. 
(c)  The administrator shall receive and accept notification and referral complaints from the U.S. Attorney General and the secretary of housing and urban development pursuant to the provisions of Title VIII, Fair Housing Act of 1968, Public Law 90-284, and shall treat such complaints hereunder in the same manner as complaints filed pursuant to (a) above. 
(d)  All complaints shall be filed within sixty (60) days following the occurrence of an alleged discriminatory housing practice. Upon the filing or referral of any complaint, the administrator shall provide notice of the complaint by furnishing a copy of such complaint to the persons named therein who allegedly committed or were threatening to commit an alleged discriminatory housing practice. The accused may file an answer to the complaint within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the written complaint. 
(e)  All complaints and answers shall be subscribed and sworn to before an officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 5½, art. II, § 7 [Ord. No. 78-56, § 7, 8-22-78])  
Sec. 14-48. - Investigation. 
(a)  Upon the filing or referral of a complaint as provided in this division, the administrator shall cause to be made a prompt and full investigation of the matter stated in the complaint. 
(b)  During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the mailing of the notice of complaint, the administrator shall, if it appears that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is threatening to occur, attempt by informal endeavors to effect conciliation, including voluntary discontinuance of the discriminatory housing practice and adequate assurance of future voluntary compliance with the provisions of this article. Nothing said or done in the course of such informal endeavors may be made public by the administrator, by the complainant or by any other party to the proceedings without the written consent of all persons concerned. 
(c)  Upon completion of the investigation and informal endeavors at conciliation by the administrator, but within thirty (30) days of the filing of the complaint with the administrator, if the efforts of the administrator to secure voluntary compliance have been unsuccessful and if the administrator has made a determination that a discriminatory housing practice has in fact occurred, the administrator shall recommend to the city attorney that such violation be prosecuted in the municipal court. With such recommendation, the administrator shall refer his entire file to the city attorney. The city attorney shall, within thirty (30) days after such referral, make a determination as to whether to proceed with the prosecution of such complaint in municipal court. If the city attorney determines to prosecute, he shall institute a complaint and prosecute same to conclusion within thirty (30) days after such determination, or as soon thereafter as practicable. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 5½, art. II, § 8 [Ord. No. 78-56, § 8, 8-22-78])  
Sec. 14-49. - Other remedies. 
This article is cumulative in its legal effect and is not in lieu of any and all other legal remedies which the person aggrieved may pursue. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 5½, art. II, § 9 [Ord. No. 78-56, § 9, 8-22-78])  
Sec. 14-50. - Cooperation with federal officials. 
The administrator and the city attorney are authorized to cooperate with the secretary of housing and urban development and the U.S. Attorney General pursuant to the provisions of Title VIII, Fair Housing Act of 1968, Public Law 90-284, and may render such service to the secretary as they shall deem appropriate to further the policies of this article. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 5½, art. II, § 11 [Ord. No. 78-56, § 11, 8-22-78])  
Sec. 14-51. - Education and public information. 
In order to further the objectives of this article, the administrator may conduct educational and public information programs. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 5½, art. II, § 12 [Ord. No. 78-56, § 12, 8-22-78])  
Secs. 14-52—14-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PROHIBITED DISCRIMINATORY ACTS 
 
Sec. 14-61. - Familial status. 
In this article, a discriminatory act is committed because of familial status if the act is committed because the person who is the subject of discrimination is: 
(1)  Pregnant; 
(2)  Domiciled with an individual younger than eighteen (18) years of age in regard to whom the person: 
a.  Is the parent or legal custodian; or 
b.  Has the written permission of the parent or legal custodian for domicile with that person; or 
c.  Is in the process of obtaining legal custody of an individual younger than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 5½, art. II, § 5 [Ord. No. 78-56, § 5, 8-22-78]) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1f, § 1.04.  
Sec. 14-62. - Refusal to sell, rent. 
(a)  A person may not refuse to sell or to rent after the making of a bona fide offer, refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, familial status or national origin. 
(b)  A person may not discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in providing services or facilities in connection with the sale or rental, because of race, color, religion, sex, familial status or national origin. 
(c)  This section does not prohibit discrimination against a person because the person has been convicted under federal law or the law of any state of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 5½, art. II, § 2 [Ord. No. 78-56, § 2, 8-22-78]) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1f, § 3.01.  
Sec. 14-63. - Publication. 
A person may not make, print or publish or cause to be made, printed or published any notice, statement or advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin, or an intention to make such a preference, limitation or discrimination. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 5½, art. II, § 2 [Ord. No. 78-56, § 2, 8-22-78]) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1f, § 3.02.  
Sec. 14-64. - Inspection. 
A person may not represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin that a dwelling is not available for inspection for sale or rental when the dwelling is available for inspection. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 5½, art. II, § 2 [Ord. No. 78-56, § 2, 8-22-78]) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1f, § 3.03.  
Sec. 14-65. - Entry into neighborhood. 
A person may not, for profit, induce or attempt to induce a person to sell or rent a dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into a neighborhood of a person of a particular race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 5½, art. II, § 2 [Ord. No. 78-56, § 2, 8-22-78]) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1f, § 3.04.  
Sec. 14-66. - Handicap. 
(a)  A person may not discriminate in the sale or rental or otherwise make unavailable or deny a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a handicap of: 
(1)  That buyer or renter; 
(2)  A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented, or made available; or 
(3)  Any person associated with that buyer or renter. 
(b)  A person may not discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities in connection with the dwelling because of a handicap of: 
(1)  That person; 
(2)  A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented, or made available; or 
(3)  Any person associated with that person. 
(c)  For purposes of this section only, discrimination includes: 
(1)  A refusal to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by the person if the modifications may be necessary to afford the person full enjoyment of the premises; 
(2)  A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices, or services, when the accommodations may be necessary to afford the person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; or 
(3)  In connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after the date that is thirty (30) months after the date of enactment of the federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 (Public Law 100-430), a failure to design and construct those dwellings in a manner that: 
a.  The public use and common use portions of the dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons; 
b.  All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises within the dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and 
c.  All premises within the dwellings contain the following features of adaptive design: 
1.  An accessible route into and through the dwelling; 
2.  Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other environmental controls in accessible locations; 
3.  Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars; and 
4.  Usable kitchens and bathrooms so that an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space. 
(d)  Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American National Standard for buildings and facilities providing accessibility and usability for physically handicapped people, commonly cited as "ANSI A 117.1," suffices to satisfy the requirements of (c)(3)c. above. 
(e)  As used in this subsection, the term "covered multifamily dwellings" means: 
(1)  Buildings consisting of four (4) or more units if the buildings have one (1) or more elevators; and 
(2)  Ground floor units in other buildings consisting of four (4) or more units. 
(f)  Nothing in this section requires that a dwelling be made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 5½, art. II, § 2 [Ord. No. 78-56, § 2, 8-22-78]) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1f, § 3.05.  
Sec. 14-67. - Brokerage services. 
A person may not deny any person access to, or membership or participation in, a multiple-listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or discriminate against a person in the terms or conditions of access, membership, or participation in such an organization, service, or facility because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 5½, art. II, § 4 [Ord. No. 78-56, § 4, 8-22-78]) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1f, § 3.07.  
Sec. 14-68. - Residential real estate related transaction. 
(a)  A person whose business includes engaging in residential real estate related transactions may not discriminate against a person in making a real estate related transaction available or in the terms or conditions of a real estate related transaction because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin. 
(b)  In this section, "residential real estate related transaction" means: 
(1)  Making or purchasing loans or providing other financial assistance: 
a.  To purchase, construct, improve, repair, or maintain a dwelling; or 
b.  To secure residential real estate; or 
(2)  Selling, brokering, or appraising residential real property. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 5½, art. II, § 3 [Ord. No. 78-56, § 3, 8-22-78]) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1f, § 3.06.  
Chapter 15 - LICENSES, PERMITS AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Finance, § 2-76 et seq.; alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3; ambulances, Ch. 4; amusements, Ch. 5; animal vendors, § 6-136 et seq.; building contractors, § 8-60 et seq.; food service establishment, § 13-2; smoking, § 13-41 et seq.; housing discrimination, § 14-26 et seq.; mobile homes, mobile home parks, etc., Ch. 17; peddlers, solicitors, etc., Ch. 20; railroads, Ch. 23; taxation, Ch. 27; wreckers, § 28-56 et seq.; vehicles for hire, Ch. 29. 
State Law reference— Authority to enforce ordinances necessary to protect and preserve health, property, good government and order, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.004; general authority to license businesses or occupations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.075. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 15-1—15-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - JUNKYARDS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 94-26, § I, adopted April 12, 1994, amended §§ 15-26—15-28 and 15-41—15-46 to read as set out herein. Prior to such amendment, said sections pertained to junkyards and derived from Ch. 3, Art. 11, §§ 1-4 of the 1963 Code. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 15-26. - Definitions. 
Whenever the following terms are used in this article, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
Antique auto shall mean an automobile that is at least twenty-five (25) years old. 
Collector shall mean the owner of one (1) or more antique or special interest vehicles who collects, purchases, acquires, trades or disposes of special interest or antique vehicles or parts of them for personal use in order to restore, preserve and maintain an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest. 
Demolisher shall mean a person whose business is to convert a motor vehicle into processed scrap or scrap metal or to otherwise wreck or dismantle a motor vehicle. 
Garagekeeper shall mean an owner or operator of a parking place or establishment, motor vehicle storage facility, or establishment for the servicing, repair, or maintenance of a motor vehicle. 
Junked vehicle shall mean a motor vehicle, as defined in Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes article 6701d-11, section 1, that is inoperative and that does not have lawfully affixed to it either an unexpired license plate or a valid motor vehicle safety inspection certificate, that is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, or discarded, or that remains inoperable for a continuous period of more than forty-five (45) days. 
Junkyard shall mean any place where used appliances, materials, junked vehicles and/or equipment, are stored or abandoned, either in whole or in part, for a period of thirty (30) days or more. 
(Ord. No. 94-26, § I, 4-12-94)  
Sec. 15-27. - Declaration of nuisance. 
Any place primarily used or maintained by any person as a junkyard or for the wrecking or disassembling of automobiles, trucks, tractors or machinery of any kind, or for the storing or leaving of worn out, wrecked or abandoned automobiles, trucks, tractors, machinery, used appliances and/or material of any kind, or of any of the parts thereof, is hereby declared to be a public and common nuisance, being obnoxious to the inhabitants of the city and the surrounding area because of its interference with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property by such inhabitants, the reduction of the value of surrounding property, creation of health and fire hazards, and the adverse effects on the environment, and is prohibited within the city limits of the city and also prohibited within the area extending five thousand (5,000) feet therefrom, unless the same is conducted in the manner hereafter stated, and following the payment of the license fee hereafter described. 
(Ord. No. 94-26, § I, 4-12-94) 
Cross reference— Nuisances, Ch. 18.  
Sec. 15-28. - Order to remove. 
Any owner, lessee, occupant or person in control of any property having on it any of the nuisances described in this article may be required to remove, abate or cure the nuisance on the property by order, in writing, from the building official or his authorized representative. Such nuisance shall be removed, abated or cured within ten (10) days of the receipt of such order. 
(Ord. No. 94-26, § I, 4-12-94)  
Sec. 15-29. - City abatement—Restitution. 
If the owner, lessee, occupant or person in control of any property fails to comply with the notice within ten (10) days of its receipt, the city may remove, abate or cure such nuisance. The owner, lessee, occupant or person in charge of property on which nuisance, as defined in this article, exists from which the city deems it necessary to remove, abate or cure such nuisance shall be required to pay to the city restitution for the city's service in performing such removal, abatement or cure in the amount established by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 94-26, § I, 4-12-94)  
Sec. 15-30. - Same—Lien on property. 
If the city abates a nuisance under this article, the owner, lessee, occupant or person in charge of the property shall be notified by mail of the charges therefor. If such charges are not paid within sixty (60) days of the receipt of such notice, the building official shall cause to be filed with the county clerk documentation of such charge sufficient to establish a lien against the property on which the nuisance was abated. 
(Ord. No. 94-26, § I, 4-12-94)  
Sec. 15-31. - Penalty. 
Any individual who fails to abate a nuisance within ten (10) days after notice from the building official, as provided in this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day after the ten-day period after the receipt of the notice in which the nuisance is not removed, abated or cured shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 94-26, § I, 4-12-94)  
Sec. 15-32. - Existing junkyards. 
All existing junkyards as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived and which do not conform to division 2 below must comply with the provisions of this division within six (6) months of the effective date of this division or be found in violation hereof, and may be subject to the restitution, lien and penalty provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 94-26, § I, 4-12-94)  
Secs. 15-33—15-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 15-41. - Required. 
Any person desiring to use or maintain any property within the city, or within five thousand (5,000) feet of the corporate limits thereof, for any of the purposes mentioned in section 15-27, shall make written application to the city council for a license to do so. 
(Ord. No. 94-26, § I, 4-12-94)  
Sec. 15-42. - Application. 
The application for a license required by this division shall set forth the name and address of the applicant and a legal description of the property or premises upon which the business is to be conducted, as well as a statement showing the effect on the use of surrounding property and its value and statement of the yard's impact upon the surrounding environment and ecology and upon the environment and ecology of the land proposed to be used as a junkyard. 
(Ord. No. 94-26, § I, 4-12-94)  
Sec. 15-43. - Issuance, denial. 
The city council shall have the power to either grant or reject an application for a license required by this division. If the application is granted, such license shall be issued by the city council upon payment of the license fee. 
(Ord. No. 94-26, § I, 4-12-94)  
Sec. 15-44. - Fee. 
The fee for a license required by this division shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per year. 
(Ord. No. 94-26, § I, 4-12-94)  
Sec. 15-45. - Expiration, renewal. 
Any license issued under this division shall expire on the first day of January next succeeding the date of its issuance, but may be renewed from year to year in like manner as is provided in the original license. 
(Ord. No. 94-26, § I, 4-12-94)  
Sec. 15-46. - Revocation. 
The city council shall have the power to revoke any license issued under this division at any time for good cause, but only after notice has been given to the owner or owners of the business of a hearing to be held not less than ten (10) days after the service of such notice. 
(Ord. No. 94-26, § I, 4-12-94)  
Sec. 15-47. - Maintenance of premises; fencing requirements. 
Any person granted a license under this article shall do the following: 
(1)  A screening device shall be erected before any outside storage is allowed and shall consist of a six-foot-high solid structure of wood or other suitable material and shall be constructed so as to obscure the junkyard premises from view from the abutting public road. 
(2)  No outside storage shall be located between the main building and any adjacent public street. 
(3)  No outside storage shall be located, either in whole or part, in a public street, sidewalk, parkway, alley or public right-of-way. 
(4)  All areas outside buildings and along the screening device shall be kept clean of weeds, grass, brush, litter and accumulation of hazardous waste. 
(Ord. No. 94-26, § I, 4-12-94)  
Secs. 15-48—15-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - GARAGE SALES 
 
Sec. 15-71. - Penalty. 
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-8.  
Sec. 15-72. - Permitted in residential areas. 
Garage sales will be permitted in districts where primary use of property is residential. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 18, § 1; Ord. No. 74-56, § 1, 11-25-74; Ord. No. 14-080 , § I, 11-18-14)  
Sec. 15-73. - Conditions under which permitted. 
Garage sales are permitted under the following conditions: 
(1)  No person shall have a garage sale within the limits of the city without first obtaining a permit. 
(2)  Any person desiring to have a garage sale shall make application to the building and inspections division for permit. Such application shall state the name of the person who is having the sale, the address of such person, the location of the sale, and the dates of the sale. A copy of such permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place during the time and at the place where the sale is being held. 
(3)  The building and inspections division shall charge and collect before the issuance of any permit a fee of five dollars ($5.00). 
(4)  Only the sale of tangible personal property at retail, by a person who does not hold himself out as engaging, nor does habitually engage, in the business of selling such tangible personal property at retail, shall constitute a garage sale under this article. 
(5)  There shall not be more than two (2) sales at the same address during any calendar year. 
(6)  All sales shall be confined to the yard, garage or patio of the premises. 
(7)  No merchandise acquired solely for the purpose of resale shall be sold. 
(8)  The duration of any sale shall not exceed three (3) consecutive calendar days. 
(9)  Sales by churches, charities and fraternal organizations for the purpose of raising funds may be held on property other than that owned by the organization and tangible personal property donated by members or others may be sold. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 18, § 2; Ord. No. 74-56, § 1, 11-25-74; Ord. No. 92-67, § II, 9-8-92; Ord. No. 14-080 , § I, 11-18-14)  
Sec. 15-74. - Signs. 
One (1) sign is permitted, not to exceed two (2) square feet, upon the property where an occasional or garage sale is taking place. All signs at any other location are prohibited. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 18, § 3 [Ord. No. 74-56, § 1, 11-25-74])  
Sec. 15-75. - No auctions. 
No sale of any property allowed to be sold under this article shall be by auction. Such sale shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 18, § 4 [Ord. No. 74-56, § 1, 11-25-74])  
Sec. 15-76. - Abatement—Generally. 
An individual holding an illegal garage sale under this article shall, within one (1) hour of notice of violation of this article, cease and desist any and all activity covered by this article. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 18, § 7 [Ord. No. 74-56, § 1, 11-25-74])  
Sec. 15-77. - Same—Separate violation. 
Failure to abate an illegal sale under this article shall constitute a separate violation of this article. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 18, § 8 [Ord. No. 74-56, § 1, 11-25-74])  
Sec. 15-78. - Each hour subsequent offense. 
After notice that an illegal sale is being held, the person holding such sale shall be guilty of a separate offense for each whole hour after the initial hour given to abate the sale. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 18, § 9 [Ord. No. 74-56, § 1, 11-25-74])  
Secs. 15-79, 15-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - NONCOMMERCIAL CAR WASHES 
 
Sec. 15-81. - Definition. 
(a)  The term "car wash," for purposes of this article, shall mean a temporary vehicle washing operation conducted by members of a social, fraternal, religious or other organization for organizational fundraising purposes. It shall not be deemed to include the operation of an authorized permanent vehicle washing business or a service station authorized to wash vehicles on its premises, although a car wash, as defined above, may be conducted on such premises. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed so as to prohibit the washing of any vehicle on the premises of the vehicle owner's residence. 
(Ord. No. 92-9, § I, 3-24-92)  
Sec. 15-82. - Applicable zoning districts. 
Car washes will be permitted in all B-5 zoning districts, churches, schools, and fraternal organizations. 
(Ord. No. 92-9, § I, 3-24-92; Ord. No. 96-33, § I, 4-23-96)  
Sec. 15-83. - Conditions under which permitted. 
Car washes are permitted under the following conditions: 
(1)  No person shall have a car wash within the limits of the city without first obtaining a permit. 
(2)  Any owner or lessee of property who wishes to sponsor a car wash on said property, or the authorized employee or agent of said owner or lessee, shall make written application to the building and development services department a car wash permit, at least 48 hours prior to the proposed date and time of the car wash. 
(3)  The following information shall be provided on the application: 
a.  The name and address of the sponsor; 
b.  The name of the organization that will be holding the car wash; 
c.  The name and address of the person who will be responsible for the activities of the organization members at the car wash; 
d.  The proposed date, times and location of the car wash; and 
e.  A statement by the applicant that he/she is the owner or lessee of the property where the car wash is to be held or is an employee or agent of the owner or lessee who has been delegated control of the premises by the owner or lessee, and that the applicant assumes all liability regarding the car wash. 
The application shall also be accompanied by payment of a nonrefundable fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00). 
(4)  The building official shall review each application for a car wash permit. Upon issuance of a permit, the permit holder shall be given a copy of the permit and a copy of the provisions of this article. 
(5)  A copy of the permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place during the time and at the place where the car wash is being held. 
(6)  The duration of any car wash will not exceed two (2) consecutive calendar days, and each approved location will be allowed no more than two (2) events in a twelve (12) month period. 
(7)  It shall be an offense for any person associated with the car wash to be located in the public right-of-way, state highway department right-of-way or the visibility triangle as defined by the code of ordinances of the city of Killeen. 
(8)  It shall be an offense for a customer of any car wash to be located, whether inside their motor vehicle or not, in the public right-of-way, state highway department right-of-way or the visibility triangle as defined by the code of ordinances of the city of Killeen. This provision does not prohibit a person from traveling through rights-of-way in order to enter and exit said car wash. 
(9)  All car wash activities shall take place at a distance of more than twenty-five (25) feet from the street curb, or from the near edge of the travel lane or lanes of any uncurbed street or road. 
(Ord. No. 92-9, § I, 3-24-92; Ord. No. 96-33, § I, 4-23-96)  
Sec. 15-84. - Signs. 
One (1) sign is permitted, not to exceed six (6) square feet, upon the property where a car wash is taking place, providing said sign shall not be located in the public right-of-way, state highway department right-of-way or the visibility triangle as defined in section 28-241(a)(2) of the code. All signs at any other location are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 92-9, § I, 3-24-92)  
Sec. 15-85. - Enforcement; abatement generally. 
(a)  Enforcement of this article shall be performed by the city code enforcement department and the city police department. 
(b)  It shall constitute an offense to conduct a car wash without having obtained a permit as required in this article. 
(1)  Upon determination by an officer that a car wash is being conducted without a valid permit, the officer shall inform the owner or lessee of the premises where the car wash is taking place, or the employee in charge of the premises at the time of the violation, that the car wash is being operated unlawfully. 
(2)  The officer shall also notify said person to cause such unlawful activity to cease immediately, and that all persons associated with said car wash must be dispersed within one (1) hour after the giving of said notice. 
(Ord. No. 92-9, § I, 3-24-92; Ord. No. 98-18, § I, 3-24-98)  
Sec. 15-86. - Failure or refusal to abate. 
Failure or refusal by an owner, lessee, or individual in charge of premises to cause a car wash to cease operations, after being given notice under section 15-85(b) above, shall constitute a separate violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 92-9, § I, 3-24-92)  
Sec. 15-87. - Each hour subsequent offense. 
After notice that an illegal car wash is being held, any person continuing to hold such car wash shall be guilty of a separate offense for each whole hour after the initial hour given to abate the car wash. 
(Ord. No. 92-9, § I, 3-24-92)  
Sec. 15-88. - Penalty. 
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. A violation of this article shall be considered as a violation of a provision governing public health and sanitation. 
(Ord. No. 92-9, § I, 3-24-92)  
Sec. 15-89. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - TENT SALES 
 
Sec. 15-90. - Definitions. 
(1)  The term commercial or business as used herein shall mean the act of selling, offering for sale, giving away, soliciting orders for, displaying, presenting, modeling, demonstrating, storing, or warehousing tangible personal property. 
(2)  The term location shall mean and be determined by common street address. 
(3)  The term tent as used herein shall mean any structure, enclosure, or shelter constructed of canvas or pliable material supported by any manner except by air or the contents it protects, which covers more than one hundred twenty (120) square feet of ground surface. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § I, 1-14-97)  
Sec. 15-91. - Penalty. 
A violation of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § I, 1-14-97)  
Sec. 15-92. - Permit required and conditions of use. 
Use of tents for commercial or business purposes shall be allowed under the following conditions and procedures: 
(a)  No person shall use a tent for commercial or business purposes within the city limits without first obtaining a permit under this article. 
(b)  Any person desiring to use a tent for such purpose shall apply to the building and development office for a permit. The application shall state: the name of the person conducting the activity; the proposed location of the tent; the name of the owner of the property where the tent is to be located; the nature of the intended activity; and the proposed dates of use; and other pertinent information on the form. 
(c)  The building and development department shall charge and collect a fee before issuance of a permit, in an amount set by the city council. 
(d)  Tents may be used for commercial or business purposes only at locations which are properly zoned for the nature of commercial or business activity to be conducted at or in the tent. 
(e)  There shall not be more than one (1) permit issued to a person, or for a location, within a period of twelve (12) consecutive months. 
(f)  A permit for the commercial or business use of a tent shall be for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) consecutive calendar days. The commercial or business activity must cease not later than midnight of the fifteenth day. The permittee must remove the tent from the location not later than 5:00 o'clock p.m. of the next following day. However, any such permit issued for an activity commencing on the Friday, Saturday, or Sunday immediately preceding Thanksgiving shall be effective from that date until midnight, December 25 that year, and the tent removed by 5:00 o'clock p.m., December 26. 
(g)  All tents used for commercial and business purposes must otherwise comply with all applicable fire, safety, and other codes in effect during the dates of the permitted activity. 
(h)  If the activity ceases, closes, or is terminated for any reason prior to the expiration of the permit, there shall be no refund of the above fee. 
(i)  A copy of the permit shall be conspicuously posted at or upon the tent entrance at all hours during the approved dates of the activity. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § I, 1-14-97; Ord. No. 98-65, § I, 9-22-98)  
Sec. 15-93. - Abatement. 
A person using a tent for commercial or business purposes without complying with any provision of this article, or who gives false, misleading, or incomplete information on an application, shall within one (1) hour of notice of violation either obtain the required permit for a fee in an amount which is triple the normal fee, or immediately cease and desist from all activity covered by this article, and remove the tent from the premises before midnight of that day. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § I, 1-14-97)  
Sec. 15-94. - Offenses. 
(a)  Failing or refusing to obtain the permit or to abate after receiving notice is a violation of this article and a criminal offense. 
(b)  Each hour an activity continues, after the one (1) hour period following notice, shall be a separate violation and a criminal offense. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § I, 1-14-97)  
Sec. 15-95. - Transition. 
Any person already using a tent for commercial or business purposes on the date this ordinance becomes effective must either apply for and receive a permit, or cease the use and remove the tent, not later than 5:00 o'clock p.m. on the seventh (7 th ) calendar day after the effective date. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § I, 1-14-97)  
Sec. 15-96. - Exclusion. 
This article does not apply to: 
(a)  A tent used by a governmental entity, public utility, or tax exempt not-for-profit organization formed for educational, philanthropic, scientific, or religious purposes. However, such entities and organizations shall comply with all other ordinances and laws applicable to their activity and the use of tents for the public. 
(b)  A tent, shed or canopy used for the display of vehicles, which are otherwise regulated by provisions of the adopted Standard Building Code, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § I, 1-14-97)  
Secs. 15-97—15-99. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 02-51, § I, adopted Oct. 29, 2002, repealed §§ 15-100—15-103 in its entirety. Formerly, said sections pertained to registration of retail electric providers and derived from Ord. No. 01-60, § I, adopted Dec. 21, 2001.  
ARTICLE VI. - SECONDHAND DEALERS 
 
Sec. 15-100. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  Business day shall mean Monday through Friday with exception of city holidays. 
(b)  Minor shall mean a person under the age of seventeen (17) years of age. 
(c)  Precious metal shall mean gold, silver, or platinum. 
(d)  Secondhand dealer or dealer shall mean a person, partnership or corporation whose business at any location or site, including internet based businesses, consists of the collecting, handling, buying, trading or selling of used or secondhand merchandise from precious metals, gems, luggage, musical instruments, firearms as defined by Texas Penal Code, electronics and other wares and merchandise handled by secondhand dealers in the usual course of trade. 
The term secondhand dealer shall not mean any person, partnership or corporation whose business consists only of the sale, purchase, or handling of new goods or merchandise, any person conducting a lawful garage sale under chapter 15, any person, partnership or corporation operating a licensed pawn shop, unless stated otherwise, or businesses operating exclusively as automotive dealers. 
(e)  Used shall mean any item, article or good which has been previously owned by someone other than the manufacturer or a dealer whose business it is to sell such items, articles or goods when new to the consumer. 
(Ord. No. 08-105, § I, 12-16-08)  
Sec. 15-101. - License requirements. 
No secondhand dealer shall transact or engage in business within the city without a license. Any person who engages in more than one business described herein at separate locations must obtain a license for each permanent location of any such business. The license may be procured by complying with the following provisions. 
(1)  An applicant shall make a request for a license by filing in writing to the Killeen police department records section on a form to be furnished by the city. The application shall contain the following: 
(a)  Full name. 
(b)  Address of business. 
(c)  Date of birth, height, weight, color of hair and eyes. 
(d)  Physical residence address. 
(e)  Whether the applicant has been convicted of a violation of a state or federal statute involving criminal offenses of theft, tampering with or fabricating physical evidence, tampering with a governmental record, or fraud. 
(f)  In the case of a firm or corporation, the individual members of the partnership or officers of the corporation. 
(g)  Signature by the applicant if an individual, by a partner if a partnership, by the president or vice-president if a corporation, or by an authorized officer if an association. 
(2)  Upon receipt of an application, the records section shall immediately forward it to the city manager for review. The city manager must approve or deny the application within 10 (ten) days. The city manager must make the decision based upon the standards for issuance stated in this article. 
(3)  The license shall be subject to all provisions and regulations of this code and other ordinances of the city. 
(4)  Such application shall be notarized. 
(5)  The fee for a license is as provided in the adopted fee schedule, except that the fee may be waived for a 501(c)(3) non-profit organization that presents proof of such status. 
(6)  The duration for said license is two (2) years from date of issuance. 
(7)  No license may be sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Ord. No. 08-105, § I, 12-16-08; Ord. No. 19-047 , § VI, 9-17-19)  
Sec. 15-102. - Grounds for denial of license. 
The city manager may reject an original application, an application for the renewal of an existing license, if, as a result of investigation, it is determined: 
(1)  applicant's place of business is not in compliance with any city of Killeen ordinances; 
(2)  applicant has had previous failures to comply with this article within the last two years; 
(3)  applicant is shown to have been untruthful on his application; 
(4)  applicant is shown to have violated any state or federal statute involving the criminal offense of theft, tampering with or fabricating physical evidence, tampering with governmental record, or fraud. 
(Ord. No. 08-105, § I, 12-16-08)  
Sec. 15-103. - Change in business name or address. 
Should any licensee change the name of his business or move his place of business from the place designated in such license to a new address, he shall immediately make application to the records section of the Killeen police department for a new license and pay the full license fee. If the new application is approved, a new license reflecting the new business name or address shall be issued. The original license must be surrendered to the records section at the time a new license is issued to the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 08-105, § I, 12-16-08)  
Sec. 15-104. - Revocation of license. 
After the license required under this article has been issued, the license may be revoked by the city manager if: 
(1)  It is found the license was obtained with a false representation in the application; or 
(2)  It is determined, after investigation by the Killeen police department under supervision of the chief of police, that the license holder, or an employee acting on behalf of the license holder, violated any provision of this chapter or any state or federal statute involving the criminal offense of theft, tampering with or fabricating physical evidence, tampering with governmental record, or fraud. 
(Ord. No. 08-105, § I, 12-16-08)  
Sec. 15-105. - Appeal of denial or revocation of license. 
If a secondhand dealer wishes to appeal a denial or revocation of license, they may appeal to the city council in the following manner: 
(1)  A written letter of appeal, signed by the license applicant or holder, stating the grounds therefore, shall be delivered to and filed with the city manager's office. 
(2)  A true copy of the application refused or license revoked shall be attached to the petition. 
(3)  The city manager shall place a copy of the appeal letter and application, along with any pertinent documents, on the agenda for the next regular city council meeting. 
(4)  The council shall consider the contents of the application or revocation; the city manager's letter stating the reasons for denial or revocation; the letter of appeal; the facts surrounding the matter as shown by testimony of parities; any argument of counsel; and the standards for issuance stated in this article. 
(5)  It shall be presumed that the only reasons for denial or revocation are those set out in the city manager's written explanation. 
(6)  The city council may consider an appeal at that meeting or set a date, time, and place for a hearing on each appeal, and shall notify the appealing individual or person thereof. 
(7)  The order of procedure upon such hearing is as follows: 
(a)  The city attorney, or a person designated to do so, shall present any evidence justifying the denial or revocation. 
(b)  The appellant or appellant's attorney shall have the right to cross-examine any witness and see any documents relied upon by any witness testifying, and to challenge or object to such evidence. 
(c)  The appellant or appellant's attorney shall thereafter present any rebutting evidence justifying consideration and approval of the application or rebutting the revocation. 
(d)  The city attorney shall have the right of cross-examination and inspection. 
(e)  Both the appellant and the city may offer rebuttal evidence. 
(f)  The appellant shall open and close argument. 
(g)  The mayor or other person presiding shall determine what evidence will be accepted. The city council is not a court and is not bound by nor required to follow formal rules of evidence or judicial procedure, beyond those described in paragraphs (a) - (f) above. The council will not debate questions of law or admissibility. 
(8)  By majority vote, the city council shall either affirm the city manager's denial, or revocation, or vote to reverse the city manager and grant the license. 
(9)  If the city council affirms the manager's decision, it shall have prepared written findings of fact and references to this division, specifically indicating the reason or reasons justified, supporting the decision. 
(Ord. No. 08-105, § I, 12-16-08)  
Sec. 15-106. - License to be available for inspection. 
The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 08-105, § I, 12-16-08)  
Sec. 15-107. - Seller must attest to ownership. 
Secondhand dealers must require all sellers to sign a written statement attesting to ownership of property. 
(Ord. No. 08-105, § I, 12-16-08)  
Sec. 15-108. - Records required of secondhand dealers. 
(1)  All secondhand dealers shall use either manual log forms or enter information electronically through Leads Online in connection with their business. 
(a)  The log forms must be in the format provided by the city of Killeen police department or 
(b)  The dealer may register and complete a Leads Online agreement to upload the sales records to the Leads Online database website. 
(2)  The log forms must contain: 
(a)  An accurate description of items purchased, including serial numbers; 
(b)  Name, address and drivers license (or other official government ID) of seller; 
(c)  Physical description of seller, including sex, eye color, race, height and weight; 
(d)  Date and time of purchase; 
(e)  Motor vehicle license of vehicle that delivered items; 
(f)  Amount of consideration paid to seller; and 
(g)  Signature of seller and dealer. 
(3)  Each part of the log form must be numbered sequentially by the supplier of the log form. 
(4)  Log forms must be three-part forms. Manual entries to the top copy must be legible and simultaneously reproduced on the remaining parts. 
(5)  Log forms must be in ink. 
(6)  Log forms shall be available for inspection by any Killeen police officer upon request during normal business hours. 
(7)  Log forms must be retained for a period of not less than three (3) years. 
(8)  It shall be a violation of this article to alter or obliterate any entry on a log form. 
(Ord. No. 08-105, § I, 12-16-08)  
Sec. 15-109. - Weekly report to be furnished to police department. 
All secondhand dealers and licensed pawn shops shall furnish a weekly report to the chief of police which consists of a full and complete legible copy of their log forms, as required under this article, by each Monday at 12:00 noon, or in the case where Monday is a holiday, the next business day at 12:00 noon. Dealers who choose to use the Leads Online program do not have to file a weekly report. Any such dealer using a manual recording system who refuses or fails to furnish such log forms shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 08-105, § I, 12-16-08)  
Sec. 15-110. - Acceptance of air conditioning unit parts. 
It shall be unlawful for any secondhand dealer to purchase or receive any central air conditioning unit parts from any person offering such property for sale unless the person presents a valid state-issued professional license or a permit issued by the city to a homeowner for the installation, alteration, or repair of an air-conditioning system at a particular address. This provision shall not apply to window air conditioning units. 
(Ord. No. 08-105, § I, 12-16-08)  
Sec. 15-111. - Purchasing or receiving goods from minors. 
(1)  No secondhand dealer shall purchase or otherwise receive in the course of business, any item, ownership of which is claimed by any minor, or which may be in the possession of or under control of a minor, unless the minor is accompanied by his parent or guardian, who shall state in writing, that such transaction is taking place with such parent's or guardian's full knowledge and consent. 
(2)  Dealer must retain and make available for inspection such written statements of consent for a period of not less than three (3) years. 
(Ord. No. 08-105, § I, 12-16-08)  
Sec. 15-112. - Stock to be open for examination. 
Each item purchased by or deposited with the secondhand dealer shall be open to inspection by any Killeen police officer during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 08-105, § I, 12-16-08)  
Sec. 15-113. - Manufacturer's identification and/or serial number or brand removed or obliterated. 
(a)  A secondhand dealer shall not purchase or have in his possession any item from which the manufacturer's identification and/or serial number or brand has been altered, removed or obliterated. 
(b)  If a police officer finds any item in the possession of a secondhand dealer from which the manufacturer's identification and/or serial number or brand has been altered, removed or obliterated, he may seize such property and hold it at the police department for thirty (30) days. At the time of the seizure of such property, the police officer shall issue the owner a receipt for the property notifying him that the property may be redeemed in thirty (30) days at the police department unless it is otherwise allowed by law to be held. 
(Ord. No. 08-105, § I, 12-16-08)  
Sec. 15-114. - Police investigative-hold demand stopping sale or disposal of property. 
A police officer shall have the right, upon written demand addressed to a particular secondhand dealer, to stop the sale or removal or redelivery of any property for a stated period of time or until the property is released by such officer. After receipt of such demand, it shall be unlawful for a secondhand dealer to sell, dispose of, remove or redeliver such property until the property is released by the officer issuing the demand. 
(Ord. No. 08-105, § I, 12-16-08)  
Sec. 15-115. - Retention period. 
Each secondhand item purchased by or deposited with the dealer shall be retained in its original form, shape and condition for a period of seven (7) business days after such purchase or deposit during which time said item shall not be sold or permitted to be redeemed or removed from the place of business or such dealer. 
(Ord. No. 08-105, § I, 12-16-08)  
Sec. 15-116. - Responsibility of secondhand dealers for employees or agents. 
Any owner, manager or operator of the business regulated under this article whose employees or agents fail to observe any of the provisions of this article shall be equally guilty with the offender and subject to the same penalties. 
(Ord. No. 08-105, § I, 12-16-08)  
Sec. 15-117. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation violating a provision of this article shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(b)  A violation constitutes a separate offense for each regulated item involved. 
(c)  A violation constitutes a separate offense for each day violation continues. 
(Ord. No. 08-105, § I, 12-16-08)  
Secs. 15-118, 15-119. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - CREDIT ACCESS BUSINESSES 
 
Sec. 15-120. - Short title and purpose. 
(a)  This article may be known and cited as "Credit Access Businesses Regulation." 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to protect the welfare of the citizens of the City of Killeen by monitoring credit access businesses in an effort to reduce abusive and predatory lending practices. To this end, this article establishes a registration program for credit access businesses, imposes restrictions on extensions of consumer credit made by credit access businesses, and imposes recordkeeping requirements on credit access businesses. 
(Ord. No. 16-011 , § 1, 2-9-16)  
Sec. 15-121. - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
(1)  Certificate of registration means a certificate of registration issued by the director under this article to the owner or operator of a credit access business. 
(2)  Consumer means an individual who is solicited to purchase or who purchases the services of a credit access business. 
(3)  Consumer's language of preference is the language the consumer understands best. 
(4)  Credit access business has the meaning given that term in V.T.C.A., Finance Code § 393.601. 
(5)  Deferred presentment transaction has the meaning given that term in V.T.C.A., Finance Code § 393.601. 
(6)  Director means the building official or his designee. 
(7)  Extension of consumer credit has the meaning given that term in V.T.C.A., Finance Code § 393.001. 
(8)  Motor vehicle title loan has the meaning given that term in V.T.C.A., Finance Code § 393.601. 
(9)  Person means any individual, corporation, organization, partnership, association, financial institution, or any other legal entity. 
(10)  Registrant means a person issued a certificate of registration for a credit access business under this article and includes all owners and operators of the credit access business identified in the registration application filed under this article. 
(11)  State license means a license to operate a credit access business issued by the Texas Consumer Credit Commissioner under V.T.C.A., Finance Code ch. 393, subch. G. 
(Ord. No. 16-011 , § 1, 2-9-16)  
Sec. 15-122. - Violations; penalty. 
(a)  A person who violates a provision of this article, or who fails to perform an act required of the person by this article, commits an offense. A person commits a separate offense for each and every violation relating to an extension of consumer credit, and for each day during which a violation is committed, permitted or continued. 
(b)  An offense under this article is punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(c)  A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under this article and need not be proved. 
(d)  The penalties provided for in subsection (b) of this section are in addition to any other remedies that the city may have under city ordinances and state law. 
(Ord. No. 16-011 , § 1, 2-9-16)  
Sec. 15-123. - Defenses. 
It is a defense to prosecution under this article that at the time of the alleged offense the person was not required to be licensed by the state as a credit access business under V.T.C.A., Finance Code ch. 393, subch. G. 
(Ord. No. 16-011 , § 1, 2-9-16)  
Sec. 15-124. - Registration required. 
A person commits an offense if the person acts, operates, or conducts businesses as a credit access business without a valid certificate of registration. A certificate of registration is required for each physically separate credit access business. 
(Ord. No. 16-011 , § 1, 2-9-16)  
Sec. 15-125. - Registration application. 
(a)  To obtain a certificate of registration for a credit access business, a person must submit an application on a form provided for that purpose to the director. The application must contain the following: 
(1)  The name, street address, mailing address, facsimile number and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  The business or trade name, street address, mailing address, facsimile number and telephone number of the credit access business. 
(3)  The names, street addresses, mailing addresses and telephone numbers of all owners of the credit access business, and the nature and extent of each person's interest in the credit access business. 
(4)  A copy of a current, valid state license held by the credit access business pursuant to V.T.C.A., Finance Code ch. 393, subch. G. 
(5)  A copy of a current, valid certificate of occupancy showing that the credit access business is in compliance with the City of Killeen Code of Ordinances. 
(6)  A nonrefundable application fee for the amount established in the adopted fee schedule. 
(b)  An applicant or registrant shall notify the director within forty-five (45) days after any material change in the information contained in the application for a certificate of registration, including, but not limited to, any change of address and any change in the status of the state license held by the applicant or registrant. 
(Ord. No. 16-011 , § 1, 2-9-16; Ord. No. 19-047 , § VI, 9-17-19)  
Sec. 15-126. - Issuance and display of certificate of registration; presentment upon request. 
(a)  The director shall issue to the applicant a certificate of registration within ten (10) calendar days upon receiving a completed application under section 15-125. 
(b)  A certificate of registration issued under this section must be conspicuously displayed to the public in the credit access business. The certificate of registration must be presented upon request to the director or any peace officer for examination. 
(Ord. No. 16-011 , § 1, 2-9-16)  
Sec. 15-127. - Expiration and renewal of certificate of registration. 
(a)  A certificate of registration expires on the earliest of: 
(1)  One (1) year after the date of issuance; or 
(2)  The date of revocation, suspension, surrender, expiration without renewal, or other termination of the registrant's state license. 
(b)  A certificate of registration may be renewed by making application in accordance with section 15-125. A registrant shall apply for renewal at least thirty (30) days before the expiration of the registration. 
(Ord. No. 16-011 , § 1, 2-9-16)  
Sec. 15-128. - Non-transferability. 
A certificate of registration for a credit access business is not transferable. 
(Ord. No. 16-011 , § 1, 2-9-16)  
Sec. 15-129. - Maintenance of records. 
(a)  A credit access business shall maintain a complete set of records of all extensions of consumer credit arranged or obtained by the credit access business, which must include the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the consumer; 
(2)  The principal amount of cash actually advanced; 
(3)  The length of the extension of consumer credit, including the number of installments and renewals; 
(4)  The fees charged by the credit access business to arrange or obtain an extension of consumer credit; and 
(5)  The documentation used to establish a consumer's income under section 15-130 of this article. 
(b)  A credit access business shall maintain a copy of each written agreement between the credit access business and a consumer evidencing an extension of a consumer credit (including, but not limited to, any refinancing or renewal granted to the consumer). 
(c)  A credit access business shall maintain copies of all quarterly reports filed with the Texas Consumer Credit Commissioner under V.T.C.A., Finance Code § 393.627. 
(d)  The records required to be maintained by a credit access business under this section must be retained for at least three (3) years. If requested by the city, the credit access business must submit a quarterly report to the director providing records maintained under section 15-129 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 16-011 , § 1, 2-9-16)  
Sec. 15-130. - Restriction on extension of consumer credit. 
(a)  The cash advanced under an extension of consumer credit that a credit access business obtains for a consumer or assists a consumer in obtaining in the form of a deferred presentment transaction may not exceed twenty (20) percent of the consumer's gross monthly income. 
(b)  The cash advanced under an extension of consumer credit that a credit access business obtains for a consumer or assists a consumer in obtaining in the form of a motor vehicle title loan may not exceed the lesser of: 
(1)  Three (3) percent of the consumer's gross annual income; or 
(2)  Seventy (70) percent of the retail value of the motor vehicle. 
(c)  A credit access business shall use a paycheck or other documentation establishing income to determine a consumer's income. 
(d)  An extension of consumer credit that a credit access business obtains for a consumer or assists a consumer in obtaining and that provides for repayment in installments may not be payable in more than four (4) installments. Proceeds from each installment must be used to repay at least twenty-five (25) percent of the principal amount of the extension of consumer credit. An extension of consumer credit that provides for repayment in installments may not be refinanced or renewed. 
(e)  An extension of consumer credit that a credit access business obtains for a consumer or assists a consumer in obtaining and that provides for a single lump sum repayment may not be refinanced or renewed more than three (3) times. Proceeds from each refinancing or renewal must be used to repay at least twenty-five (25) percent of the principal amount of the original extension of consumer credit. 
(f)  For purposes of this section, an extension of consumer credit that is made to a consumer within seven (7) days after a previous extension of consumer credit has been paid by the consumer will constitute a refinancing or renewal. 
(Ord. No. 16-011 , § 1, 2-9-16)  
Sec. 15-131. - Requirement of consumer understanding of agreement. 
(a)  Every agreement between the credit access business and a consumer evidencing an extension of consumer credit (including, but not limited to, any refinancing or renewal granted to the consumer), must be written in the consumer's language of preference. Every credit access business location must maintain on its premises, to be available for use by consumers, agreements in the English and Spanish languages. 
(b)  For every consumer who cannot read, every agreement between the credit access business and a consumer evidencing an extension of consumer credit (including, but not limited to, any refinancing or renewal granted to the consumer) must be read to the consumer in its entirety in the consumer's language of preference, prior to the consumer's signature. 
(c)  For every consumer who cannot read, every disclosure and notice required by law must be read to the consumers in its entirety in the consumer's language of preference, prior to the consumer's signature. 
(Ord. No. 16-011 , § 1, 2-9-16)  
Sec. 15-132. - Referral to consumer credit counseling. 
A credit access business shall provide a form, to be prescribed by the director, to each consumer seeking assistance in obtaining an extension of consumer credit which references nonprofit agencies that provide financial education and training programs and agencies with cash assistance programs. The form will also contain information regarding extensions of consumer credit, and must include the information required by subsections 15-129(a)(1)—(5) of this article specific to the loan agreement with the consumer. If the director has prescribed a form in the consumer's language of preference, the form must be provided in the consumer's language of preference. 
(Ord. No. 16-011 , § 1, 2-9-16)  
Sec. 15-133. - Notice of Military Lending Act. 
(a)  A credit access business shall post a written communication of the Military Lending Act. 
(b)  A written communication means: 
(1)  A sign posted on the property on which is written language identical to the following: 
ATTENTION ALL ACTIVE DUTY MILITARY PERSONNEL 
AND THEIR DEPENDENTS 
  IN ACCORDANCE WITH 10 U.S. CODE § 987 AND THE MILITARY LENDING ACT, A CREDITOR MAY NOT IMPOSE AN ANNUAL PERCENTAGE RATE OF INTEREST GREATER THAN 36 PERCENT WITH RESPECT TO THE CONSUMER CREDIT EXTENDED TO A COVERED MILITARY MEMBER. 
  FEDERAL LAW PROVIDES IMPORTANT PROTECTIONS TO REGULAR OR RESERVE MEMBERS OF THE ARMY, NAVY, MARINE CORPS, AIR FORCE, OR COAST GUARD, SERVING ON ACTIVE DUTY UNDER A CALL OR ORDER THAT DOES NOT SPECIFY A PERIOD OF 30 DAYS OR FEWER, AND THEIR DEPENDENTS. MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES AND THEIR DEPENDENTS MAY BE ABLE TO OBTAIN FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FROM ARMY EMERGENCY RELIEF, NAVY AND MARINE CORPS RELIEF SOCIETY, THE AIR FORCE AID SOCIETY, OR COAST GUARD MUTUAL AID. MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES AND THEIR DEPENDENTS MAY REQUEST FREE LEGAL ADVICE REGARDING AN APPLICATION FOR CREDIT FROM A SERVICE LEGAL ASSISTANCE OFFICE OR FINANCIAL COUNSELING FROM A CONSUMER CREDIT COUNSELOR. 
  A CREDITOR OR ASSIGNEE WHO KNOWINGLY VIOLATES 10 U.S.C. 987 AS IMPLEMENTED BY THIS PART SHALL BE FINED AS PROVIDED IN TITLE 18, UNITED STATES CODE, OR IMPRISONED FOR NOT MORE THAN ONE YEAR, OR BOTH. 
  COMPLAINTS MAY BE FILED WITH THE CONSUMER AFFAIRS DEPARTMENT OF FT. HOOD AT 254-287-2489. 
(2)  Appears in contrasting colors; 
(3)  The title "Attention All Active Duty Military Personnel and their Dependents" must be in bolded print with block letters at least one (1) inch height. All other letters must be in block letters at least one-half inch height; and 
(4)  Is displayed in a conspicuous manner clearly visible to the public. 
(Ord. No. 16-011 , § 1, 2-9-16)  
Secs. 15-134—15-160. - Reserved.  
Chapter 16 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS AND OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to enforce ordinances necessary to protect and preserve health, property, good government and order, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.004. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 16-1—16-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 16-26. - Penalty. 
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-8.  
Sec. 16-27. - Old refrigerators and iceboxes. 
All old refrigerators and iceboxes placed in storage or discarded and not in use shall have the door of such refrigerator or icebox wired closed securely, or all door hinges removed therefrom. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 10, art. 3, § 1) 
Cross reference— Nuisances, Ch. 18. 
State Law reference— Abandoned iceboxes, etc., V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 756.001 et seq.  
Sec. 16-28. - Urination and defecation in public. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in any public place, or in immediate proximity thereto, or in a place which may be viewed from a public place, at a location which has not been designated as a restroom. 
(Ord. No. 94-41, § I, 5-24-94)  
Sec. 16-29. - Solicitation of controlled substances. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if, with intent to acquire a controlled substance, he requests, commands, offers to purchase, or attempts to induce another to sell, donate, or otherwise transfer or deliver a controlled substance or dangerous drug to the person. 
(b)  It is no defense to prosecution under this article that: 
(1)  No monetary or other consideration was tendered to the person solicited. 
(2)  The person solicited was unable or unwilling to transfer or deliver a controlled substance or dangerous drug. 
(c)  It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution under this article that: 
(1)  The solicitation is made in furtherance of a transaction which would not constitute a violation of any applicable law. 
(2)  The solicitation is made by a peace officer, federal law enforcement officer, of a law enforcement agent acting in the lawful discharge of an official duty. 
(d)  As used in this article, the term "controlled substance or dangerous drug" shall have the same definition given in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 481.002 for "controlled substance" and "federal controlled substance," as that statute and its schedules may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 95-22, § I, 3-14-95)  
Secs. 16-30—16-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - WEAPONS 
 
Sec. 16-41. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this division the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Air powered weapon shall mean any paintball gun, BB gun, pellet gun, air rifle or air pistol. 
Archery device shall mean any bow, compound bow, crossbow, crossbow pistol or any other device capable of firing an arrow or bolt. 
Firearm shall mean any pistol, handgun, rifle or shotgun that fires a projectile through the combustion of gunpowder or propellant. 
Indoor archery range shall mean a room, place or enclosure equipped with targets for practice with a bow, compound bow, crossbow, crossbow pistol or any other device capable of firing an arrow or bolt. 
Indoor firing range shall mean a room, place or enclosure equipped with targets for practice with any BB gun, pellet gun, air rifle or pistol, gun, pistol or firearm of any description. 
Permit holder shall mean the person to which a permit was issued or his guest(s). A person shall be assumed to be a guest if the permit holder is present at the permitted activity and consents to the person's presence or the person has written permission to participate in the permitted activity from the person to which the permit was issued. Written permission must include the name, date of birth and home address of the person being given permission. 
Shooting gallery shall be as defined in section 5-51. 
(Ord. No. 89-16, § III(7-6-5(A)), 2-14-89; Ord. No. 04-30, § I, 4-27-04) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 16-42. - Penalty. 
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this division shall be punished as provided in section 1-8.  
Sec. 16-43. - Discharge of firearms. 
Except as otherwise regulated by state law and this division, it shall be unlawful to discharge, other than within an indoor firing range or shooting gallery, within the city limits a firearm of any description without first obtaining a permit from the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 89-16, § III(7-6-5(B)), 2-14-89; Ord. No. 99-62, § I, 8-10-99; Ord. No. 04-30, § I, 4-27-04)  
Sec. 16-44. - Discharge of air powered weapons or archery device. 
1.  It shall be unlawful to discharge any air powered weapon or archery device on locations zoned other than A agricultural, A-Rl agricultural single family residential or district B-5 business district as part of a business establishment. 
2.  It shall be unlawful to discharge any air powered weapon or archery device on locations of less than 5 acres in size. 
3.  It shall be unlawful to discharge an air-powered weapon or archery device in a manner not reasonably likely to contain the fired projectile to the property controlled by the property owner or agent. 
(Ord. No. 89-16, § III(7-6-5(C)), 2-14-89; Ord. No. 99-62, § II, 8-10-99; Ord. No. 04-30, § I, 4-27-04; Ord. No. 18-048 , § I, 12-18-18)  
Sec. 16-45. - Discharge of firearm near structures, buildings, roadways. 
1.  It shall be unlawful for any holder of a permit issued under this division to discharge any firearm within one hundred (100) yards of any occupied residence not owned or controlled by the property owner or his agent. 
2.  It shall be unlawful for any holder of a permit issued under this division to discharge a firearm on any property less than twenty five (25) acres in size. It is permissible for more than one property owner to join with another property owner in permitting contiguous properties to meet the minimum acreage requirements of this section. 
3.  It shall be unlawful for any holder of a permit issued under this division to discharge a firearm in a manner not reasonably likely to contain the fired projectile to the permitted property. 
(Ord. No. 89-16, § III(7-6-5(E)), 2-14-89; Ord. No. 04-30, § I, 4-27-04)  
Sec. 16-46. - Exceptions. 
Sections 16-43, 16-44 and 16-45 do not apply to: 
a.  a peace officer lawfully acting within in the scope of the peace officer's duties; 
b.  an authorized agent, officer, employee or representative of a state or federal agency lawfully acting within the scope of that person's duties; 
c.  a person acting in self defense; 
d.  the discharge of any firearm that does not release a projectile as part of a demonstration at a special event, function or activity, or for signal or ceremonial purposes in athletic events, or by a military organization; 
e.  The use of toy bows and soft rubber tipped arrows; 
f.  A person acting in defense of livestock or crops. 
g.  A discharge in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction or in an area annexed by the city after September 1, 1981, if the weapon discharged is: 
(1)  A shotgun, air rifle or pistol, BB gun, or bow and arrow discharged: 
(a)  On a tract of land of ten (10) acres or more and more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from a residence or occupied building located on another property; and 
(b)  Discharged in a manner not reasonably expected to cause a projectile to cross the boundary of the tract; or 
(2)  A center fire or rim fire rifle or pistol of any caliber discharged: 
(a)  On a tract of land of fifty (50) acres or more and more than three hundred (300) feet from a residence or occupied building located on another property; and 
(b)  In a manner not reasonably expected to cause a projectile to cross the boundary of the tract. 
(Ord. No. 89-16, § III(7-6-5(E)), 2-14-89; Ord. No. 04-30, § I, 4-27-04; Ord. No. 18-048 , § I, 12-18-18)  
Sec. 16-47. - Where permits prohibited. 
Permits shall only be issued for locations that are zoned A agricultural or A-R1 agricultural single family residential. No permits shall be issued for areas that do not meet the area or distance requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 89-16, § III(7-6-5(G)), 2-14-89; Ord. No. 99-62, § III, 8-10-99; Ord. No. 04-30, § I, 4-27-04)  
Sec. 16-48. - Permits for hunting deer. 
It shall be unlawful for a permit holder to hunt deer from an elevation less than 10' higher than the animal being hunted on locations less than 50 acres using a centerfire weapon .22 caliber or greater. 
(Ord. No. 89-16, § III(7-6-5(H)), 2-14-89; Ord. No. 04-30, § I, 4-27-04)  
Sec. 16-49. - Application for permit. 
A person wishing to obtain a permit required by this division must file with the city manager's office an application containing the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  A description of the property, including property line dimensions and total acreage of the property where the weapon will be discharged; 
(3)  The name of the owner(s) of the property; 
(4)  The type of the weapon to be used; i.e. rifle, shotgun or handgun, and whether it is a rimfire or centerfire caliber; 
(5)  If the applicant is not the property owner(s), a document evidencing that the applicant has the permission of the owner to use the land; and 
(6)  The purpose of discharging the weapon, and the time period requested, not to exceed one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 89-16, § III(7-6-5(I)), 2-14-89; Ord. No. 04-30, § I, 4-27-04)  
Sec. 16-50. - Police review of application. 
Upon receipt of an application for a permit required by this division, the city manager shall immediately forward same to the police department. The police department shall have seven (7) working days in which to review the application to determine whether: 
(1)  Discharging a weapon in the location requested would affect public safety, health, or welfare; and 
(2)  The applicant has been convicted of a felony or falsified the application. 
(3)  The location must meet the minimum area and distance requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 89-16, § III(7-6-5(J)), 2-14-89; Ord. No. 99-62, § IV, 8-10-99; Ord. No. 04-30, § I, 4-27-04)  
Sec. 16-51. - Action on application. 
Upon receiving the report from the police department, the city manager shall, based upon the police department's findings, act upon the application by either issuing or denying the permit, within 10 working days. If the city manager issues the permit, it shall designate a period that corresponds to the reason the permit is requested, but not to exceed one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 89-16, § III(7-6-5(K)), 2-14-89; Ord. No. 99-62, § V, 8-10-99)  
Sec. 16-52. - Possession, display of permit. 
Approved permits issued under this division shall be carried on the permit holder's person at any time a firearm or other weapon is discharged or carried on the location that the permit describes, and shall be shown upon the demand of any peace officer. 
(Ord. No. 89-16, § III(7-6-5(L)), 2-14-89)  
Sec. 16-53. - Revocation of permits. 
(a)  A permit issued under this division may be seized by any police officer, and may be revoked by the chief of police, if: 
(1)  The permit holder fails to show the permit to a police officer upon request; or 
(2)  Complaints from an adjacent property owner or a law enforcement officer are received that allege unsafe weapon handling or discharge; or 
(3)  The permit holder is carrying or discharging a firearm of a type not specifically indicated on the permit; or 
(4)  The landowner requests revocation of all or specific permits issued for his land; or 
(5)  Violations of any of the restrictions in this division occur. 
(b)  If the chief of police revokes a permit issued hereunder, he shall send to the permit holder, by certified mail, return-receipt requested, written notice of the revocation, the reason therefore, and the right to appeal. 
(c)  The chief of police shall send a copy of the written notice of revocation to the city manager, who shall provide copies of such notice to the city council. 
(d)  A permit holder who has his permit revoked shall not be issued another permit under this division for a period of ninety (90) days from the date of revocation for the first revocation and for a period of one year for any subsequent revocation. 
(Ord. No. 89-16, § III(7-6-5(M)), 2-14-89; Ord. No. 04-30, § I, 4-27-04)  
Sec. 16-54. - Appeals procedure. 
(a)  A permit applicant or holder may appeal the denial or revocation of a permit hereunder to the city council subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The appeal must be in writing and filed with the city manager's office within five (5) working days of the denial or revocation action; 
(2)  The appeal must clearly set out the basis of such appeal; 
(3)  The hearing shall be scheduled for the next regular city council meeting no earlier than ten (10) days after receipt of the appeal from the city council to evaluate all evidence and testimony regarding the permit denial or revocation and appeal. 
(b)  The city council shall formally act upon the appeal at the meeting and the city council's decision shall be binding on all parties. 
(Ord. No. 89-16, § III(7-6-5(N)), 2-14-89; Ord. No. 99-62, § VI, 8-10-99)  
Secs. 16-55—16-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - FALSE ALARMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 95-19, § I, adopted February 28, 1995, amended Ch. 16, Art. II by adding a new Div. 3, but did not provide for specific designation of sections; hence, codification of such new provisions as §§ 16-61-16-69 was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 16-61. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms, as used in this article, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them as follows: 
Alarm site shall mean a single premises or location (one (1) street address) served by an alarm system or systems that are under the control of one (1) owner. 
Alarm system shall mean a device or system arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which the department is expected to respond. Systems commonly referred to as "burglar alarm systems," "holdup alarms," and "panic/alert systems" are included. "Alarm system" does not include: 
(1)  An alarm installed on a vehicle, unless the vehicle is permanently located at a site; nor 
(2)  An alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants of a premises with no audible exterior alarm or automatic dialing device. 
Alarm user shall mean the owner, agent or person in control of the premises where an alarm system is maintained within the city, except for the alarm systems on motor vehicles. If, however, an alarm system on a motor vehicle is connected with an alarm system on a premises, the person using such system is an alarm user. 
Automatic dialing device shall mean and refer to an alarm system which automatically sends over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of the emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect. 
Burglar alarm system shall mean and refer to an alarm system signaling an entry or attempted entry into the area protected by the system. 
Commercial establishment shall mean a structure intended or used for the purpose of conducting a commercial business enterprise. 
Department shall mean the city police department. 
Direct connect shall mean an alarm system which has the capability of transmitting system signals to and receiving them at an agency or site designated by the department. 
Direct line shall mean a telephone line, leading directly from a central station or modified central station to the communications center of the department, that is for use only to report emergency signals on a person-to-person basis. 
False alarm shall mean the activation of an alarm system which is not the result of an emergency or threat of emergency for which the alarm system was designed to give notice and for which the responding police officer finds no evidence of any criminal activity. This term shall include activation of an alarm system through mechanical or electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the owner or lessee of an alarm system, or of their employees or agents. The department may not consider a false alarm to have occurred unless a response is made by an agency of the municipality within 30 minutes of the alarm notification and the agency determines from an inspection of the interior or exterior of the premises that the alarm was false. This term shall not include activations which result from any of the following: 
(1)  Alarms caused by an attempted illegal entry of which there is visible evidence, illegal entry, or other demonstrable criminal activity. 
(2)  Alarms caused by the failure or malfunction of the monitoring equipment located in the department. 
(3)  Any activation of an alarm system which is caused by hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes, gale force winds or higher, thunderstorms or electrical storms, utility power surges, or surges through phone lines. 
(4)  Alarms occurring on a repeated basis without apparent cause, but where continuous decided effort, in the sole opinion of the department, is being made jointly by the alarm vendor, alarm user (for installation or servicing), and any other concerned person to correct the malfunction expeditiously. 
(5)  Alarms intentionally caused by a person acting under a reasonable belief that an emergency exists. 
(6)  Alarms followed by an immediate call to the department by the alarm monitoring company canceling the alarm, such call having been made prior to the arrival of any officer. 
(7)  Alarms resulting from the servicing of an alarm system by an alarm business when, prior to such repair or service, the alarm user or their agent has notified the department, in person or by call, giving the proper code number, that the alarm system will be repaired or serviced at the particular date and time coinciding with that alarm. 
(8)  Alarms caused by an animal, provided that actions of the animal were beyond the control and prevention of the alarm user. 
(Ord. No. 95-19, § I, 2-28-95; Ord. No. 05-95, § I, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 16-62. - Local audible alarms; limits on operation. 
All alarm systems equipped with any exterior sound-producing device, including, but not limited to, gongs, buzzers, sirens, bells or horns, shall be equipped with a time device which limits the operation of such sound-producing device to a continuous ten (10) minutes; except that commercial establishments shall be allowed a continuous twenty (20) minutes of operation of the sound-producing devices. 
(Ord. No. 95-19, § I, 2-28-95)  
Sec. 16-63. - Restrictions on automatic dialing devices. 
No automatic dialing shall be keyed to the department or otherwise connected to the department terminals. Any alarm systems which are keyed to a primary or secondary trunkline of the department shall be immediately disconnected therefrom at the expense and responsibility of the owner or lessee of the system. Failure to disconnect any automatic dialing device which is keyed to the department shall constitute a violation of this article [division]. 
(Ord. No. 95-19, § I, 2-28-95)  
Sec. 16-64. - Direct monitoring of financial institutions. 
A financial institution may install, with the permission of the department, an alarm system that is monitored directly by the department. The installation must be accomplished at the institution's expense. 
(Ord. No. 95-19, § I, 2-28-95)  
Sec. 16-65. - Notification required. 
In the absence of other corroborating information, an alarm systems monitor shall make two attempts to contact the occupant of the alarm system location before the department will respond to the alarm signal. 
(Ord. No. 95-19, § I, 2-28-95; Ord. No. 05-95, § I, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 16-66. - Appeal of false determination. 
(a)  If an alarm user believes that the department's determination that an alarm was false is unjustified, then the alarm user may appeal that determination by filing a notice of appeal with the city manager's office within ten (10) calendar days of the date of notice to the alarm user by the department of the false alarm. In the notice of appeal, the alarm user shall set out the specific basis upon which such user is contesting the false determination. 
(b)  The city manager, or a representative designated by the city manager, shall act as a hearing officer and shall conduct a hearing to determine whether to reclassify the alarm as valid. The burden of proof shall be upon the alarm user. At the hearing, the hearing officer shall not be bound by the rules of evidence applicable in a court proceeding but may rely upon that evidence which a reasonable person would rely upon in reaching a decision. The hearing officer may request additional information from the alarm user or the department. 
(c)  The hearing shall be conducted within a reasonable time after the notice of appeal is filed. During the time the appeal is pending, the contested alarm shall not be considered in determining the number of false alarms occurring during a 12-month period. At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall provide the alarm user and the department with written notice of his determination within a reasonable time. 
(d)  The determination of the city manager or his designee shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 95-19, § I, 2-28-95; Ord. No. 05-95, § I, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 16-67. - Service fee. 
Effective upon the occurrence of the fourth false burglar alarm, a service fee shall be assessed against the alarm user as follows: 
(1)  $50, if the location has had more than three but fewer than six other false alarms in the preceding 12-month period; 
(2)  $75, if the location has had more than five but fewer than eight other false alarms in the preceding 12-month period; or 
(3)  $100, if the location has had eight or more other false alarms in the preceding 12-month period. 
(Ord. No. 95-19, § I, 2-28-95; Ord. No. 05-95, § I, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 16-68. - Collection of service fees. 
All service fees authorized in this division shall be billed and collected by the finance department, according to its procedures. 
(Ord. No. 95-19, § I, 2-28-95)  
DIVISION 4. - ILLEGAL SMOKING PRODUCTS 
 
Sec. 16-69. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  Person shall mean an individual corporation, partnership, wholesaler, retailer or any licensed or unlicensed business. 
(b)  Illegal smoking product shall mean any plant or other substance, whether described as tobacco, herbs, incense, spice or any blend thereof, regardless of whether the substance is marketed for the purpose of being smoked, which includes any one or more of the following substances or chemicals: 
(1)  Salvia divinorum or salvinorin A; all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as salvia divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and every compound, manufacture, salts, derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or extracts. 
(2)  2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol (also known as CP47, 497) and homologues; 
(3)  (6aS,10aS)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a, 7,10,10a-tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-1-ol (also known as HU-211 or Dexanabinol); 
(4)  1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-018); 
(5)  1-butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-073); or 
(6)  1-pentyl-3-(4-methoxynaphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-081). 
Products containing some or all of the above substances are potentially marketed under: "K-2," "K-2 Summit," "K-2 Sex," "Genie," "Dascents," "Zohai," "Sage," "Spice," "Sence," "Smoke," "Skunk," "KO Knock-out 2," "Spice Gold," "Spice Diamond," "Yucatan Fire," "Solar Flare," "Pep Spice," "Fire N' Ice," "Salvia Divinorum," and "Salvnorin A." 
Any product containing any of the chemical compounds set forth above shall be subject to the provisions of this division, regardless of whether they are marketed under alternative names. 
(Ord. No. 10-045, § I, 9-14-10)  
Sec. 16-70. - Violation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use, possess, purchase, barter, give, publicly display, sell or offer for sale an illegal smoking product. 
(Ord. No. 10-045, § I, 9-14-10)  
Sec. 16-71. - Penalty. 
(1)  Any person, firm or corporation violating a provision of this article shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than one-hundred dollars ($100.00), nor more than two-thousand dollars ($2000.00). 
(2)  In addition to the fine, the city of Killeen may seek restitution if there are expenses associated with the testing of substances. The restitution and fine shall not be more than two-thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(3)  A violation constitutes a separate offense for each regulated item involved. 
(4)  A violation constitutes a separate offense for each day a violation continues. 
(Ord. No. 10-045, § I, 9-14-10)  
Sec. 16-72. - Affirmative Defense. 
It shall be an affirmative defense that the sale or possession of Salvinorin A was in conjunction with ornamental landscaping and used solely for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 10-045, § I, 9-14-10)  
Secs. 16-73—16-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 91-32, § I, adopted May 28, 1991, amended Art. III, §§ 16-76-16-82 to read as set forth herein. Prior to such amendment, §§ 16-76-16-82 contained similar provisions and derived from Ch. 7, art. 6, §§ 4, 7, 13 and Ch. 7, art. 9, §§ 1-4 of the 1963 Code. 
 
Sec. 16-76. - Purpose; definitions. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to control excessive noise and vibration that interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life, property, recreation, and conduct of business as defined and described in this article. 
(b)  As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed: 
Ambient noise shall mean background or surrounding noise. 
A-weighted sound level shall mean the sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighted network, fast response. 
C-weighted sound level shall mean the sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the C-weighted network, fast response. 
City manager shall also mean the city manager's designee. 
Elapsed time average shall mean the A-weighted or C-weighted sound level, fast response, emanating from a source during one (1) hour, by sampling the sound level for a continuous period of three (3) minutes and recording the average sound level for that period; then repeating the sampling process on one (1) other occasion during the hour; and then, averaging the two (2) readings together (adding the two (2) readings and dividing the sum by two (2)). 
Impulsive sound means sound of short duration, usually less than one (1) second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of sources of impulsive sound include explosions, drop forge impacts, and the discharge of firearms. 
Nighttime shall mean the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
Noise nuisance means any loud, irritating, vexing, disturbing, or unreasonable sound which causes distress, annoyance, discomfort or injury to or which interferes with the comfort or repose of any reasonable person of ordinary nervous sensibilities in the vicinity or hearing thereof, or any sound which endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals, or any sound which interferes with the physical well-being of humans or animals, or any sound which endangers or injures person or real property. 
Public place means any public road, street or alley, inn, tavern, store, grocery or workshop, or a place in which people are assembled or to which people commonly resort for purposes of business, amusement, recreation, or other lawful purposes. 
Sound level shall mean the weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of a sound level meter and frequency weighting network such as A or C as specified in American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters (ANSI S1.4-1971). 
Sound level meter shall mean an instrument which includes a microphone, amplifier, RMS detector, integrator, or time averages, output meter, and weighing network used to measure sound pressure levels. 
Vibration perception threshold means the minimum ground- or structure-borne vibrational motion necessary to cause a reasonable person to be aware of the vibration by such direct means as, but not limited to, sensation by touch or visual observation of moving objects. 
(Ord. No. 91-32, § 1, 5-28-91; Ord. No. 94-27, § I, 4-12-94; Ord. No. 03-45, § I, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 16-77. - General restrictions. 
A person may not: 
(a)  create a noise in excess of the decibel limits prescribed by this article; 
(b)  make noise or play a musical instrument or other equipment plainly audible to a nearby business or residence during the nighttime; 
(c)  operate, permit, or cause the operation of any device that creates vibration which is above the vibration perception threshold of an individual at or beyond the property of the source if on private property, or at fifty (50) feet from the source if in a public space or public right-of-way; 
(d)  create, generate, produce, or emanate an unreasonable noise or noise nuisance which, by its manner, volume, intensity, or duration, is such as to annoy, distress or disturb the comfort or repose of any reasonable person of ordinary nervous sensibilities within the vicinity or hearing thereof; or so as to endanger or injure the safety or health of humans or animals; or so as to interfere with the physical well being of humans or animals; or so as to endanger or injure personal or real property. 
(Ord. No. 03-45, § I, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 09-065, § I, 9-22-09)  
Sec. 16-78. - Noise nuisance enumeration. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to create, generate, produce or emanate an unreasonable noise or noise nuisance which, by its manner, volume, intensity, or duration is such as to annoy, distress or disturb the comfort or repose of any reasonable person of ordinary nervous sensibilities within the vicinity or hearing thereof; or so as to endanger or injure the safety or health of humans or animals; or so as to interfere with the physical well being of humans or animals; or so as to endanger or injure personal or real property. Unreasonable noise nuisance includes, but is not limited to, the following acts: 
(1)  The playing or permitting, or causing the playing, of any radio, television, phonograph, drum, jukebox, nickelodeon, musical instrument, sound amplifier or similar device which produces, reproduces, or amplifies sound, whether such device is operated at a fixed location or in a vehicle. 
(2)  The gathering, on public or private property, of any number of persons at any time, when the cumulative noise of the gathering, whether from human voices or other sources, or from a combination of human voices and other sources, causes unreasonable disturbance to any person or animal located within the range of hearing of such gathering. 
(3)  The keeping of any animal, fowl, or bird, which makes frequent or long, continued noise. 
(4)  The continued or frequent sounding of any horn or other signal device on any automobile, truck, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, except as a danger signal. 
(5)  The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, automobile, truck, motorcycle, or other motor vehicle or boat, except through a muffler or other device which prevents loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(6)  The crying, calling, or shouting, in person or by a mechanical device, or the use of any whistle, rattle, bell, gong, clapper, hammer, drum, horn, loudspeaker or phonograph with or without an amplifier, hand organ, or other devices or instruments, musical or otherwise, for the purpose of advertising any candidates for elective office, any goods, wares, or merchandise, or for the purpose of attracting attention to or inviting persons to any political rally, meeting or gathering, to any place of amusement, to any performance or show, or to any business or activity whatsoever. 
(7)  The raucous shouting, whistling, yelling, singing, hooting, or crying of peddlers, hawkers, vendors or any other persons. 
(8)  The use of any automobile, bus, motorcycle, truck, van or other vehicle, so out of repair or so loaded, that it emits or creates loud grating, grinding, or rattling noise. 
(b)  A peace officer, consistent with the law of this state, may arrest any person who violates any provision of this article in the officer's presence; such officer shall also have authority to issue citations for violation of this article without arresting the offender; provided, however, that in no case shall arrest and citation be mutually exclusive of each other as actions available to the officer in any particular case. 
(Ord. No. 91-32, § I, 5-28-91; Ord. No. 94-27, § II, 4-12-94; Ord. No. 03-45, § I, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 16-79. - Restriction on decibel level. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to create, generate, produce or emanate an unreasonable noise or noise nuisance when, using the A-weighted scale, fast response, it exceeds 3 decibels over the ambient noise, or a maximum of 50 decibels, whichever is higher, or using the C-weighted scale, fast response, it exceeds 5 decibels over the ambient noise, or a maximum of 60 decibels, whichever is higher. Measurement shall be taken at the property line of the noise-producing property, or beyond, in accordance with sec. 16-81(e). 
(b)  Regardless of the measurable decibels level established above and measured as provided in section 16-81(e), it shall be unlawful to generate, produce or emanate an unreasonable noise or noise nuisance which, by its manner, volume, intensity, or duration is such as to annoy, distress or disturb the comfort or repose of any reasonable person of ordinary nervous sensibilities within the vicinity or hearing thereof; or so as to endanger or injure the safety or health of humans or animals; or so as to interfere with the physical well being of humans or animals; or so as to endanger or injure personal or real property. 
(c)  A peace officer, consistent with the law of this state, may arrest any person who violates any provision of this article in the officer's presence; such officer shall also have authority to issue citations for violation of this article without arresting the offender; provided, however, that in no case shall arrest and citation be mutually exclusive of each other as actions available to the officer in any particular case. 
(Ord. No. 91-32, § I, 5-28-91; Ord. No. 94-27, § III, 4-12-94; Ord. No. 03-45, § I, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 16-80. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Sound generated by emergency vehicles or for the purpose of alerting persons to an emergency; 
(2)  Sound produced by a vehicle motor while the vehicle is moving on a public right-of-way, public waterway, airport runway, or railway, except as regulated under subsection 16-78(a)(8) above; 
(3)  Sound produced by any governmental body in the performance of a governmental function; 
(4)  Sound generated at or by a parade route during a lawful and permitted parade, a scheduled stadium event, or at outdoor celebrations sponsored or co-sponsored by the city or any governmental body in the performance of its duty, or as otherwise allowed by law; or 
(5)  The activity, operation, noise, or vibration source emanates from an operation or activity (including, by way of example only, but not limited to, construction, reconstruction, remodeling, and rebuilding of any structure or place in conformity with applicable provisions of this code and state law) that cannot reasonably be done in an alternative manner, time, or place so as to otherwise comply with this article. 
(b)  Applications for a permit for relief from the noise and vibration restrictions designated in this article on the basis of undue hardship may be made to the city manager. Each application must be accompanied by a fee as provided in the adopted fee schedule. The relief requested may be granted upon a good and sufficient showing: 
(1)  That additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify his activity or operation to comply with the provisions of this article; 
(2)  That the activity, operation, noise or vibration source will be of temporary duration and cannot reasonably be done in a manner that would comply with this article; or 
(3)  That no reasonable alternative is available to the applicant. 
(c)  If granted, the permit shall be in writing and contain all conditions upon which such permit is granted, including, but not limited to, the effective dates, any time-of-day, location, sound-pressure-level, or equipment limitations. The city manager may prescribe any reasonable conditions or requirements deemed necessary to minimize adverse effects upon the community or the surrounding area. 
(d)  In the event the city manager denies an application for a permit for relief from the noise and vibration restrictions designated in this article, or grants relief under conditions the applicant finds unacceptable, the affected party may appeal the decision to the city council by filing a written letter with the city manager within ten (10) calendar days after receiving notice of the city manager's decision. The appeal letter must specifically state each and every point of contention with the city manager's determination. The city manager shall immediately cause the appeal to be placed on the next regular meeting agenda of the city council for discussion and action. At that meeting, the city council shall consider the standards contained in this article, the city manager's reasons for denying a permit or applying conditions, the points raised in the letter of appeal, and relevant surrounding facts. 
(Ord. No. 91-32, § I, 5-28-91; Ord. No. 94-27, § IV, 4-12-94; Ord. No. 03-45, § I, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 19-047 , § VII, 9-17-19)  
Sec. 16-81. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Administrative stop order. The building official, his designee, or his duly authorized noise abatement officers may issue an order to any person having possession or control over noise-generating property to immediately halt any sound which exposes any person to continuous or impulsive noise levels that are unreasonably loud, disturbing, or raucous. Within five (5) days following issuance of such an order, the building official or his duly authorized representative may apply to the appropriate court for an injunction to replace the administrative stop order. 
(b)  Identification of violator. The persons responsible for violations of this article are identified as follows: 
(1)  At private residences. Any adult resident present at the time of the offense, and any adult guest or adult trespasser with the ability to control the level of noise at the time of the offense when no adult resident is present at the time of the offense. 
(2)  At business locations. Any business owner, operator, manager, employee in charge, and all persons in control or in possession of the noise nuisance-generating instrument or property at the time of the offense. 
(3)  At any location with an unattended noise nuisance-producing machine, device, instrument, child, animal, or combination of same. Any person who leaves unattended any machine, instrument, device, child, animal, or any combination of same, which thereafter commences producing noise in violation of this article. 
(c)  Authority of peace officer. Subject to subsection (d) below, a peace officer, consistent with the law of the state, may arrest any person who violates any provision of this article in such officer's presence. Such officer shall also have authority to issue citations for violation of this article without arresting the offender; provided, however, that in no case shall arrest and citation be mutually exclusive of each other as actions available to the officer in any particular case. 
(d)  Method of noise measurement. Whenever portions of this article prohibit noise over a certain decibel limit, measurement of the noise shall be made with a decibel meter meeting the standards prescribed by the American Standards Association and using the A-weighted or C-weighted scale, fast response. Measurements shall be taken so as to provide a proper representation of the noise being measured. The microphone shall be placed three to five feet above ground level, when possible, and positioned so as not to create any unnatural enhancement or diminution of the measured noise. Traffic, aircraft, and other transportation noise shall not be considered in taking measurements, except where such background noise interferes with the primary noise being measured. 
(e)  Determination of violation. An arrest, citation, summons, or complaint for the violation of any part of this article must be based on probable cause arising from: 
(1)  The complainant's physical sense perceptions and observations of the unreasonable noise or vibration, as defined herein, at the time such is occurring; or 
(2)  Sound level measurements, taken in accordance with this article, which exceed the stated limits; or 
(3)  A combination of the foregoing two (2) types of evidence. 
(Ord. No. 91-32, § I, 5-28-91; Ord. No. 94-27, § V, 4-12-94; Ord. No. 03-45, § I, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 09-065, § I, 9-22-09)  
Sec. 16-82. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any portion of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred ($100.00), nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). For the second or subsequent conviction within a twelve-month period, such person shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars (250.00), nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 91-32, § I, 5-28-91; Ord. No. 03-45, § I, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 09-065, § I, 9-22-09)  
Sec. 16-83. - Culpable mental state not required. 
An offense under this chapter shall not require a culpable mental state. 
(Ord. No. 03-45, § I, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 16-84. - Riding wild horses on street. 
Whosoever in this city shall ride or cause to be ridden along any street or alley, or upon the public square any wild or unbroken horse, mare, gelding or mule, knowing it at the same time to be wild and unbroken shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 91-32, § I, 5-28-91)  
Secs. 16-85—16-105. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY 
 
Sec. 16-106. - Penalty. 
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-8.  
Sec. 16-107. - Interfering with or obstructing officer. 
Any person who may interfere with, obstruct, hinder, prevent or attempt to prevent any officer of the city in the discharge of his duty shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 7, art. 4, § 1)  
Sec. 16-108. - Mistreatment of police dogs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously torture, torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure, disable or kill any dog used by the police department in the performance of the functions or duties of such department, or to interfere with or meddle with any such dog while being used by the department or any officer or member thereof in the performance of any of the duties or functions of the department or of such officer or member. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 7, art. 4, § 7)  
ARTICLE V. - YOUTH CURFEW 
 
Sec. 16-109. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Curfew hours means: 
(1)  11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and 
(2)  12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday. 
(3)  Notwithstanding (1) and (2), from June 1 to August 15 of each year, curfew hours shall be from 12:01 a.m. on any day until 6:00 a.m. 
Emergency shall include, but not be limited to, fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident or seeking immediate medical treatment for any person. 
Interstate transportation means transportation between states of the United States or between a state of the United States and a foreign country, to which any travel through the city is merely incidental. 
Intrastate transportation means transportation between locations within the state, to which any travel through the city is merely incidental. 
Minor shall mean any person under seventeen (17) years of age. 
Parent shall mean a person who is the natural or adoptive parent of minor. As used herein "parent" shall also include a court-appointed guardian or other person twenty-one (21) years of age or older who has been authorized by the parent, by a court order, or by the court-appointed guardian to have the care and physical control of a minor. 
Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets and highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transportation facilities, restaurants and shops. 
(Ord. No. 92-46, § I, 8-11-92; Ord. No. 96-61, § I, 7-23-96; lapsed 07-23-99; re-adopted Ord. No. 99-69, § I, 9-14-99; Ord. No. 02-33, § I, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 05-59, § I, 8-16-05; Ord. No. 08-052, § I, 7-22-08; Ord. No. 11-058, § I, 7-12-11; Ord. No. 17-033 , § I, 5-23-17; Ord. No. 20-022 , § I, 5-12-20)  
Sec. 16-110. - Offenses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any minor to intentionally or knowingly remain, walk, run, stand, drive or ride about in or upon any public place in the city during curfew hours. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a parent of a minor to knowingly allow or permit the minor to be in violation of the curfew imposed in subsection (a) of this section. The term "knowingly" includes knowledge which such parent should reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in the parent's care. It shall be prima facie evidence of violation of this section if a responsible parent has no knowledge of a minor's whereabouts during the hours of curfew established by this article. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, or employee of any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, to knowingly allow a minor to remain upon the premises of said place of business during curfew hours. 
(Ord. No. 92-46, § I, 8-11-92; Ord. No. 96-61, § I, 7-23-96; lapsed 07-23-99; re-adopted Ord. No. 99-69, § I, 9-14-99; Ord. No. 02-33, § I, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 05-59, § I, 8-16-05; Ord. No. 08-052, § I, 7-22-08; Ord. No. 11-058, § I, 7-12-11; Ord. No. 17-033 , § I, 5-23-17; Ord. No. 20-022 , § I, 5-12-20)  
Sec. 16-111. - Defenses. 
It is a defense to prosecution under section 16-110 that, at the time of the act that otherwise would constitute an offense: 
(1)  The minor was accompanied by his or her parent; 
(2)  The minor was accompanied by an adult twenty-one (21) years of age or older approved by the parent; 
(3)  The minor was on an emergency errand; 
(4)  The minor was attending a school, religious or government-sponsored activity, or going to or coming from a school, religious or government-sponsored activity; 
(5)  The minor was engaged in a lawful employment activity or labor organization meeting, or going to or coming from said lawful employment or labor organization meeting; 
(6)  The minor was on the premises of the place where such minor resides or on the premises of a next-door neighbor, and said neighbor was not communicating an objection to a peace officer regarding the presence of said minor; 
(7)  The minor was upon an errand directed by his or her parent; 
(8)  The minor was in an aircraft or motor vehicle involved in intrastate or interstate transportation, or was awaiting transportation by such means; 
(9)  The minor was exercising his or her First and Fourteenth Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, including, but not limited to, the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or 
(10)  The minor was married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with the Texas Family Code. 
(11)  In a prosecution under subsection 16-110(c), the owner, operator or employee of the place of business promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the business during curfew hours and refused to leave. 
(Ord. No. 92-46, § I, 8-11-92; Ord. No. 96-61, § I, 7-23-96; lapsed 07-23-99; re-adopted Ord. No. 99-69, § I, 9-14-99; Ord. No. 02-33, § I, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 05-59, § I, 8-16-05; Ord. No. 08-052, § I, 7-22-08; Ord. No. 11-058, § I, 7-12-11; Ord. No. 17-033 , § I, 5-23-17; Ord. No. 20-022 , § I, 5-12-20)  
Sec. 16-112. - Enforcement procedures. 
Any peace officer, upon finding a minor in violation of section 16-110 may: 
(1)  Order the minor to go directly and promptly to his home, after issuing either a verbal warning, a written warning or a citation; or 
(2)  Release the minor to a parent, legal guardian or other responsible adult under circumstances deemed appropriate by the officer, after issuing either a verbal warning, written warning or a citation. 
a.  When a minor is released to a parent, legal guardian or other responsible adult, the adult shall be informed of the specific violation, the nature and purpose of the law, and the consequences of future violations. The peace officer has the discretion to issue either a verbal warning, written warning or a citation to the minor's parent, legal guardian, or a responsible adult into whose care the minor was placed. 
(Ord. No. 92-46, § I, 8-11-92; Ord. No. 96-61, § I, 7-23-96; lapsed 07-23-99; re-adopted Ord. No. 99-69, § I, 9-14-99; Ord. No. 02-33, § I, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 05-59, § I, 8-16-05; Ord. No. 08-052, § I, 7-22-08; Ord. No. 11-058, § I, 7-12-11; Ord. No. 17-033 , § I, 5-23-17; Ord. No. 20-022 , § I, 5-12-20)  
Sec. 16-113. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any minor violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor as defined by the Texas Penal Code and shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Family Code title 3, and the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(b)  A parent who violates subsection 16-110(b) or a person who violates subsection 16-110(c) shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor, which shall be punishable by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(c)  In assessing punishment for either a parent or minor, the municipal court judge may consider a community service or teen court program. 
(Ord. No. 92-46, § I, 8-11-92; Ord. No. 96-61, § I, 7-23-96; lapsed 07-23-99; re-adopted Ord. No. 99-69, § I, 9-14-99; Ord. No. 02-33, § I, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 05-59, § I, 8-16-05; Ord. No. 08-052, § I, 7-22-08; Ord. No. 11-058, § I, 7-12-11; Ord. No. 17-033 , § I, 5-23-17; Ord. No. 20-022 , § I, 5-12-20)  
Sec. 16-114. - Continuing evaluation. 
This ordinance shall be reviewed every third year after passage, as required by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 370.002, as amended. Such review shall be conducted following public hearings upon the need to continue the ordinance, and the city council shall have the option to continue, abolish or modify the ordinance based upon its review of the ordinance's effects on the community and on the problems the ordinance is intended to remedy. 
(Ord. No. 96-61, § I, 7-23-96; lapsed 07-23-99; re-adopted Ord. No. 99-69, § I, 9-14-99; Ord. No. 02-33, § I, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 05-59, § I, 8-16-05; Ord. No. 08-052, § I, 7-22-08; Ord. No. 11-058, § I, 7-12-11; Ord. No. 14-042, 6-10-14; Ord. No. 17-033 , § I, 5-23-17; Ord. No. 20-022 , § I, 5-12-20)  
ARTICLE VI. - POSSESSION OF TOBACCO 
 
Sec. 16-115. - Definitions. 
(a)  Minor: - A person less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(b)  Tobacco product: 
(1)  A cigar; 
(2)  Smoking tobacco, including granulated, plug-cut, crimp-cut, ready-rubbed, and any form of tobacco suitable for smoking in a pipe or as a cigarette; 
(3)  Chewing tobacco, including Cavendish, Twist, plug scrap, and any kind of tobacco suitable for chewing; 
(4)  Snuff or other preparations of pulverized tobacco; or 
(5)  An article or product that is made of tobacco or a tobacco derivative. 
(Ord. No. 96-14, § I, 3-12-96)  
Sec. 16-116. - Offenses. 
It is unlawful for a minor to: 
(1)  Possess a tobacco product; 
(2)  Purchase a tobacco product; 
(3)  State that he or she is eighteen (18) years of age or older in order to facilitate their purchase of tobacco products; 
(4)  Present false or misleading documentation that he or she is eighteen (18) years of age or older in order to facilitate their purchase of tobacco products. 
(Ord. No. 96-14, § I, 3-12-96)  
Sec. 16-117. - Defense. 
It is a defense to prosecution under sec. 16-115 that at the time of possession of a tobacco product, the minor was a legal employee of a business holding proper permits to serve as a distributor, wholesaler, bonded agent, or retailer of tobacco products, such possession being for the purpose of carrying out the business of the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 96-14, § I, 3-12-96)  
Sec. 16-118. - Enforcement. 
(a)  A police officer may stop and detain a person whom the officer has reasonable suspicion to believe is in violation of this ordinance. If, after investigating the circumstances, the police officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred, the defense of sec. 16-116 does not apply, and the detained person is unable to produce convincing evidence that he or she is eighteen (18) years of age or older, the police officer may issue a citation or make an arrest for the violation of this ordinance. 
(b)  In assessing punishment, a municipal court judge may consider community service, a tobacco education program or a teen court program. If the municipal court judge assesses participation in a tobacco education program or community service in lieu of a fine upon conviction for a violation of this ordinance he shall require the completion of the community service or tobacco education program within thirty (30) days of conviction. 
(Ord. No. 96-14, § I, 3-12-96)  
Sec. 16-119. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. 
(b)  Each day a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense, and shall be punishable as such. 
(Ord. No. 96-14, § I, 3-12-96)  
Secs. 16-120—16-129. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - RETURN OF LIBRARY MATERIALS 
 
Sec. 16-130. - Failure to return library materials. 
(a)  Any person who has outstanding Killeen public library fees for overdue materials or an unpaid fine (provided for below) shall be disallowed from further borrowing until the fees have been paid or the overdue materials returned. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person who has borrowed library materials or who, as a parent or guardian, has agreed to be responsible for library materials borrowed by another person, to fail to return such library materials after the expiration of ten (10) days after receiving written notice demanding the return of such library materials. Notice shall be given by regular mail to the address shown on the person's application to borrow library materials or to the person's last known address if such address is different from the address shown on such application. A notice sent by regular mail to the person's address, as set forth above, shall be deemed to have been received by the person upon the third regular postal day after its deposit in the U.S. mail. 
(c)  In any prosecution charging a violation of subsection (b) above, proof that library materials were borrowed on the library card of a person shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that such person was the person who borrowed the library materials. 
(d)  In any prosecution under this section, it is no defense that the person no longer possesses the library materials. 
(Ord. No. 98-84, § I, 12-22-98)  
Sec. 16-131. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined up to, but not to exceed $500.00 for each offense. 
(b)  Each day a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense for each unreturned item and shall be punishable as such. 
(c)  In addition to a fine, the court may order restitution be paid, based upon replacement value of the unreturned material. 
(Ord. No. 98-84, § I, 12-22-98)  
Secs. 16-132-16-139. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - SEXUAL PREDATOR RESIDENCY 
 
Sec. 16-140. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, words, and the derivation thereof shall have the meanings given herein. 
(a)  Day care center shall mean a child care facility that is registered, licensed or listed by the state of Texas. 
(b)  Minor. A minor is a person younger than seventeen (17) years of age. 
(c)  Permanent residence. A place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for fourteen (14) or more consecutive days. 
(d)  Person includes an individual, firm, corporation or other business entity. 
(e)  Premises where children commonly gather. Public parks, private and public schools, amusement arcades, video arcades and youth centers as defined in article 481.134 of the Health and Safety Code of the state of Texas, indoor and outdoor amusement centers that cater primarily to children, amusement parks, public commercial and semi-private swimming pools, child daycare centers, the Killeen municipal golf course, and public or private school or daycare bus stop. For the purposes of this code, planted street medians are not public parks. 
(f)  Temporary residence. 
1.  A place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address; or 
2.  A place where a person routinely abides, resides, or lodges for a period of 4 or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent residence. 
(Ord. No. 07-040, § I, 5-8-07)  
Sec. 16-141. - Offenses. 
(a)  For each person required to register on the Texas Department of Public Safety's "Public" sex offender database (the "database") under chapter 62, Code of Criminal Procedure, because of a reportable conviction or adjudication involving a victim younger that seventeen (17) years of age or who has been civilly committed as a sexually violent predator under chapter 841, Health and Safety Code, and is subject to outpatient treatment and supervision under that chapter, it shall be unlawful for that person to establish a permanent residence or temporary residence within 2,000 feet of any premise where children commonly gather, as defined in section 16-140(e). 
(b)  It is unlawful to lease, rent or otherwise provide any residence, dwelling, place, structure or part thereof, manufactured home, trailer, or other conveyance, with the knowledge that it will be used as a permanent residence or temporary residence by any person prohibited from establishing such permanent residence or temporary residence pursuant to the terms of this section, if such place, structure or part thereof, manufactured home, trailer or other conveyance is located within 2,000 feet of any premises where children commonly gather, as defined in section 16-140(e). 
(Ord. No. 07-040, § I, 5-8-07)  
Sec. 16-142. - Evidentiary matters; measurements. 
(a)  It shall be prima facie evidence that this article applies to such a person if that person's record appears on the database and the database indicates that the victim was less than seventeen (17) years of age. 
(b)  For the purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of the permanent or temporary residence to the nearest property line of the premises where children commonly gather, as described herein above, or, 
(1)  in the case of multiple residences on one property, measurement is from the nearest property line of the residence premises following a straight line to the nearest property line of the premises where children commonly gather, or 
(2)  in the case of a bus stop, measurement is from the center point of the stop following a straight line to the property line of the permanent or temporary residence. 
(c)  A map depicting the prohibited areas shall be maintained by the city of Killeen. The city shall review the map every 3 months for changes. Said map will be available to the public at the Killeen police department. 
(Ord. No. 07-040, § I, 5-8-07)  
Sec. 16-143. - Culpable mental state not required. 
Neither allegation nor evidence of a culpable mental state is required for the proof of the offense defined by this article under section16-141(a). 
(Ord. No. 07-040, § I, 5-8-07)  
Sec. 16-144. - Affirmative defenses. 
It is an affirmative defense to prosecution that any of the following conditions apply: 
(a)  The person required to register on the database established the permanent or temporary residence, and has complied with all of the sex offender registration laws of the state of Texas, prior to the date of the adoption of this ordinance. 
(b)  The person required to register on the database was a minor when he or she committed the offense requiring such registration and was not convicted as an adult. 
(c)  The person required to register on the database is a minor. 
(d)  The premises where children commonly gather, as specified herein, within 2,000 feet of the permanent or temporary residence of the person required to register on the database was opened after the person established the permanent or temporary residence and the person has complied with all sex offender registration laws of the state of Texas. 
(e)  The information on the database is incorrect, and, if corrected, this section would not apply to the person who was erroneously listed on the database. 
(Ord. No. 07-040, § I, 5-8-07)  
Sec. 16-145. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating a provision of this article shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and, upon conviction of such violation, shall be punished by a penalty of fines as set forth in section 1-8 for each offense. Each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 07-040, § I, 5-8-07)  
Sec. 16-146. - Provisions severable. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this ordinance are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this ordinance of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Ord. No. 07-040, § I, 5-8-07)  
Chapter 17 - MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Building and construction regulations, Ch. 8; flood damage prevention, Ch. 12; health and human services, Ch. 13; licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 15; planning and development, Ch. 21; subdivisions and other developments, Ch. 26; zoning, Ch. 31; mobile home zoning district, § 31-261 et seq. 
State Law reference— Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Act, V.A.C.S. art. 5221f; industrialized housing and buildings, V.A.C.S. art. 5221-f-1. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 17-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City health officer shall mean the legally designated health authority of the city, or his duly authorized representative. 
FHA shall mean the Federal Housing Administration. 
Hard surface shall mean a surface that will not soften when exposed to moisture and which is of sufficient thickness to withstand unusual wheel loads. The use of asphalt, concrete, soil cement, also gravel or crushed rocks when used in compliance herewith shall meet this requirement. However, caliche, when used by itself, will not be acceptable. In the event that gravel or crushed rock is used, such material must be applied six (6) to eight (8) inches thick with a soil binder, or in the alternative apply two (2) or three (3) inches thick over a minimum six (6) inches thick caliche base. The use of precast concrete slabs is acceptable as such slabs are at least two (2) feet square and are adequately reinforced. Such slabs must be clearly specified in construction plans approved by the building official. 
License shall mean any written license issued annually by the building official of the city allowing a person to operate and maintain a mobile home park under the provisions of this chapter and the regulations issued herein. 
Licensee shall mean any person licensed to operate and maintain a mobile home park under the provisions of this chapter. 
Manufactured home shall mean a structure constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems. The term does not include a travel trailer. 
Mobile home shall mean a structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems. The term does not include a travel trailer. For purposes of this chapter, any reference to mobile home includes a manufactured home. 
Mobile home or vacation travel trailer space shall mean a plot of ground within a single mobile home or vacation travel trailer park, and designed for the accommodation of a single mobile or manufactured home or travel trailer. 
Mobile home or vacation travel trailer stand shall mean a hard-surfaced area of a mobile or manufactured home or vacation travel trailer space that is reserved for the placement of a mobile or manufactured home or travel trailer. 
Mobile home park shall mean any tract of land under single ownership, where accommodation is provided for nontransient mobile or manufactured home use. 
Planning commission shall mean the planning and zoning commission of the city, or its duly authorized representative. 
Service buildings shall mean a structure housing toilet, lavatory or such other facilities as may be required by this chapter. 
Skirting shall mean the enclosing of the open space between the underside of a mobile home and the ground around the entire perimeter of the structure, using a masonry wall or a framework to which panels are attached. 
Space width shall mean the horizontal distance of the side lot lines, measuring at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and the rear lot lines. 
Travel trailer shall mean a vehicular, portable home designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses. Such homes shall be classified as a travel trailer whether or not its wheels, rollers, skids or other rolling equipment have been removed, and whether or not any addition thereto has been built on the ground; and shall also include pickup campers, converted buses, self-powered motor homes, tent trailers, tents and analogous temporary portable housing and accessory buildings. 
Vacation travel trailer park shall mean any tract of land under single ownership, one (1) acre or more, where accommodation is provided for transient trailer use. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 3 [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71; Ord. No. 75-91, § 1, 12-9-75]; Ord. No. 06-35, § 1, 3-28-06) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 17-2. - Scope and purpose. 
(a)  The scope of this chapter shall be to govern the establishment and operation of all mobile home and vacation travel trailer parks within the city. 
(b)  Except for the skirting requirements, this chapter shall have no retroactive effect on existing trailer parks; however, any additions to or any changes in the physical character of the existing trailer parks, which are regulated by this chapter, shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the design and use of mobile home parks, because the public services must be provided, and the health, safety and welfare of the community must be maintained. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 2 [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71]; Ord. No. 06-35, § 1, 3-28-06)  
Sec. 17-3. - Penalty. 
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-8.  
ARTICLE II. - MOBILE HOMES 
 
Sec. 17-4. - Parking restricted. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any reason to park a mobile home within the city for a period longer than forty-eight (48) hours except in an approved mobile home park or mobile home subdivision. The provisions of this section shall not, however apply to: 
(1)  Locations where mobile homes are manufactured or sold or stored by the manufacturer or seller. 
(2)  Temporary offices or display units. 
(3)  When permission is granted by a "special use" under the provisions of section 31-456. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to park or store a mobile home on any street or parkway. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 3 [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71; Ord. No. 75-91, § 1, 12-9-75]; Ord. No. 06-35, § 1, 3-28-06)  
Sec. 17-5. - Connection of utilities. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to connect utilities to, or to occupy a mobile home within the city, except where it is located in a duly licensed mobile home park under the terms of this chapter or on property zoned R-MS. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to connect utilities to, or to occupy a travel trailer within the city except where it is located in a duly licensed vacation travel trailer park under the terms of this chapter, under the terms of the city zoning ordinance, or as provided in this section. 
(c)  A person may connect electricity to a travel trailer for the purposes of maintenance or storage. 
(d)  A person may connect electricity to and occupy a travel trailer that is located on the property of a non-profit entity for a period not to exceed forty-eight (48) hours. A non-profit entity may request a longer period of time for a travel trailer to be occupied on its property by submitting an application for permit to the building official. Each application for permit shall be accompanied by a permit fee of $15.00 per trailer. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 4 [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71]; Ord. No. 06-35, § 1, 3-28-06)  
Sec. 17-6. - Skirting required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to rent, offer for rent, occupy or otherwise maintain a mobile home upon any private lot, or within any mobile home park within the city limits, unless said mobile home is skirted according to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 06-35, § 1, 3-28-06)  
Sec. 17-7. - Skirting construction materials. 
Skirting methods and materials allowed shall be as follows: 
(1)  Skirting shall be of a material suitable for exterior exposure and contact with the ground, including but not limited to vinyl or metal skirting systems. Such materials or systems shall be installed in accordance with the skirting manufacturer's installation instructions. Skirting shall be adequately secured to assure stability, to minimize vibration and susceptibility to wind damage, and to compensate for possible frost heave. 
(2)  Any skirting installed as a permanent enclosure such as brick, stone, masonry, cement, board or wood sheathing shall be constructed of materials as required by the adopted construction codes in chapter 8. 
(Ord. No. 06-35, § 1, 3-28-06)  
Sec. 17-8. - Additional skirting requirements. 
(a)  Vent openings shall be installed in the skirting walls either pursuant to the skirting manufacturer's recommendations or as provided in this section. Vents shall be arranged to provide cross-ventilation and shall be covered with corrosion-resistant wire mesh of not less than ¼-inch nor more than ½-inch in any dimension. Vent openings shall have a combined net area of not less than one square foot for each 150 square feet of crawl space. 
(b)  An access hatch shall be installed within permanent skirting installations to allow access under the mobile home for maintenance and repair. The access hatch shall be sufficient size to allow a person of average size to crawl through. The door of the access hatch shall have sufficient hardware to keep it closed tightly when not in use. 
(Ord. No. 06-35, § 1, 3-28-06)  
Sec. 17-9. - Time limits. 
Skirting installation shall be completed within: 
(a)  Six (6) months after the passage of this ordinance for all mobile homes installed on or before the date of this ordinance; and 
(b)  Sixty (60) days after the date of occupancy for all other mobile homes. 
(Ord. No. 06-35, § 1, 3-28-06)  
Secs. 17-10—17-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - MOBILE HOME PARKS OR VACATION TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 17-31. - Building permits and code compliance. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, change physically, or extend any mobile home park or vacation travel trailer park within the city unless and until such plans have been approved by the city council, and unless the person shall hold a valid permit issued by the building official. 
(b)  All new construction permitted under the terms of this section shall comply with the requirements and standards set out in all relevant sections of the city code, including but not limited to, the subdivisions regulations, the building code, the plumbing code, the electrical code, and the zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 5 [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71])  
Sec. 17-32. - Inspection. 
The building inspector and fire marshal are hereby authorized and directed to make such inspections as are necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with this article. They shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any private or public property for the purposes of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this article. It shall be the duty of the park management to give them free access to all lots at reasonable times for the purpose of inspection. It shall be the duty of every occupant of a mobile home park to give the owner thereof or his agent or employee access to any part of such mobile home park at reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with this article. Whenever, upon inspection of any mobile home park, the building official or other authority finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any provisions of this article, he shall give notice in writing in accordance with this section to the person to whom the license was issued that unless such conditions or practices are corrected within a reasonable period of time as specified in the notice other action will be taken. At the end of such period, the authority giving the notice shall reinspect such mobile home park and, if such conditions or practices have not been corrected, he shall recommend that the city council suspend the license and give notice in writing of such suspension to the person to whom the license is issued. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 6(4) [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71; Ord. No. 86-70, § 6, 9-26-86])  
Sec. 17-33. - Registration of occupants. 
It shall be the duty of the licensee to keep a register containing a record of all mobile home and vacation travel trailer owners and occupants located within the park. The register shall be kept for a time period of two (2) years and shall be readily available for inspection by the law enforcement officers, public health officials, and other officials whose duties necessitate acquisition of the information contained in the register. The register shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of each occupant. 
(2)  The make, model, and the year, license number and state of registration, if available, of mobile homes, and vacation travel trailers and name and address of each owner. 
(3)  The date of arrival and departure of each mobile home and vacation travel trailer. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 7 [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71])  
Sec. 17-34. - Supervision. 
It shall be the responsibility of the park management to keep a responsible attendant or supervisor or owner-operator in charge at all times, to keep the facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition at all times. The park manager shall notify park occupants of all applicable provisions of this article and inform them of their duties and responsibilities under this article. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 12 [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71])  
Secs. 17-35—17-45. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 17-46. - Required, application. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any mobile home park or vacation travel trailer park within the city, unless he holds a valid license issued annually by the building official in the name of such person. Application for license should be made to the building official who shall issue a license upon compliance by the applicant with the provision of this article, and other applicable legal requirements. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 6 [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71; Ord. No. 86-70, § 6, 9-23-86])  
Sec. 17-47. - Investigation, inspection. 
The application for a license under this division shall be filed in duplicate. The city engineer and city planning and zoning commission shall investigate the applicant, and inspect the proposed plans and specifications. Each of them shall then make a report to the city council concerning such applicant and include therein their recommendations relative to the issuance of a license. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 6(5) [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71; Ord. No. 86-70, § 6, 9-23-86])  
Sec. 17-48. - Issuance. 
If the mobile home and/or travel trailer park will be in compliance with all provisions of this article and all other applicable ordinances or statutes, the city council may approve the application, and, in the case of proposed parks, make such approval contingent upon the completion of the park according to the plans and specifications submitted with the application. The building official, at the direction of the city council, shall issue the license. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 6(5) [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71; Ord. No. 86-70, § 6, 9-23-86])  
Sec. 17-49. - Fee. 
The annual fee for each mobile home park or vacation travel trailer park shall be in accordance with the adopted fee schedule. The building inspection department shall send out notices at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date, and follow up to ensure that the annual license is obtained. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 6(1); Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71; Ord. No. 86-70, § 6, 9-23-86; Ord. No. 19-047 , § VIII, 9-17-19)  
Sec. 17-50. - Transfer. 
The fee for transfer of the annual license shall be in accordance with section 8-1. Upon application for a transfer of the license, the city council may issue a transfer upon payment of transfer fee. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 6(2) [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71; Ord. No. 86-70, § 6, 9-23-86])  
Sec. 17-51. - Expiration. 
Each license issued under this division, and any transfer thereof, may be granted at any time during the year and shall expire at the end of the fiscal year of the city, unless previously revoked or terminated. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 6(2) [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71; Ord. No. 86-70, § 6, 9-23-86])  
Sec. 17-52. - Display. 
The license certificate issued under this division shall be conspicuously posted in the office located on the premises of the mobile home park or travel trailer park at all times. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 6(3) [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71; Ord. No. 86-70, § 6, 9-23-86])  
Sec. 17-53. - Revocation. 
The license to maintain and operate a mobile home park and a vacation travel trailer park shall be revoked by the city council upon thirty (30) days' written notice when recommended by the building official or the city fire marshal on the finding of a violation of any provision of this chapter. A new license may be issued if the circumstances leading to revocation have been remedied, and new license fee paid. Upon receipt of notice of such suspension such person shall cease operation of such mobile home park. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 6 [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71; Ord. No. 86-70, § 6, 9-23-86])  
Secs. 17-54—17-65. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DESIGN STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 17-66. - Conformance. 
Any person planning to construct, change physically, or enlarge a mobile home park or a vacation travel trailer park shall inform himself of the requirements of other city ordinances and shall conform to the requirements of this division. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 8 [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71])  
Sec. 17-67. - Plans subject to subdivision ordinance. 
(a)  Plans for mobile home parks and travel trailer parks shall be submitted under the same requirements and according to the same procedures as required for a subdivision under the subdivision ordinance subject to the following additional information: 
(1)  Complete engineering plans and specifications of the proposed park. 
(2)  Area and dimensions of the tract of land by metes and bounds. 
(3)  The number, location, and size of all mobile home lots. 
(4)  The location and width of roadways and sidewalks. 
(5)  The location of service buildings and any other proposed structures. 
(6)  The location of water and sewer lines and riser pipes. 
(7)  Plans and specifications for water supply, refuse, and sewage disposal facilities. 
(8)  Plans and specifications of all roadways and sidewalks. 
(9)  The location and typical details of lighting and electrical systems. 
(10)  Location and size of recreation area. 
(b)  All plans shall be submitted on twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-inch linen tracing cloth or approved equal. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 8(B) [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71])  
Sec. 17-68. - Site size. 
The initial development of any mobile home park shall not be less than two (2) acres fully improved with serviced spaces. The initial development of any vacation travel trailer park shall not be less than one (1) acre fully improved. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 8(C) [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71])  
Sec. 17-69. - Density. 
The following maximum site densities shall apply to mobile home parks and vacation travel trailer parks: 
(1)  Mobile home 10 per acre 
(2)  Vacation travel trailer 18 per acre 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 8(D) [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71])  
Sec. 17-70. - Fencing. 
Where mobile home parks and travel trailer parks are constructed adjacent to a permanent home type of residential property, a six-foot-high, solid fence shall be constructed on the boundary line between the park and the residential property. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 8 [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71])  
Sec. 17-71. - Spacing and setbacks. 
Mobile home and vacation travel trailer minimum setback and spacing requirements shall be as follows: 
Spacing 	Mobile Homes 	Vacation Travel Trailers 
Between mobile structures 	25' 	12' 
End to end parking 	10' 	6' 
From permanent structure (excluding individual storage structures, patio roofs, carports) 	10' 	5' 
From patio roof or carport of one mobile structure to adjacent mobile structure 	8' 	3' 
Rear and side park property lines 	5' 	5' 
Adjacent to single family 	25' 	25' 
Front park property line 	25' 	25' 
From interior streets 	8' from body 	8' from body 
From cul-de-sac streets 	8' from body 	8' from body 
Average space width 	40' 	20' 
 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 8(F) [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71])  
Sec. 17-72. - Tenant storage. 
Mobile home parks shall provide storage facilities of one hundred ten (110) cubic feet minimum on each mobile home space. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 8(G) [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71])  
Sec. 17-73. - Patio roofs and carports. 
Mobile home and vacation travel trailer parks spaces may have open, unenclosed patio roofs and carports of metal, fiberglass, or other incombustible materials. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 8(H) [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71])  
Sec. 17-74. - Plumbing, drainage systems—FHA specifications. 
Mobile home park plumbing and drainage systems shall meet FHA specifications. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 8(I)(1) [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71])  
Sec. 17-75. - Same—adherence to code. 
Mobile home park plumbing and drainage systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with the provisions of this article and the installation requirements of this code. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 8(I.1.1) [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71])  
Sec. 17-76. - Same—prohibited installation. 
No gas piping, nonmetallic drainage or vent piping, sewage disposal system or parts thereof, serving more than one (1) trailer, shall be located under a trailer. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 8(I.1.2) [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71])  
Sec. 17-77. - Water distribution system. 
(a)  The distribution system shall be constructed of material acceptable to FHA. 
(b)  The water distribution system shall consist of piping capable of supplying six (6) gallons per minute at a minimum pressure of twenty (20) pounds per square inch at each mobile home stand. Also, the system shall be capable of supplying the following water demand for mobile homes: 
Number of Mobile Home Spaces 	Demand Load (gpm) 
50 	105 
75 	145 
100 	180 
150 	235 
200 	285 
250 	330 
300 	370 
 
(c)  Greater design values may be required when the domestic system is to provide fire protection. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 8(I.2) [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71])  
Sec. 17-78. - Hose connections. 
Adequate hose connections shall be provided for watering lawns of park and utility buildings. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 8(I.3) [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71])  
Sec. 17-79. - Individual water connections. 
(a)  An individual water connection shall be provided at each mobile home lot. 
(b)  The connection shall be located a safe distance from the sewer connection in accordance with the edition of the Standard Plumbing Code in force in the city. 
(c)  The connection shall consist of a riser terminating at least four (4) inches above the ground surface, with two (2) three-quarter-inch valved outlets. The outlets shall be threaded so that a connection can be made from one (1) outlet to the mobile home water piping system and the other connection can serve a garden hose. 
(d)  The riser pipe shall be protected within a concrete curb, or by a concrete collar having a minimum thickness of three (3) inches and extending twelve (12) inches from the riser in all directions. The finished grade shall be sloped to divert surface drainage sewage from the connection. 
(e)  If a drain valve is included to drain the riser, an adequate return system must be provided to prevent a cross-connection. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 8(I.4) [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71])  
Sec. 17-80. - Sewer system and connections; design and construction. 
(a)  All sewer lines shall be constructed of material acceptable to FHA. The lines should be laid in trenches separated a safe distance from any drinking water supply line under pressure. 
(b)  Sewers shall be at a grade which will ensure a velocity of two (2) feet per second when the sewer is flowing full. 
(c)  All joints in the sewer line shall be made watertight, and every effort shall be made to minimize groundwater infiltration into the sewerage system. 
(d)  All sewer connections and manholes shall be constructed so as to prevent surface water from entering the sanitary sewers. 
(e)  Cleanouts extending to grade shall be installed at fifty-foot intervals on four-inch lines, and at one-hundred-foot intervals for larger diameters. 
(f)  All cleanouts shall be capped with cleanout plugs. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 8(I.5) [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71])  
Sec. 17-81. - Individual sewer connections. 
Each mobile home lot shall be equipped with at least a three-inch sewer connection located so as to provide a suitable connection from the home with a continuous grade which is not subject to surface drainage. 
(1)  This sewer connection shall consist of a riser with a minimum diameter of three (3) inches. The riser shall be protected within a concrete curb or by a concrete collar at least three (3) inches thick and extending twelve (12) inches from the riser in all directions. The finished grade shall be sloped to divert surface drainage away from the connection. It shall extend twelve (12) inches horizontally from the riser in all directions. The connection shall terminate within the rear one-third of the stand. 
(2)  The connection between the mobile home drain and the sewer shall be watertight. It shall be of material and a size acceptable to FHA. 
(3)  The connection shall be equipped with couplings that will assure tight joints at the mobile home and at the drain. Provision shall be made for plugging the drain when a mobile home does not occupy the space. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 8(I.6) [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71])  
Sec. 17-82. - Inspection; testing. 
Plumbing and drainage installations shall be tested and inspected as required by the installation requirements of this code. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 8(I.7) [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71])  
Sec. 17-83. - Responsibility. 
(a)  Code violations. When it is evident that there exists or may exist, a violation of any pertinent regulation, the owner, lessee, operator, person in charge of the park or any person causing a violation, shall immediately disconnect the trailer water supply and sewer connection from the respective park systems and shall employ such other corrective measures as may be ordered by the city plumbing inspector. 
(b)  Maintenance. All required devices or safeguards shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, operator, lessee or his designated agent shall be responsible for their maintenance. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 8(I.8) [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71])  
Sec. 17-84. - Fuel. 
Bottled gas for cooking purposes shall not be used at individual mobile home or travel trailer lots unless the containers are properly connected by copper or other suitable metallic tubing. Bottled gas cylinders shall be securely fastened in place. No cylinder containing bottled gas shall be located in a mobile home or travel trailer or within five (5) feet of a door thereof. State and local regulations applicable to the handling of bottled gas and fuel oil must be followed. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 8(I)(2) [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71])  
Sec. 17-85. - Natural gas. 
Mobile and vacation travel trailer spaces shall be provided with a natural gas hookup at least four (4) inches above the ground, when natural gas is used. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 8(I)(3) [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71])  
Sec. 17-86. - Electrical distribution system. 
All lines from meter base breaker boxes to the mobile home or travel trailer shall be buried at least eight (8) inches belowground, and shall be not less than one (1) foot radial distance from water, sewer, gas, or communication lines. All electrical requirements set forth in the appropriate state and local codes shall be complied with. All electric meters shall be permanently installed in a location accessible from an interior street, alley, or all-weather walkway. Wiring from the pole meter base to the trailer breaker box shall be not less than the size of the wiring from the breaker box to the trailer. Wiring from the meter base to eight (8) inches underground and from the trailer supply box to eight (8) inches underground shall be installed in approved conduit. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 8(I)(4) [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71])  
Sec. 17-87. - Lighting. 
Entrances and exits to mobile home parks and vacation travel trailer parks shall be lighted with one (1) or more luminaries (or fixtures) totaling seven thousand seven hundred (7,700) luminaries. The interior area of the mobile home park or vacation travel trailer park shall be adequately lighted so as to provide at least 0.5 footcandle average. All luminaries shall be mounted fifteen (15) feet to twenty-five (25) feet above ground level. Potentially hazardous locations such as major street intersections and steps or step ramps shall be individually illuminated a minimum of 0.3 footcandles. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 8(J) [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71])  
Sec. 17-88. - Walks. 
All parks shall be provided with safe, convenient, all-season, access not less than four (4) feet in width for intended use, durable and convenient to maintain, between individual mobile homes or travel trailers and service buildings, and to all community facilities provided for park residents. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 8(K) [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71])  
Sec. 17-89. - Street system. 
(a)  General. All mobile homes and vacation travel trailer spaces shall be provided with safe and convenient vehicular access from abutting public streets. 
(b)  Access. Access to mobile home and vacation travel trailer parks shall be designed to minimize congestion and hazards of the entrance and exits and to allow free movement of traffic on adjacent streets. 
(c)  Interior streets. Interior asphalt streets shall be provided in mobile home and vacation travel trailer parks and shall be of adequate width to accommodate anticipated traffic and in any event meet the following requirements: 
(1)  All mobile home and vacation travel trailer spaces shall abut upon a paved interior street which shall connect with a public street. 
(2)  All entrance streets and other interior streets shall have a pavement width of not less than twenty-four (24) feet. 
(d)  Cul-de-sac streets shall be limited in length to three hundred (300) feet and shall provide a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least eighty (80) feet. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 8(L) [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71])  
Sec. 17-90. - Driveway or accessway. 
A driveway or accessway shall be reserved from the street to the mobile home or vacation travel trailer stand. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 8(M) [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71])  
Sec. 17-91. - Parking. 
One and one-half (1½) off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each mobile home space. Such parking spaces shall not be over three hundred (300) feet from the mobile homes they serve. Vacation travel trailer parks shall provide an automobile parking space for each vacation travel trailer space. Such parking spaces shall not be over two hundred (200) feet from the travel trailers they serve. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 8(N) [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71])  
Sec. 17-92. - Sanitation facilities. 
Mobile home parks with travel trailer facilities and vacation travel trailer parks shall provide toilets, baths or showers and other sanitation facilities which shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  Female sanitation facilities. Female sanitation facilities shall consist of not less than one (1) flush toilet for every ten (10) travel trailers and one (1) shower or bath with individual dressing accommodations for every ten (10) travel trailers; and 
(2)  Male sanitation facilities. Male sanitation facilities shall consist of not less than one (1) flush toilet for every fifteen (15) travel trailers and one (1) shower or bath with individual dressing accommodations for every ten (10) travel trailers; or 
(3)  Travel trailer facilities. Mobile home parks and vacation travel trailer parks providing space only for travel trailers equipped with self-contained toilet and shower or bathing facilities are exempt from the foregoing sanitation facility requirements. Such travel trailers with self-contained toilet and shower or bathing facilities shall connect to the mobile home park's or vacation trailer park's water and sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 88-19, § I(3-9-9), 3-22-88)  
Sec. 17-93. - Garbage disposal facilities. 
Mobile home parks and vacation travel trailer parks may provide a sufficient number of dumpsters to handle the refuse generated by their occupants. Such dumpsters may be located in designated areas where pickup will be made by the city. The storage and collections of refuse if not handled by dumpsters shall comply with chapter 24. 
(1)  The storage, collection, and disposal of refuse in the mobile home or vacation travel trailer parks shall be so conducted as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident, fire hazards or air pollution. 
(2)  All refuse shall be stored in flytight, watertight, rodentproof containers, which shall be located not more than two hundred (200) feet from any mobile home or vacation travel trailer space. Containers shall be provided in sufficient number and capacity to properly store all refuse until pickup. 
(3)  Refuse collection stands shall be provided for all refuse containers. Such container stands shall be so designed as to prevent containers from being tipped to minimize spillage and container deterioration and to facilitate cleaning around them. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 10 [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71])  
Sec. 17-94. - Fire protection. 
The mobile home park and vacation travel trailer park shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the city fire prevention authority. The city fire marshal shall make periodic inspections of these parks to ensure that the following conditions are met and maintained. 
(1)  Fire hydrants shall be installed so that no mobile home space will be over three hundred (300) feet from a fire hydrant setting on at least a six-inch water main, and that no vacation travel trailer space shall be over three hundred (300) feet from a fire hydrant setting on at least a six-inch water main. 
(2)  There shall not be any storage under a mobile home or a vacation travel trailer. 
(3)  Fences around mobile homes shall not be over thirty-six (36) inches in height across the front of the space. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 9, § 11 [Ord. No. 71-7, § 2, 3-22-71])  
Chapter 18 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to define and abate nuisances, § 18. 
Cross reference— Animals, Ch. 6; health and human services, Ch. 13; certain junkyards declared nuisance, § 15-27; old refrigerators and iceboxes, § 16-27; solid waste, Ch. 24. 
State Law reference— Authority of home rule municipalities to define and abate nuisances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 217.041 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this article I through IV, the following words, terms, and phrases shall be defined as follows: 
Abandoned shall mean to cease the care or maintenance thereof, or to intentionally leave behind. 
Abate shall mean to eliminate or cure by removal, repair, rehabilitation, or demolition. 
Approved receptacle shall mean a container that is composed of durable material and designed to prevent the discharge of its contents and to make its contents inaccessible to animals, vermin, or other pests. 
Bar ditch shall mean a depression along the side of a road that is intended to convey storm water from the roadway. 
Brush shall mean any low woody vegetation, dense undergrowth, decaying scrub vegetation or the dead remains of such. 
Building shall mean a structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of a person, chattel, machine, equipment, or other movable property. 
Building official shall mean the building official charged with administration of this chapter or his duly authorized representative. 
Code enforcement director shall mean the director of code enforcement charged with enforcement of this chapter or his duly authorized representative. 
Easement, for the purpose of this chapter, shall mean a grant by a property owner to the public or other entity for the use of a defined strip of land, for such purpose as the installation, maintenance, and/or repair of utility lines, or other public services whose ownership and care of the land encompassed by such easement is maintained by the property owner. 
Fill dirt shall mean soil, gravel, rock, brick, concrete, mortar or other similar material, brought to property, in accordance with chapters 12, 26 and 32 of this code, to solidify the ground's foundation or increase elevation. 
Junk shall mean used iron, metal, furniture, tires, appliances, and other similar items openly stored, discarded, or abandoned on property or premises. 
Litter shall mean any garbage or rubbish as defined in section 24-26 and herein, and all other waste material which creates a nuisance or potential danger to public health, safety, and welfare if not deposited in an approved receptacle. 
Occupant shall mean any person living or sleeping in a building or having possession of a space within a building. 
Open storage shall mean the open storage or placement of an item on any premise or property which is not entirely enclosed by a building or approved screening device. 
Owner shall mean any person, agent, firm, partnership, corporation, association, family, group, or owner's agent. It also includes the singular and plural. 
Person shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association, family, group, occupant, owner's agent, lessee, renter, or tenant. It also includes the singular and plural. 
Premises shall mean a lot, plot, or parcel of land including the buildings or structures thereon. The term includes a yard, ground, walk, driveway, fence, porch, steps, or other structures appurtenant to the property. 
Property shall mean any premise, personal or real property. 
Public nuisance shall mean the allowance of, or the maintaining of, an unlawful condition, act, or use of any property or premise affecting the public's life, health, safety, or general welfare within the city limits. 
Public place, property, or right-of-way shall mean any place to which the public or substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, alleys, parkways, sidewalks, highways and common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops. 
Refuse shall mean all solid waste (except body waste), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, and solid market and industrial wastes. 
Top soil shall mean the top layer of soil that is removed when a lot is graded or prepared for construction. 
Weeds shall mean any herbage or vegetation, but excludes cultivated shrubs, bushes, trees, flowers, and crops. 
(Ord. No. 00-78, § I, 10-24-00; Ord. No. 06-36, § I, 3-28-06; Ord. No. 07-093, § I, 10-16-07; Ord. No. 13-038, § I, 5-14-13) 
Cross reference— Solid waste, Ch. 24. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to prohibit conditions, V.A.C.S. art. 4436.  
Secs. 18-2—18-10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 18-11. - Declaration of public nuisance. 
A person shall not cause, permit, or allow a public nuisance under this chapter on any lot or parcel of land, premise, or any public place within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 00-78, § I, 10-24-00)  
Secs. 18-12-18-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SPECIFIC NUISANCES 
 
Sec. 18-21. - High weeds, grass, or brush. 
A.  Generally: It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee, occupant, or person in control of any lot, parcel of land, or premise within the city limits to allow the accumulation of high weeds, grass, or brush to exist in excess of the standards provided herein. Such violation is considered a health and fire hazard and, as such, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
B.  Height limitations. 
1.  Property two (2) acres or less. Any accumulation of weeds, grass, or brush on any lot, parcel of land, or premise two (2) acres or less shall not exceed a height of more than twelve (12) inches. 
2.  Property over two (2) acres. Any accumulation of weeds, grass, or brush on any property of more than two (2) acres shall not exceed a height of more than twelve (12) inches within fifty (50) feet adjacent to and along any dedicated public street or right-of-way or adjacent to any lot that is occupied by a residence or business. Any accumulation of weeds, grass, or brush on the remaining area of the property shall not exceed a height of more than forty-eight (48) inches. a. Exception to 2: Paragraph 2 above shall not apply to agriculturally zoned property or property within the city limits for which a current agricultural exemption is filed with Bell County. 
C.  Property adjoining public rights-of-way. 
1.  Except as provided in paragraph 2 below, any private property adjoining a public right-of-way within the city including that which is between the sidewalk and the curb must be maintained by the owner, occupant, lessee, or person in control of such adjoining private property. Any growth of weeds and grass shall not exceed twelve (12) inches in height, and all brush must be cleared from such right-of-way. This requirement does not apply to right-of-way behind any private property that has a rear property line adjacent to a street classified as an arterial or collector in the city's thoroughfare plan. 
2.  The city shall maintain all bar ditches adjoining a public right-of-way within the city limits. 
D.  This section shall apply to property with weeds and grass but not property with slopes greater than 3 feet rise per 1 foot run of lot, or other terrain features that inhibit mowing or development, and which will not create a fire or health hazard if left in their natural state. 
E.  This section shall not apply to those portions of property that are wetlands as defined and regulated in chapter 32. 
(Ord. No. 00-78, § I, 10-24-00; Ord. No. 06-36, § I, 3-28-06; Ord. No. 13-038, § I, 5-14-13)  
Sec. 18-22. - Dangerous weeds over 48 inches high. 
A.  The city may abate, without notice, weeds that have grown higher than 48 inches and are an immediate danger to the life, health, or safety of any person. After such abatement, notice shall be given as follows: 
1.  Not later than the 10 th day after the date the city abates weeds under this section, the city shall give notice to the property owner in the manner required by section 18-42. 
a.  The notice shall contain: 
(i)  an identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the property; 
(ii)  a description of the violation(s) of the ordinance that occurred on the property; 
(iii)  a statement that the city abated the weeds; and 
(iv)  an explanation of the property owner's right to request an administrative hearing about the city's abatement of the weeds. 
b.  The city shall conduct an administrative hearing before the building official on the abatement of weeds under this section if, not later than the 30th day after the date of the abatement of the weeds, the property owner files with the building official a written request for a hearing. 
c.  An administrative hearing conducted under this section shall be conducted not later than the 20 th day after the date a request for a hearing is filed. The owner may testify or present any witnesses or written information relating to the city's abatement of the weeds. 
d.  The city may assess expenses and create liens under this section as it assesses expenses and creates liens under sections 18-44 and 18-45. 
e.  The authority granted by this section is in addition to the authority in article IV of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 00-78, § I, 10-24-00; Ord. No. 06-36, § I, 3-28-06; Ord. No. 07-093, § I, 10-16-07; Ord. No. 13-038, § I, 5-14-13) 
State Law reference— Additional authority to abate dangerous weeds, V.T.C.A., Health & Safety Code, § 342.008.  
Sec. 18-23. - Accumulation of litter, trash, or rubbish. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee, occupant, or person in control of any lot, parcel of land, or premise within the city limits to allow the accumulation of any litter, trash, or rubbish. All litter shall be kept in an approved receptacle designed to contain litter in a manner so as not to allow it to be blown, carried, or deposited by the wind upon any private or public property or any right-of-way. Such violation is considered a health and fire hazard and, as such, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 00-78, § I, 10-24-00) 
State Law reference— Municipal power concerning filth, carrion, and other unwholesome matter, V.T.C.A., Health & Safety Code, § 342.003.  
Sec. 18-24. - Littering by depositing or dumping. 
No person shall throw, deposit, drop, sweep, or place any litter or junk into or on any private or public property, right-of-way, street, sidewalk, or other place. All litter shall be disposed of in an approved receptacle. 
(Ord. No. 00-78, § I, 10-24-00; Ord. No. 06-36, § I, 3-28-06)  
Sec. 18-25. - Allowing stagnant water to accumulate. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee, occupant, or person in control of any lot, parcel of land, or premise within the city limits to allow holes, containers, or other various receptacles that contain stagnant water that may produce disease to exist on such lot, parcel of land, or premises. The code enforcement director may require an inspection of the premises and may require the filling, draining, and regulating of the unsanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. 00-78, § I, 10-24-00; Ord. No. 06-36, § I, 3-28-06) 
State Law reference— Municipal power concerning stagnant water and other unsanitary conditions, V.T.C.A., Health & Safety Code, § 342.001.  
Sec. 18-26. - Allowing unsanitary conditions. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee, occupant, or person in control of any lot, parcel of land, or premise within the city limits to allow any unwholesome unsanitary condition that may produce disease to exist on such lot, parcel of land, or premise. The code enforcement director may require an inspection of the premises and may require the filling, draining, and regulating of the unsanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. 00-78, § I, 10-24-00; Ord. No. 06-36, § I, 3-28-06) 
State Law reference— Municipal power concerning stagnant water and other unsanitary conditions, V.T.C.A., Health & Safety Code, § 342.001.  
Sec. 18-27. - Care of premises. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee, occupant, or person in control of any lot, parcel of land, or premise within the city limits to utilize such property for the open storage of any of the following: 
1.  Abandoned vehicles. Abandoned vehicles such as motor or non-motorized vehicles, boats, trailers, and similar items and parts thereof. 
2.  Abandoned appliances. Abandoned appliances and parts thereof. 
3.  Supplies and materials. The open storage of building materials, building rubbish, tires, or any accumulation of any other product or supplies. 
(a)  Note: It is not the intent of this section to prohibit the storage of building materials associated with a city-permitted construction project. 
4.  Vegetation. The open storage of dead trees, limbs, brush, or weeds. 
B.  It shall be the duty and responsibility of every such owner, lessee, occupant, or person in control of any lot, parcel of land, or premise to keep such property clean and to prevent a public nuisance. 
C.  Exception: Any of the above-listed items that are screened from public view by the methods stated in sections 31-250 or 31-280 (screening devices), or section 8-512 (landscaped buffer screening devices), and which will not cause health or sanitary nuisances are exempt. 
(Ord. No. 00-78, § I, 10-24-00; Ord. No. 06-36, § I, 3-28-06)  
Sec. 18-28. - Fill dirt. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee, occupant or person in control of any lot, parcel of land, or premise within the city limits to accumulate fill dirt visible from any public place unless the fill dirt is leveled at least once every six (6) months. 
B.  This section does not apply to top soil and gravel stock piled, stored for sale, lawfully permitted for development or state permitted material storage properties. 
C.  Soil, gravel, rock, brick, concrete, mortar and other similar material brought in for a purpose other than to solidify the ground's foundation or increase elevation is not allowed. 
D.  Requirements in chapters 12, 26 and 32 must be met before the placement of fill dirt materials. 
(Ord. No. 06-36, § I, 3-28-06; Ord. No. 13-038, § I, 5-14-13)  
Secs. 18-29-18-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - NOTICE, REMEDIES, AND PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 18-41. - Notice of violation. 
A.  Except as provided in paragraph B, any owner, lessee, occupant, or person in control of any lot, parcel of land, or premise within the city limits having on it any of the nuisances described in articles I through III shall be required to remove, abate, or cure such nuisance within seven (7) days from the date of the written notice from the code enforcement director. 
B.  Any owner, lessee, occupant, or person in control of any lot, parcel of land, or premise within the city limits having on it an accumulation of fill dirt as described in section 18-28 shall be required to remove, abate, or cure such nuisance within six (6) months from the date of the written notice from the code enforcement director. 
C.  Any owner, lessee, occupant, or person in control of any lot, parcel of land, or premise who receives written notice of a violation described in this section who cannot remove, abate or cure the nuisance because of weather or who requires additional time to arrange a contractor to remove, abate or cure the nuisance may be given an extension of time, not to exceed seven (7) days, if contact is made with the city's code enforcement division within seven (7) days from the date of the notice. 
(Ord. No. 00-78, § I, 10-24-00; Ord. No. 06-36, § I, 3-28-06; Ord. No. 07-093, § I, 10-16-07)  
Sec. 18-42. - Notice to property owner and others. 
A.  Once notice has been provided as required in section 18-41 above, the city may remove, abate, or cure such nuisance after the period prescribed in section 18-41, and charge all expenses incurred by the city, including administrative fees, to such owner as prescribed in section 18-46. Such notice shall be given to the property owner as follows: 
1.  personally to the owner in writing; or 
2.  by letter (regular mail) addressed to the owner at the owner's address as recorded in the appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the property is located; or 
3.  if personal service cannot be obtained: 
a.  by publication at least once; or 
b.  by posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the violation relates; or 
c.  by posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the violation relates, if the property contains no buildings. 
B.  A notice of a violation in section 18-41 may also be sent by letter (regular mail) to any lessee, occupant or person in control of the property as applicable. 
C.  In addition to the notice requirements of paragraph A of this section, notice for high weeds, grass or brush in violation of section 18-21 shall be sent to the lienholder of record by letter (regular mail) addressed to the lienholder at the lienholder's address as recorded in the appraisal district records in which the property is located, if lienholder information is available. 
D.  If the city mails a notice to a property owner, lessee, occupant or person in control of the property in accordance with this section, and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as "refused" or "unclaimed," the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered as delivered. 
(Ord. No. 00-78, § I, 10-24-00; Ord. No. 06-36, § I, 3-28-06) 
State Law reference— Work or improvements by municipality; notice, V.T.C.A., Health & Safety Code, § 342.006.  
Sec. 18-43. - Repeat of same violation. 
The city may inform the owner by regular mail and a posting on the property that if the owner commits another violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety on or before the first anniversary (12 months) of the date of notice, the city without further notice may correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess the expense against the property. If a violation covered by a notice under this subsection occurs within the one-year period, and the city has not been informed in writing by the owner of an ownership change, then the city without notice may take any action permitted by section 18-46 below. 
(Ord. No. 00-78, § I, 10-24-00) 
State Law reference— Work or improvements by municipality; notice, V.T.C.A., Health & Safety Code, § 342.006.  
Sec. 18-44. - City authorized to abate. 
If the owner of any lot, parcel of land, premise, or any other property fails to comply with the notice given by sections 18-42 and/or 18-43 above, within the period prescribed by section 18-41 for notice, the city may enter the property and remove, abate, or cure such nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 00-78, § I, 10-24-00; Ord. No. 06-36, § I, 3-28-06) 
State Law reference— Work or improvements by municipality; notice, V.T.C.A., Health & Safety Code, § 342.006.  
Sec. 18-45. - Same-lien on property. 
If the city abates a nuisance under articles I through III, the owner of such property shall be notified by regular mail of the expenses thereof. If such charges are not paid within thirty (30) days of the date of such notice, the code enforcement director shall cause to be filed with the county clerk documentation of such expenses sufficient to establish a lien against the property on which the nuisance was abated. 
(Ord. No. 00-78, § I, 10-24-00; Ord. No. 06-36, § I, 3-28-06) 
State Law reference— Assessment of expenses, lien, V.T.C.A., Health & Safety Code, § 342.007.  
Sec. 18-46. - Remedies, expenses, and citation. 
Any person who violates a section in articles I through III shall be subject either to abatement restitution or penal fine(s) or both, or any other relief provided by law. 
A.  Abatement restitution: Any property owner notified by the provisions of sections 18-42 and 18-43 above of a violation of article III and who fails to abate such nuisance within the time specified shall be required to pay to the city all expenses incurred to abate the nuisance per sections 18-44 and 18-45, plus an administrative fee as provided in the adopted fee schedule. 
B.  Penal fine: The city may issue a citation or summons to any owner, lessee, occupant, or person in charge of property within the city limits who violates an ordinance in articles I through III. An individual or legal entity receiving a citation or summons who is convicted of violating any provision of article III of this chapter upon property located within any single family detached dwelling zoned area of the city shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). A second conviction within a twelve (12) month period shall be punishable by a fine not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). A third or subsequent conviction within a twelve (12) month period shall be punishable by a fine not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Such remedy under this section is in addition to the abatement restitution or any other relief provided by law. 
An individual or legal entity receiving a citation or summons who is convicted of violating any provision of article III of this chapter upon property located within any non-single family detached dwelling zoned area of the city shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). A second conviction within a twelve (12) month period shall be punishable by a fine not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). A third or subsequent conviction within a twelve (12) month period shall be punishable by a fine not less than seven hundred-fifty dollars ($750.00) or more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Such remedy under this section is in addition to the abatement restitution or any other relief provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 00-78, § I, 10-24-00; Ord. No. 06-36, § I, 3-28-06; Ord. No. 13-033, § I, 4-23-13; Ord. No. 19-047 , § IX, 9-17-19)  
Sec. 18-47. - Immediate citation for depositing or dumping. 
The code enforcement director or a police officer shall immediately issue a citation or summons to any person observed littering, as defined in section 18-24. 
(Ord. No. 00-78, § I, 10-24-00; Ord. No. 06-36, § I, 3-28-06) 
State Law reference— Violation of ordinance, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.005.  
Secs. 18-48-18-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - JUNK VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic, Ch. 28. 
State Law reference— Abandoned, junked, etc., vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.071E et seq. 
 
Sec. 18-51. - Definitions. 
Whenever the following terms are used in this article, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
Antique vehicle shall mean a passenger car or truck that is at least twenty-five (25) years old. 
Code enforcement director shall mean the director of code enforcement or his designee. 
Demolisher shall mean a person whose business is to convert a motor vehicle into processed scrap or scrap metal or to otherwise wreck or dismantle a motor vehicle. 
Junked vehicle shall mean a vehicle that is self-propelled and 
(1)  Displays an expired license plate or invalid motor vehicle inspection certificate or does not display a license plate or motor vehicle inspection certificate; and 
(2)  Is 
(A)  Wrecked, dismantled, or partially dismantled, or discarded; or 
(B)  Is inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than: 
(i)  Seventy-two (72) consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or 
(ii)  Thirty (30) consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property. 
Motor vehicle collector shall mean a person who owns one or more antique or special interest vehicles and acquires, collects, or disposes of an antique or special interest vehicle or part of them for personal use to restore and preserve an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest. 
Special interest vehicle shall mean a motor vehicle of any age that has not been altered or modified from original manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by hobbyists. 
(Ord. No. 00-78, § I, 10-24-00; Ord. No. 06-36, § I, 3-28-06; Ord. No. 07-093, § I, 10-16-07; Ord. No. 11-094, § I, 10-11-11) 
State Law reference— Definitions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.071E.  
Sec. 18-52. - Declaration of nuisance. 
A junked vehicle, including a part of a junk vehicle, that is visible at any time of the year from a public place or public right-of-way: 
A.  Is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the public; 
B.  Tends to reduce the value of private property; 
C.  Invites vandalism; 
D.  Creates a fire hazard; 
E.  Is an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors; 
F.  Produces urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the city; and 
G.  Is a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 00-78, § I, 10-24-00; Ord. No. 06-36, § I, 3-28-06) 
State Law reference— Junked vehicle declared to be a public nuisance, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.072E.  
Sec. 18-53. - Exception. 
The following are exempt from the provisions of this article: 
A.  A vehicle or vehicle part that is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner and is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or 
B.  A vehicle or vehicle part that is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, or that is an antique or special interest vehicle stored by a motor vehicle collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle and the outdoor storage area are: 
1.  Maintained in an orderly manner; 
2.  That do not constitute a health hazard; and 
3.  Are screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means, including a fence, rapidly growing trees or shrubbery; or 
C.  A motor vehicle designed or altered for competitive racing, used for hunting or used for off-road activities that is stored on private property for not more than thirty (30) days, except, however, only one (1) such vehicle is allowed on the property at any one time. 
(Ord. No. 00-78, § I, 10-24-00; Ord. No. 06-36, § I, 3-28-06) 
State Law reference— Inapplicability of subchapter, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.077E.  
Sec. 18-54. - Abatement requirements. 
A.  The city shall abate and remove from private or public property or public right-of-way any junked vehicle or part of a junked vehicle which is a public nuisance. 
B.  Procedures to abate: 
1.  A public hearing as set forth in section 18-57 shall be required before removal of the public nuisance. 
2.  A junked vehicle shall not be allowed to be reconstructed or made operable after removal by the city. 
3.  Notice shall be sent to the Texas Department of Transportation no later than the fifth day of removal. 
C.  The municipal court may issue necessary orders to enforce the order from the building official to remove the public nuisance. 
D.  Procedures for abatement and removal of the public nuisance shall be administered by the code enforcement director, and he may enter private property to examine a public nuisance, to obtain information to identify the nuisance, and to remove or direct the removal of the nuisance. 
E.  Any person authorized by the city may enter private property to remove the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 00-78, § I, 10-24-00; Ord. No. 06-36, § I, 3-28-06; Ord. No. 07-093, § I, 10-16-07)  
Sec. 18-55. - Relocation of a junked vehicle. 
The relocation of a junked vehicle that is a public nuisance to another location within the city limits after a proceeding for the abatement and removal of the public nuisance has commenced has no effect on the proceeding if the junked vehicle constitutes a public nuisance at the new location. 
(Ord. No. 00-78, § I, 10-24-00) 
State Law reference— Authority to abate nuisance, procedures, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.074E.  
Sec. 18-56. - Notice to abate. 
A.  The procedures for the abatement and removal of a public nuisance under this article shall provide not less than ten (10) days notice of the nature of the violation and must be sent by certified mail with a five-day return requested or delivered by the United States Postal Service with signature confirmation service to: 
1.  The last known registered owner of the nuisance; 
2.  Each lien holder of record of the nuisance; and 
3.  The owner or occupant of: 
a.  The property on which the nuisance is located; or 
b.  If the nuisance is located in a public right-of-way, the property adjacent to the right-of-way. 
B.  The notice must state: 
1.  The nuisance must be abated and removed not later than the tenth (10 th ) day after the date on which the notice was mailed; and 
2.  Any request for a hearing must be made before the ten (10) day period expires. 
C.  If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the nuisance is unknown, notice may be placed on the nuisance or, if the owner is located, hand delivered. 
D.  If notice is returned undelivered, action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier than the eleventh (11 th ) day after the date of the return. 
(Ord. No. 00-78, § I, 10-24-00; Ord. No. 07-093, § I, 10-16-07) 
State Law reference— Notice, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.075E.  
Sec. 18-57. - Hearing. 
A.  If a person for whom notice was sent requests an administrative hearing not later than the date by which the nuisance must be abated and removed, such hearing shall be held before the building official not earlier than the eleventh (11th) day after the date of service of notice. 
B.  At the hearing the junked motor vehicle is presumed to be inoperable, unless demonstrated otherwise by the owner. 
C.  Any order requiring the removal of a vehicle or vehicle part must include the vehicle's description, identification number, and license number of the vehicle if the information is available at the location of the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 00-78, § I, 10-24-00; Ord. No. 06-36, § I, 3-28-06; Ord. No. 07-093, § I, 10-16-07) 
State Law reference— Hearing, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.076E.  
Sec. 18-58. - Voluntary abatement. 
If, within ten (10) days after receipt of notice to abate the nuisance as provided in this article, the owner of the vehicle shall give his written permission to the code enforcement director for the removal of the junked motor vehicle from the premises, the giving of such permission shall be considered compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 00-78, § I, 10-24-00; Ord. No. 06-36, § I, 3-28-06)  
Sec. 18-59. - Disposal of junked vehicles; remedies. 
A.  A junked vehicle or vehicle part shall be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard, motor vehicle demolisher, or any suitable site operated by the city for processing as scrap or salvage. 
B.  Any individual who fails to timely abate a nuisance may be required to pay the city restitution for the city's cost in removing, abating, or curing such nuisance, plus an administrative fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
C.  Any vehicle or vehicle part, after removal by this article, shall not be reconstructed or made operable. 
(Ord. No. 00-78, § I, 10-24-00) 
State Law reference— Junked vehicle disposal, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, Subchapter E, § 683.078.  
Sec. 18-60. - Obstructions to traffic. 
Nothing in this article shall affect a law or ordinance authorizing the immediate removal, as an obstruction to traffic, of a vehicle left on public property. 
(Ord. No. 00-78, § I, 10-24-00)  
Sec. 18-61. - Criminal penalties. 
A person who commits an offense under section 18-52 is, on conviction, subject to a fine not to exceed $200.00. On conviction, the court shall order removal and abatement of the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 00-78, § I, 10-24-00; Ord. No. 06-36, § I, 3-28-06)  
Secs. 18-62-18-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - GRAFFITI REMOVAL 
 
Sec. 18-81. - Findings. 
The city council finds and determines as follows: 
(1)  The existence of graffiti is directly linked to gang-related activities and therefore injurious to the health, safety and welfare of the general public and contributes directly, substantially and increasingly to the deterioration of neighborhoods; 
(2)  The immediate removal of graffiti is the most effective deterrent to its reoccurrence; and 
(3)  The abatement of graffiti will improve the general health, safety and welfare of the city, as well as the public image of the city. 
(Ord. No. 91-15, § I(10-7-1), 4-9-91)  
Sec. 18-82. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abatement shall mean the repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal of a public nuisance. 
Director shall mean the director of code enforcement or his designated representative. 
Graffiti shall mean the unauthorized application of paint, ink, chalk, dye or other similar substance, or other inscribed or engraved material on a public or private structure, building or surface within the city without the permission of the owner. 
Owner shall mean any person, firm or corporation having legal title to the property. 
Public nuisance shall mean anything injurious to health so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, which nuisance affects, at the same time, an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons; although the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon individuals may be unequal. 
Public right-of-way shall include any road, parkway, alley, sidewalk or other way. 
Real property shall mean any lot or parcel of land, including, but not limited to, an alley, sidewalk, or unimproved public easement abutting said lot or parcel of land. 
(Ord. No. 91-15, § I(10-7-2), 4-9-91; Ord. No. 06-36, § I, 3-28-06; Ord. No. 13-047, § I, 6-11-13)  
Sec. 18-83. - Declaration of public nuisance. 
The city council does hereby find and declare that graffiti on publicly or privately owned structures, building or surfaces within the city constitutes a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 91-15, § I(10-7-3), 4-9-91; Ord. No. 13-047, § I, 6-11-13)  
Sec. 18-84. - City offer to remove. 
(a)  Whenever graffiti is found to exist, the director shall inform the owner in writing that the city offers to remove the graffiti from the owner's property with no charge. The owner will be required to give written permission for removal and release the city and any contractor or volunteer from liability in the performance of the removal. The city's offer shall be given: 
(1)  personally to the owner in writing; 
(2)  by letter mailed regular first class mail, addressed to the property owner at the property owner's address as contained in the records of the appraisal district in which the property is located; 
(3)  by posting on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the offer relates; or 
(4)  by posting on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground of the property to which the offer relates. 
(b)  If the offer in subsection (a) above is mailed, it is presumed received by the owner five (5) calendar days following the date the offer is mailed. 
(c)  The owner has seven (7) days from the date of the offer to accept the offer in writing. Upon acceptance, the city may enter the property and remove the graffiti. Painting or repair of the structure, building or surface shall be limited to the area where the graffiti or other inscribed material is located. 
(d)  Failure of the owner to accept the city's offer in writing in a timely manner shall constitute a refusal. 
(Ord. No. 91-15, § I(10-7-4), 4-9-91; Ord. No. 07-093, § I, 10-16-07; Ord. No. 13-047, § I, 6-11-13)  
Sec. 18-85. - Notice to remove graffiti. 
(a)  If the property owner refuses the offer made by the city pursuant to section 18-84, the director will serve the property owner with written notice requiring the owner to remove the graffiti within fifteen (15) calendar days. The notice shall be given: 
(1)  personally to the owner in writing; 
(2)  by letter sent by certified mail, addressed to the property owner at the property owner's address as contained in the records of the appraisal district in which the property is located; or 
(3)  if service cannot be obtained under subsection (1) or (2) above: 
a.  by publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation for the city; 
b.  by posting notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the notice relates; or 
c.  by posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the notice relates. 
(b)  If the offer in subsection (a) above is mailed, it is presumed received by the owner five (5) calendar days following the date the offer is mailed. If the United States Postal Service returns the notice as "refused" or "unclaimed," the validity of the notice is not affected and the notice is considered as delivered. 
(Ord. No. 91-15, § I(10-7-5), 4-9-91; Ord. No. 07-093, § I, 10-16-07; Ord. No. 13-047, § I, 6-11-13)  
Sec. 18-86. - Property Owner Responsibility. 
(a)  It shall be an offense for any person who is the owner of property to permit graffiti on the property after: 
(1)  receiving the city's offer to remove the graffiti from the property free of charge; 
(2)  refusing the city's offer; and 
(3)  failing to remove the graffiti on or before the fifteenth (15 th ) day after receiving the notice described in section 18-85. 
(b)  An owner of property is not required to comply with the requirements of this section if: 
(1)  the graffiti is located on transportation infrastructure; and 
(2)  the removal of the graffiti would create a hazard for the person performing the removal. 
(Ord. No. 91-15, § I(10-7-6), 4-9-91; Ord. No. 06-36, § I, 3-28-06; Ord. No. 07-093, § I, 10-16-07; Ord. No. 13-047, § I, 6-11-13)  
Sec. 18-87. - Failure to abate graffiti. 
If the graffiti is not removed by the owner within fifteen (15) calendar days after the date the notice is received, the city may, without further notice, make entry upon the property and remove the graffiti. Painting or repair of the structure, building or surface shall be limited to the area where the graffiti or other inscribed material is located. No person shall obstruct, impede, or interfere with any officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the city whenever said person is engaged in the work of abatement, pursuant to the provisions of this article, or is performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work as authorized or directed pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 13-047, § I, 6-11-13)  
Sec. 18-88. - Assessment of expenses and filing of liens. 
(a)  The city may assess the expenses of removal incurred by the city for the abatement of graffiti pursuant to section 18-87 against the real property on which the graffiti abatement was completed. 
(b)  To obtain a lien against the property for expenses incurred under section 18-87, the city must file a statement of expenses with the county clerk for Bell County. The statement of expenses must contain: 
(1)  the name of the property owner, if known; 
(2)  the legal description of the property; and 
(3)  the amount of the expenses incurred under section 18-87. 
(c)  A lien described in subsection (b) above attaches to the property on the date on which the statement of expenses is filed in the real property records of Bell County and is subordinate to: 
(1)  any previously recorded liens; and 
(2)  the rights of a purchaser or lender for value who acquire an interest in the property subject to the lien before the statement of expenses is filed. 
(Ord. No. 13-047, § I, 6-11-13)  
Sec. 18-89. - Performance of abatement. 
(a)  Abatement of graffiti as a public nuisance may, in the discretion of the director, be performed by city employees or by a contractor retained pursuant to the provisions of this code, the city charter or other applicable law. 
(b)  The city may utilize the services of volunteer groups or county probationers ordered to perform community service hours in abating graffiti upon: 
(1)  Public structures; or 
(2)  Private property only after obtaining the written consent of the owner of said property. 
(Ord. No. 91-15, § I(10-7-7), 4-9-91)  
Sec. 18-90. - Civil remedies available. 
Nothing in this article shall preclude the abatement of graffiti by the city through civil process by means of restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction, or in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 91-15, § I(10-7-8), 4-9-91)  
Sec. 18-91. - Prohibition of certain pressurized paint container sales or purchases. 
(a)  It shall constitute an offense for any person to knowingly or intentionally sell, exchange, give or loan, or knowingly or intentionally cause or permit to be sold, exchanged, given or loaned, any pressurized can containing paint, dye or a similar substance to anyone knowing that the person who receives the pressurized container intends to use it to place graffiti upon permanent structures within the city. 
(b)  It shall constitute an offense for anyone to purchase any pressurized can containing paint, dye or a similar substance with the intent of using said substance to place graffiti upon permanent structures within the city. 
(Ord. No. 91-15, § I(10-7-9), 4-9-91)  
Sec. 18-92. - Possession of pressurized paint containers. 
It shall constitute an offense for any person to have in his possession any pressurized can containing paint, dye or a similar substance while upon any public highway, street, alley, easement, right-of-way or other public place, whether said person is or is not in any automobile, vehicle or other conveyance, with the intent of using said substance to place graffiti upon permanent structures within the city. 
(Ord. No. 91-15, § I(10-7-10), 4-9-91)  
Sec. 18-93. - Possession of pressurized paint containers in public parks and buildings. 
It shall constitute an offense for any person to have in his possession any pressurized can containing paint, dye or a similar substance while in any public park, playground, swimming pool, recreational facility or other such public place owned, operated or managed by the city, except authorized employees of the city or an individual or authorized employee of an individual or company under contract with the city. 
(Ord. No. 91-15, § I(10-7-11), 4-9-91)  
Sec. 18-94. - Store display. 
It shall constitute an offense for any person licensed to operate a business in the city to display: 
(1)  Felt tip pens, markers or the like with a writing tip larger than one-quarter (1/4) inch in diameter; 
(2)  Etching materials capable of making markings, scratching, etc., on plate glass; or 
(3)  Aerosol spray cans containing paint, dye or similar substances, which container displays are not otherwise regulated by state or federal law, for sale from any self-service or self-help counter that is not under constant supervision of store personnel. 
(Ord. No. 91-15, § I(10-7-12), 4-9-91; Ord. No. 07-093, § I, 10-16-07)  
Sec. 18-95. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 91-15, § I(10-7-13), 4-9-91)  
Chapter 19 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— General authority relative to parks, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 331.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 19-1. - Penalty. 
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-8.  
Sec. 19-2. - Unauthorized vehicles on municipal golf course; penalty. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle, other than city owned and/or operated vehicles, on the city municipal golf course without special permission to do so from the city. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 7, art. 12, § 15 [Ord. No. 69-53, §§ 1, 2, 10-27-69])  
Secs. 19-3—19-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PARK RULES 
 
Sec. 19-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bicycle shall mean every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels, either of which is more than fourteen (14) inches in diameter. 
Park shall mean a park, playground, baseball field, beach, hike and bike trail, dog park or recreation center within the city, if owned or used by the city. 
Superintendent shall mean the person immediately in charge of any park area and its activities, to whom all park attendants of such area are responsible. 
Vehicle shall mean any wheeled conveyance, whether motor-powered, animal-drawn or self-propelled. This term shall include any trailer in tow of any size, kind or description. This term shall not include baby carriages and vehicles in the service of the city. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 11, art. 5, § 1 [Ord. No. 79-23, § 1, 5-22-79]; Ord. No. 08-106, § 1, 12-16-08; Ord. No. 17-005 , § I, 1-24-17) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 19-27. - Penalty. 
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-8.  
Sec. 19-28. - Injury to park property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to: 
(1)  Dig or remove any sand, soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs or plants, down timber or other wood or materials, or make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or other means. 
(2)  Attach any rope, wire or other contrivance to any tree or plant. 
(3)  Dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas, or in any other way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 11, art. 5, § 2 [Ord. No. 79-23, § 2, 5-22-79])  
Sec. 19-29. - Littering. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to dump, deposit or leave on any park grounds, bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse or other trash, except in the containers provided. It shall be unlawful for any person to place such refuse or trash in any waters in or contiguous to any park. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 11, art. 5, § 3 [Ord. No. 79-23, § 3, 5-22-79])  
Sec. 19-30. - Traffic. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to: 
(1)  Violate any of the traffic laws of the state or any of the traffic ordinances of the city. Such statutes and ordinances shall apply in parks without regard to whether the violation occurs on a public street, if the violation, by its nature, could be committed in a place other than a public street. 
(2)  Fail to obey all traffic officers, such persons being hereby authorized and instructed to direct traffic whenever and wherever needed in parks and on the highways, streets or roads immediately adjacent thereto in accordance with the provisions of this section and such supplementary regulations as may be issued by the city council. 
(3)  Fail to obey any traffic-control device indicating speed, direction of travel, caution, stopping, standing, parking or other instructions designed to promote traffic-control safety. 
(4)  Drive or operate a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of the speed limit posted. 
(5)  Drive any vehicle on any area except the paved park roads or parking areas, or such other areas as may on occasion be specifically designated as temporary parking areas by the superintendent. 
(6)  Park a vehicle in other than an established or designated parking area, in accordance with the posted direction or under the instructions of any attendant who may be present. 
(7)  Ride a bicycle on any part of a park other than a paved vehicle road or path designated for that purpose. However, a bicyclist shall be permitted to wheel or push a bicycle by hand over any grassy area or wooded trails or any other paved areas reserved for pedestrian use. 
(8)  Ride a bicycle other than as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable. It shall be unlawful for persons to ride bicycles on a roadway in any configuration other than single file. Bicyclists shall at all times operate their machines with reasonable regard to the safety of others, signal all turns and pass to the right of any vehicle they may be meeting. 
(9)  Carry more persons on a bicycle at one (1) time than the number for which it is designated and equipped. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 11, art. 5, § 4 [Ord. No. 79-23, § 4, 5-22-79])  
Sec. 19-31. - Recreational activities. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in a park to: 
(1)  Cook or build a fire at other than designated areas; 
(2)  Use amplified sound equipment other than portable radios, car tape decks, radios or stereo receivers unless the person has obtained a permit from the parks and recreation department, or play portable radios, car tape decks, radios or stereo receivers at a volume calculated to disturb other persons of normal sensibilities in the park; 
(3)  Swim in any stream or body of water other than a swimming pool; 
(4)  Wash or perform any routine maintenance or repairs on motor vehicles except in emergency situations; 
(5)  Cut or remove any wood from a park area; 
(6)  Engage in any commercial activity or any activity for the purpose of earning money unless authorized by permit from the city; 
(7)  Possess glass containers of any kind; 
(8)  (a)  Bring, take, carry, or transport any animal to any public event, any sporting field such as, but not limited to, baseball, softball or soccer field, recreational centers, city sponsored outdoor concerts, or any organized sporting or recreational event that is held on a playing field. It is not a defense that the animal was restrained by a leash, chain, rope, cage, or any other means. 
(b)  Paragraph (a) above shall not apply to dogs or any other animals that are used as assistance animals. 
(c)  Animals are allowed in city parks that do not have a sporting or recreational field if the animal is under the complete control of the owner or caretaker by means of a leash, cord, chain, or other means. 
(d)  The restrictions of this subsection shall not apply to dogs within the fenced area of a dog park. 
(9)  Possess or discharge pellet guns, BB guns or firearms of any kind; 
(10)  Leave a picnic area before the fire is completely extinguished and before all trash in the nature of boxes, paper, cans, bottles, garbage and other refuse is placed in a trash receptacle, if provided. If no such trash receptacles are available, it shall be unlawful to fail to carry away trash and refuse from the park area to be properly disposed of elsewhere by the picnicker; 
(11)  Camp in any area of a park other than those designated as camp areas, which camp areas shall be provided by the superintendent and used by groups of persons under adequate supervision. It shall be unlawful for any person to set up tents, shacks or any other temporary shelter with the purpose of camping overnight, or leave in a park any movable structure or special vehicle to be used or that could be used for such purpose, such as a house trailer, camp trailer, camp wagon or the like unless such person has obtained a permit for overnight camping from the parks and recreation department; 
(12)  Ride a horse except on designated bridle paths; where such riding is permitted, it shall be unlawful to ride other than a thoroughly broken and properly trained horse or to allow such horse to graze or otherwise go unattended. 
(13)  Possess or consume any alcoholic beverage. 
(14)  Disregard any official signage posted in a park by city officials. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 11, art. 5, § 5 [Ord. No. 79-23, § 5, 5-22-79; Ord. No. 81-16, 5-12-81]; Ord. No. 00-84, § I, 11-14-00; Ord. No. 04-98, § I, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 17-005 , § I, 1-24-17)  
Sec. 19-32. - Closing hours. 
All public parks located within the city that are owned by the city shall be closed between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. Anyone found in or around the parks between those hours may be cited by the proper law enforcement officers. This section shall not apply to city-sanctioned recreational functions that begin before or extend into hours when the park is closed. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 11, art. 5, § 6 [Ord. No. 79-23, § 6, 5-22-79]; Ord. No. 08-106, § 1, 12-16-08)  
Sec. 19-33. - Pools. 
All city pools will close at 8:00 p.m. unless a permit for a function is issued by the parks and recreation department. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 11, art. 5, § 7 [Ord. No. 79-23, § 7, 5-22-79])  
Sec. 19-34. - Baseball diamonds. 
All baseball diamonds shall be under control of the city and shall not be used unless a permit is obtained from the parks and recreation department. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 11, art. 5, § 8 [Ord. No. 79-23, § 8, 5-22-79])  
Sec. 19-35. - Covered pavilions. 
Covered pavilions may be reserved for use by groups by obtaining a permit from the parks and recreation department. It shall be unlawful for any person not having a permit to refuse to leave a pavilion after being asked to leave by a person having a permit. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 11, art. 5, § 9 [Ord. No. 79-23, § 9, 5-22-79])  
Sec. 19-36. - Park closing; denial of permit, appeal. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to close any park or cancel all activities therein by order of the director of community services or the chief of police or their designees. 
(b)  The city also reserves the right to refuse to issue permits for any activities requiring a permit. Any person aggrieved by the refusal of a permit may appeal such refusal to the city council by filing a written appeal with the city manager within five (5) days of the refusal. The city council shall hold a hearing on such appeal within ten (10) days of its filing, and the decision of the council shall be final. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 11, art. 5, § 10 [Ord. No. 79-23, § 10, 5-22-79])  
Secs. 19-37—19-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RECREATION SERVICES ADVISORY BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 20-016 , § I, adopted April 14, 2020, in effect repealed art. III, §§ 19-41—19-44, in its entirety and enacted a new art. III, §§ 19-41 and 19-42, as set out herein. The former article pertained to tree care and derived from Ord. No. 07-026, § I, adopted March 13, 2007; and Ord. No. 08-100, § I, adopted December 9, 2008. 
 
Sec. 19-41. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Words not specifically defined shall have the meanings given in Webster's Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary, as revised. 
Board shall mean the recreation services advisory board. 
Park trees shall mean any trees, shrubs, brushes and all woody vegetation in city parks, and in all areas owned by the city and to which the public has access. 
Public trees shall mean any trees, shrubs, and all woody vegetation on city parks or city-owned property and rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 20-016 , § I, 4-14-20)  
Sec. 19-42. - Establishment of a recreation services advisory board. 
(a)  Board membership. The city council hereby creates an advisory board known as the "recreation services advisory board," hereinafter referred to as the "board." The board shall consist of seven (7) members approved by the city council. Members of the board will serve without compensation. 
(b)  Term of office. Each member shall serve terms that are staggered so the continuity among the board will be maintained. Position 1, 3, 5, 7 (odd numbered members) will serve an initial one-year term, followed by subsequent two-year terms. Positions 2, 4, 6 (even numbered members) will serve a two-year term of service. 
(c)  Meetings. The board shall meet a minimum of four (4) times each year. The executive director of recreation services or the chair of the board may schedule additional meetings as needed. 
(d)  Officers. The board shall elect a chairperson and a vice-chairperson from its own membership who shall serve for a one-year term. 
(e)  Duties. The duties of the board shall include: 
The board shall, when tasked by the city council, act in an advisory capacity to the city council with advice and recommendations on policies, rules, programs and regulations relating to the administration of the public park and recreation facilities. The board shall provide advisory oversight of public playgrounds, athletic fields, walking trails, recreation centers/facilities, golf course, cemetery, trees and tree care and other facilities and activities on any of the properties owned or controlled by the city. 
A staff liaison shall be assigned to the board through the executive director of recreation services to assist the appointed secretary on all business and to include any/all communication from the recreation services department and the board. 
(Ord. No. 20-016 , § I, 4-14-20)  
Chapter 20 - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, ETC.[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 15. 
State Law reference— Authority to enforce ordinances necessary to protect and preserve health, property, good government and order, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.004; general authority to license, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.075. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 20-1—20-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ITINERANT PEDDLERS, MERCHANTS, ETC.  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 20-26. - Definition. 
For purposes of this article, the term "itinerant vendor, merchant, or peddler" is defined as any person selling goods, wares or merchandise who does not have a fixed place of business in a permanent building in the city which is either owned by such vendor or under lease to such vendor for a period of at least one hundred eighty (180) days, and any vendor who conducts a business from any truck, trailer, mobile home, van or any other type of structure or vehicle capable of being transported on the streets and highways of the city or who goes from door to door or place to place selling or soliciting orders for goods, wares or merchandise. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 2, § 1 [Ord. No. 82-26, § 1, 6-22-82]; Ord. No. 01-21, § 1, 5-8-01) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 20-27. - Compliance generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any itinerant vendor, merchant or peddler, or any person as agent, employee or servant of any such vendor, merchant or peddler, to sell, offer or exhibit for the purpose of taking orders for sale thereof, any goods, wares, merchandise or other personal property at any location in the city without having complied with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 2, § 2 [Ord. No. 82-26, § 1, 6-22-82])  
Sec. 20-28. - Exemptions from permit fee. 
The payment of the permit fee shall not be held to be applicable to the following; however, they are required to comply with all other provisions of this article: 
(1)  Ordinary commercial travelers who sell or exhibit for sale goods, wares, merchandise, or other personal property to persons engaged in the business of buying, selling and dealing in the same. 
(2)  Vendors of farm produce, poultry, stock or agricultural products in their natural state if raised on land owned or leased by the vendor, or such products may be sold by any member of the owner's or lessee's household. 
(3)  Sales of goods, wares and merchandise donated by the owners thereof, the proceeds of which are to be used and applied to some charitable, religious or philanthropic purposes. 
(4)  Sales of goods, wares and merchandise by any bona fide charitable, religious or philanthropic organization. 
(5)  Persons engaged in interstate commerce. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 2, § 14 [Ord. No. 82-26, § 1, 6-22-82]; Ord. No. 01-21, § 1, 5-8-01)  
Sec. 20-29. - Penalty. 
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-8.  
Sec. 20-30. - Location. 
(a)  Use of streets. No itinerant vendor, merchant or peddler shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public streets, nor shall any be permitted a stationary location, nor shall they be permitted to operate in any congested areas where their operations might impede or inconvenience the public. For the purpose of this article the judgment of a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public impeded or inconvenienced. 
(b)  Right-of-way. No itinerant vendor may locate in the public right-of-way or state highway department right-of-way. 
(c)  Zoning and setbacks. No itinerant vendor may locate in an area unless the zoning classification of the area permits the type of business or service to be performed or provided, and further unless the vendor complies with all setback and parking requirements. 
(d)  State highways, streets, or roadways. No itinerant vendor may locate on a property with at least one property line on the following streets or roadways: 
(1)  FM 439. 
(2)  State Highway 195/Fort Hood Street. 
(3)  Business Highway 190. 
(4)  Central Texas Expressway (Highway 190). 
(5)  FM 2410. 
(6)  Clear Creek. 
(7)  Reese Creek. 
(8)  Stan Schlueter (Loop 3470). 
(9)  Twin Creek. 
(10)  Roy Reynolds (from Business Highway 190 North to FM 439). 
(11)  Elms Road. 
(12)  Trimmier Road. 
(13)  Lowe's Boulevard. 
(14)  Wal-Mart Boulevard. 
(15)  W.S. Young. 
(16)  10 th Street. 
(17)  Westcliff Road. 
(18)  Lake Road (from 38 th Street to W.S. Young). 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 2, § 8 [Ord. No. 82-26, § 1, 6-22-82; Ord. No. 87-52, § 2, 8-11-87]; Ord. No. 88-56, § 1, 6-28-88; Ord. No. 01-21, § 1, 5-8-01)  
Sec. 20-31. - Sale of animals. 
Nothing in this chapter shall permit the sale of animals other than as prescribed in chapter 6, article III. 
(Ord. No. 94-61, § II, 9-13-94)  
Secs. 20-32—20-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 20-41. - Required. 
No person shall engage in business in the city as an itinerant vendor, merchant or peddler without a permit from the police department. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 2, §§ 2, 3 [Ord. No. 82-26, § 1, 6-22-82])  
Sec. 20-42. - Application. 
Applicants for permits under this division must file with the police department an application in writing on a form obtained from the department which shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and description of the applicant. 
(2)  Address (legal and local). 
(3)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold. 
(4)  If the applicant is the employee or agent of a company, the name and address of the employer. 
(5)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. 
(6)  The fingerprints of the applicant. 
(7)  Whether the business is conducted door to door or in a fixed location. 
(8)  If the applicant is to conduct his business from a fixed location, written authorization from the landowner showing that the applicant has permission to use such location. 
(9)  A photograph of the applicant. 
(10)  The number of the limited sales tax permit issued to the business by the state comptroller's office. 
(11)  Driver's license number. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 2, § 3 [Ord. No. 82-26, § 1, 6-22-82])  
Sec. 20-43. - Fee. 
For each permit issued under this division, there shall be paid by the applicant therefor in cash in advance of the issuance thereof, to defray the actual expense of administration of this division, a fee per year as provided in the adopted fee schedule. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 2, § 7 [Ord. No. 82-26, § 1, 6-22-82]; Ord. No. 92-67, § III, 9-8-92; Ord. No. 19-047 , § X, 9-17-19)  
Sec. 20-44. - Denial. 
(a)  The police department may deny to a person a permit under this division because of a person's conviction of a felony or misdemeanor if the crime directly relates to the conduct of a peddler's business. 
(b)  In determining whether a criminal conviction directly relates to an occupation, the police department shall consider: 
(1)  The nature and seriousness of the crime; 
(2)  The relationship of the crime to the purposes for requiring a license to engage in the occupation; 
(3)  The extent to which a license might offer an opportunity to engage in further criminal activity of the same type as that in which the person previously had been involved; 
(4)  The relationship of the crime to the ability, capacity or fitness required to perform the duties and discharge the responsibilities of the permitted occupation; 
(5)  The evidence of the person's rehabilitation or rehabilitative effort while incarcerated or following release; 
(6)  Other evidence of the person's present fitness, including letters of recommendation from: prosecution, law enforcement, and correctional officers who prosecuted, arrested, or had custodial responsibility for the person; the sheriff and chief of police in the community where the person resides; and any other persons in contact with the convicted person; and 
(7)  It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to the extent possible to secure and provide to the police department the recommendations of the prosecution, law enforcement and correctional authorities as required under this article; the applicant shall also furnish proof in such form as may be required by the permitting authority that he has maintained a record of steady employment and has supported his dependents and has otherwise maintained a record of good conduct and has paid all outstanding court costs, supervision fees, fines and restitution as may have been ordered in all criminal cases in which he has been convicted. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 2, § 10 [Ord. No. 82-26, § 1, 6-22-82]) 
State Law reference— Eligibility of persons with criminal backgrounds for licenses, permits, etc., V.A.C.S. art. 6252-13c.  
Sec. 20-45. - Issuance. 
Upon completion and presentation of the application, the police department shall issue a permit under this division to the applicant unless grounds for denial exist under section 20-44. Such permit shall contain the signature of the issuing officer and shall show the name, address and kind of goods to be sold thereunder, the date of issuance, the expiration date of such permit and shall have attached a photograph of permittee. The police department shall keep a permanent record of all permits issued. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 2, § 4 [Ord. No. 82-26, § 1, 6-22-82])  
Sec. 20-46. - Transfer. 
No permit issued under the provisions of this division shall be transferred or assigned. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 2, § 5 [Ord. No. 82-26, § 1, 6-22-82])  
Sec. 20-47. - Expiration. 
All annual permits issued under the provisions of this division shall expire on the thirty-first day of December in the year when issued. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 2, § 9 [Ord. No. 82-26, § 1, 6-22-82])  
Sec. 20-48. - Exhibition. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any itinerant vendor, merchant, or peddler to fail to conspicuously display on or about their person the permit issued by the city. "Conspicuously displayed" shall mean displayed to the front and visible to whomever the permit holder is conversing at all times they are engaged in a permitted activity. 
(b)  Each itinerant vendor, merchant, or peddler shall collect all trash or debris accumulating within fifteen (15) feet of any vending location and shall deposit such trash or debris in a trash container. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 2, § 6 [Ord. No. 82-26, § 1, 6-22-82]; Ord. No. 01-21, § 1, 5-8-01)  
Sec. 20-49. - Revocation. 
(a)  Permits issued under the provisions of this division may be revoked by the police department after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for permit. 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on his business as peddler. 
(3)  Any violation of this article. 
(4)  Conviction of any misdemeanor or any felony if the crime directly relates to the conduct of a peddler's business. 
(5)  Conducting the business of peddling in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety and general welfare of the public. 
(b)  Notice of hearing for the revocation of a permit shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the permit holder at his address given in the application for permit at least five (5) days prior to the date set for hearing. A revocation for the reason enumerated in (a)(4) above shall be under the same guidelines mentioned in section 20-44. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 2, § 12 [Ord. No. 82-26, § 1, 6-22-82])  
Sec. 20-50. - Appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by the action of the police department with reference to the revocation of a permit under this division shall have the right to appeal to the city manager or his designee. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the city manager or his designee, within fourteen (14) days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such person's address given in the application, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The city manager or his designee shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as provided in section 20-49 for notice of hearing on revocation. The decision and order of the city manager on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 2, § 13 [Ord. No. 82-26, § 1, 6-22-82]; Ord. No. 01-21, § 1, 5-8-01)  
Secs. 20-51—20-74. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SOLICITATION FROM PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 20-75. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section: 
Business day means any calendar day except Saturday, Sunday or any city, state, or national holiday. 
Public right-of-way shall mean the traveled portion of the road including any public property within ten (10) feet of the curb line, and in the absence of a curb, the public property within ten (10) feet of the outside edge of the road or highway. Right-of-way includes all medians within the public right-of-way. 
Solicitation, soliciting, solicited or any other form of the word solicit means the act of asking, begging, pleading or communicating in any other such manner, whether orally, by written and/or printed material including but not limited to handbills or leaflets, hand signing or by any other method, direct or implied, by an individual or group of individuals for the purpose of educating, promoting, receiving or obtaining money, alms, gifts or items of value, real or intrinsic for said individual or group of individuals, or for-profit organization, a non-profit organization, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, club, company, corporation, business trust, establishment, religious institution or religion, association, or any other organization or affiliate thereof. 
Solicitor means the person soliciting. 
(Ord. No. 01-20, § 1, 5-8-01)  
Sec. 20-76. - Compliance generally. 
A.  No person shall be or go upon any public right-of-way for the purpose of soliciting from the occupant of any vehicle, except that a person in possession of a permit from the city may solicit on the designated intersections of public rights-of-way beginning on the first Monday through the following Sunday of the months of May, July, September and December, each year. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit within the city of Killeen without first obtaining a permit from the city secretary's office. 
C.  It shall be unlawful to solicit in the public right-of-way other than between dawn and dusk. 
D.  It shall be unlawful for a person younger than eighteen (18) years to solicit under this article. 
E.  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause a child ten (10) years of age or younger to solicit in public rights-of-way or sidewalks. For purposes of this section, the term "cause" shall mean to aid, direct, hire, encourage, permit or allow. 
F.  It shall be unlawful for a solicitor to fail to wear a traffic safety vest while soliciting in public rights-of-way. 
G.  It shall be unlawful for a person to solicit in the public right-of-way, except at the following designated intersections: 
1.  Central Texas Expressway (Highway 190) and State Highway 195, 
2.  W. S. Young and Business Highway 190, 
3.  W. S. Young and Central Texas Expressway (Highway 190), 
4.  Trimmier and Central Texas Expressway (Highway 190), 
5.  Stan Schlueter (Loop 3470) and Central Texas Expressway (Highway 190), 
6.  Business Highway 190 and State Highway 195, and 
7.  10 th Street and Rancier. 
(Ord. No. 01-20, § 1, 5-8-01)  
Secs. 20-77—20-79. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2.PERMIT - FOR SOLICITATION IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
 
Sec. 20-80. - Permit application deadline. 
A.  Permits for solicitation will be issued on a first-come, first-serve basis. There will be a separate registration period for each quarter's solicitation week. The city secretary will begin accepting permit applications on the following dates: 
The first Monday in April for the May solicitation week; 
The first Monday in June for the July solicitation week; 
The first Monday in August for the September solicitation week; and 
The first Monday in November for the December solicitation week. 
B.  Only one cause or organization will be allowed at a designated intersection, but the cause or organization is not restricted to one designated intersection. When the permits for solicitation have been issued for all designated intersections of public rights-of-way, no more permits will be issued for that specific week for that quarter. 
(Ord. No. 01-20, § 1, 5-8-01)  
Sec. 20-81. - Required fee. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit within the city of Killeen without first obtaining a permit from the city secretary's office. A person's or organization's first permit application of the calendar year shall be accompanied by a fifty-dollar ($50.00) registration fee. Additionally, a ten-dollar ($10.00) fee for each individual solicitor is required each time a person or organization submits a permit application. The purpose of the ten-dollar fee is to defray the cost of providing the individual permits that are required to be worn on each individual solicitor's person. No application will be processed until the required fees are tendered to the city secretary. Permit fees are nonrefundable and shall not be prorated. 
(Ord. No. 01-20, § 1, 5-8-01)  
Sec. 20-82. - Application for permit. 
A.  A person or organization seeking a solicitation permit shall file an application with the city secretary's office. Such application shall, at a minimum, contain the following information: 
1.  full name, street address and telephone number of the person or organization for whom solicitations are made; 
2.  full name, street address, date of birth and telephone number of each solicitor working under this permit (copy of each solicitor's driver's license/photo identification required); and 
3.  location where, and days on which, solicitation will occur, if approved; 
4.  The full name, street address and telephone number of each individual who will be directly in charge or control of the solicitation; 
5.  A statement to the effect that if the permit is granted, such permit will not be used as, or be represented to be, an endorsement by the city or any of its officers or employees; and 
6.  Any other information that the city deems necessary for the administration of this article. 
B.  The application must be signed by the applicant, if the person applying is an individual; if the applicant is a partnership, by the partner charged with disbursing funds solicited; if the applicant is a corporation or an association, by its officer charged with dispersing the funds solicited. The person signing the application shall sign the application and swear before an officer authorized to administer oaths that he has carefully read the application and that all the information contained therein is true and correct. 
C.  Information provided by applicant is subject to verification by the police department. 
D.  Such application shall also show satisfactory written proof of the individual's authority to represent the company, association or partnership, when applicable. 
E.  The application shall be accompanied by all applicable fees, as established in sec. 20-11. No permit provided for by this division shall be issued until such fees have been paid by applicant. 
F.  The application shall be accompanied by an executed copy of a waiver of liability in favor of the city on a form provided by the city. 
G.  The application shall be accompanied by an insurance policy evidenced by a certificate of insurance signed by an agent authorized to bind coverage indicating that the applicant has obtained, at his sole expense, insurance coverage (1) that is written by an insurance company with an A- or better rating by AM Best and that is admitted and licensed to do business in the state of Texas; (2) that is in full force and effect for the duration of the permit period; (3) that provides at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) of liability coverage per person and five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) per occurrence, and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage and with no deductible; (4) that insures the applicant and all persons who will be soliciting; (5) that names the city of Killeen, its officers, employees, and elected representatives as additional insureds; (6) that provides that any insurance or self-insurance maintained by the city shall apply in excess of and not contribute with it; (7) that is written on an occurrence basis; and (8) that is otherwise acceptable to and approved by the city attorney of the city of Killeen. 
(Ord. No. 01-20, § 1, 5-8-01)  
Sec. 20-83. - Exemption from application fee. 
A.  Application fee shall not be required of duly authorized, nonprofit charitable organizations. (Registered as such with the secretary of state for the state of Texas.) 
B.  A person may be exempt from the payment of the fee by filing an affidavit with the city secretary that avers that the person is incapable of paying the fee, and sets forth the person's financial condition. 
(Ord. No. 01-20, § 1, 5-8-01)  
Sec. 20-84. - Permit issuance, duration and form. 
A.  A permit applied for under this division shall be issued in the order in which the completed application was received by the city secretary within fifteen (15) business days after the application is completed and filed, unless it is determined that the applicant has provided false or incomplete information on its application. 
B.  A permit requested under this division shall be issued for the length of time requested, not to exceed three (3) days per calendar year, and shall be issued in increments of one (1) day periods. 
C.  The city shall establish the form of the permit. Each permit shall be printed in black ink except the following shall be printed prominently thereon in red: "The issuance of this permit is not an endorsement by the city of Killeen or any of its officers or employees." Each permit shall bear a permit number, which is the same as the number of the file containing the application filed by the same applicant. 
(Ord. No. 01-20, § 1, 5-8-01)  
Sec. 20-85. - Denial or revocation of permit to solicit. 
A permit may be revoked and the solicitor may be prohibited from reapplying for the remainder of that quarter and for the next three quarters, or an application to solicit may be denied, when it has been determined that: 
1.  An applicant has given false or misleading information on an application; or 
2.  A solicitor is charged with and subsequently convicted of theft, fraud or a violation of any city, state, or federal law, in connection with said solicitation; or 
3.  A solicitor or the entity has made, or caused to be made, false statements or misrepresentations to any member of the public with regard to the solicitation; or 
4.  A solicitor or the entity violates any part of any provision of this article; or 
5.  A solicitor creates a traffic or safety hazard to themselves or the users of the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 01-20, § 1, 5-8-01)  
Sec. 20-86. - Appeal from denial or revocation of permit to solicit. 
Should an applicant or registrant be denied a permit or have a permit revoked, he may appeal that action to the city manager or his designee by submitting a letter to the city secretary within ten (10) business days of the action complained of. A hearing on the denial or revocation will be held within fifteen business (15) days. The city manager or his designee shall render a decision on the appeal within five (5) business days of the date of the hearing. The decision of the city manager or his designee shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 01-20, § 1, 5-8-01)  
Sec. 20-87. - Display of identification to solicit. 
A person in charge of conducting the solicitation shall provide all solicitors involved in the solicitation with an identification permit issued by the city secretary. It must be clearly displayed on the person of every solicitor at all times while soliciting, must be recognizable to any person, and must identify both the solicitor and the person or entity for whom the solicitor is soliciting. It shall be unlawful for any solicitor to fail or refuse to show or display such identification. 
(Ord. No. 01-20, § 1, 5-8-01)  
Sec. 20-88. - Display of permit to solicit. 
The person(s) in charge of conducting the solicitation shall provide each solicitor with a copy of the permit issued by the city in accordance with this article. It shall be unlawful for any solicitor to engage in solicitation without having a copy of the permit conspicuously displayed on their person or to fail or refuse to show or display such permit upon the request of any person. 
(Ord. No. 01-20, § 1, 5-8-01)  
Sec. 20-89. - Solicitation for purposes not set out in application. 
It shall be unlawful for any person(s) to solicit for a purpose other than that set out in the application upon which the permit is issued. 
(Ord. No. 01-20, § 1, 5-8-01)  
Sec. 20-90. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association, agent or employee thereof who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00 for each offense. Each and every hour that such violation shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 01-20, § 1, 5-8-01)  
Chapter 21 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Airport zoning, § 7-51 et seq.; building and construction regulations, Ch. 8; flood damage prevention, Ch. 12; mobile homes, mobile home parks, etc., Ch. 17; subdivisions and other developments, Ch. 26; zoning, Ch. 31. 
State Law reference— Municipal planning and development, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 371.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 21-1. - Issuance of building permit; certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  In order to promote the use and development of any designated industrial park area within the city or within its extraterritorial jurisdiction, the city council may, upon the recommendation of the city manager, authorize the issuance of the building permit, and the postponement of any building or zoning code requirements until such time as the occupancy of the building can be determined. 
(b)  Such authorization shall not be construed to waive any requirement of this code. 
(c)  The certificate of occupancy shall be granted only upon compliance with all the requirements of this code. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 4, § 1 [Ord. No. 83-74, 12-20-83])  
Secs. 21-2—21-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Planning and zoning commission, § 27(6). 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions generally, § 2-116 et seq. 
 
Sec. 21-26. - Composition. 
There shall be a planning and zoning commission for the city composed of nine (9) members who shall be residents of the city or of the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction and who shall be appointed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 88-79, § 1(9-1-2(B)), 8-9-88; Ord. No. 05-127, § I, 12-20-05)  
Sec. 21-27. - Rules. 
The planning and zoning commission may adopt rules or procedures to govern its actions. Such rules shall be consistent with the provisions of this article and shall become effective upon being filed with the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 88-79, § 1(9-1-2(B)), 8-9-88)  
Chapter 22 - POLICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Police generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 22-1—22-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Police force authorized, §§ 17, 27 (13). 
Cross reference— Officers and employees generally, § 2-31; taxicab/limousine driver's permits, § 29-44 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide for police department, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.003. 
 
Sec. 22-26. - Duties of chief generally. 
The chief of police of the city shall appoint one (1) or more police officers, and shall either in person or by appointed police officers attend upon the municipal court while such court is in session, and shall promptly and faithfully execute and return any process issued from such court. He shall have like power with the sheriff of the county to execute the writ of search warrant. He shall be active in quelling riots, disorder and disturbances of the peace within the city, and shall have authority to take suitable and sufficient bail for the appearances before the municipal court of any person charged with an offense against the ordinances or laws of the city. It shall be his duty to arrest, without warrant, all violators of the public peace, and all who contract or interfere with him in the execution of the duties of his office, or who shall be guilty of any disorderly conduct or disturbances whatever. To prevent a breach of the peace, or to preserve quiet and good order, he shall have authority to close any theater, ballroom, barroom or any other place or building of public resort, and in the prevention and suppression of crime and in the arrest of offenders he shall have possession and execute like power, authority and jurisdiction as the sheriff of the county, under the laws of the state. He shall receive a salary or fees of office, or both, to be fixed by the city council. The chief of police shall give bond for faithful performance of his duties as the city council may require, and he shall perform such duties and possess such other powers, rights and duties as the city council may by ordinance require and confer not inconsistent with the constitution and laws of the state. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 1, art. 6, § 1)  
Sec. 22-27. - Power and duty of police officers. 
It shall be the duty of each police officer at all times to preserve to the best of his ability, order, peace and quiet, and to enforce strict obedience to the laws of the state and of the city. Each police officer shall have power and authority to arrest, take charge of, confine or bring before the mayor or municipal judge for trial any and all persons in the city, violating any law or ordinance of this city, or aiding or abetting in any such violation. In making arrests police officers shall be considered the deputies of the chief of police, and shall have all the power and authority invested in that officer by law or ordinance in preserving the peace, quelling disorder and making arrests. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 1, art. 6, § 2)  
Sec. 22-28. - Assistance to other jurisdictions. 
(a)  The chief of police is hereby given authority to make the necessary provisions for his regularly employed law enforcement officers to assist any other county or municipality upon the declaration by an authorized officer of the county or municipality declaring a state of civil emergency. 
(b)  In addition to the above conditions, the other county or municipality which has declared itself in a state of civil emergency must also request the services of the law enforcement officers of this city for the protection of health, life and property of such other county or municipality and its inhabitants. 
(c)  This authority is given in conjunction with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 362 [§ 362.001 et seq.] and if the chief of police is requested to assist a county or municipality, any assistance given will be made in accordance with such chapter. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 1, art. 6, § 10 [Ord. No. 69-49, §§ 1-3, 10-13-69])  
Sec. 22-29. - Fee for issuance of identification photos. 
The following miscellaneous police department fee is hereby adopted and approved: 
Identification photos .....$5.00 
(Ord. No. 92-68, § II, 9-8-92) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 92-68, adopted September 8, 1992, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, codification of § II as § 22-29 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Taxicab/limousine driver's permits, § 29-44 et seq.  
Secs. 22-30—22-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - POLICE RESERVE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Police reserve forces, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.012. 
 
Sec. 22-51. - Established. 
An auxiliary police force to be known as the police reserve is hereby established. It shall be composed of personnel who have volunteered to join the organization and whose application for membership has been accepted and who have complied with all the rules, regulations and orders provided for the conduct and control of the members thereof. It shall be composed of no more than fifty (50) members. The police reserve shall be separate and distinct from the police department of this city, but shall be headed by the chief of police. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 4, art. 2, § 1)  
Sec. 22-52. - General authority of chief. 
The members of the police reserve shall be under the authority, control and command of the chief of police subject to all of the provisions of the city charter, ordinances of the city and of this article. Members shall be appointed from a list of eligibles compiled as hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 4, art. 2, § 2)  
Sec. 22-53. - List of eligibles. 
A list of eligibles shall be prepared of applicants for the police reserve and shall be accompanied by a complete set of fingerprints or supplemented immediately by fingerprinting by the police division, which fingerprints shall be checked by the identification bureau to ascertain any criminal record of such person. The application shall state the residence of the applicant. Each applicant shall be an actual resident of the county, and shall furnish satisfactory proof of good character, temperate habits, freedom from communicable diseases and physical ability to perform the duties of the position for which he seeks appointment. He shall furnish three (3) references and attach letters of recommendation from such references to the application. The application shall be on the form prescribed by the chief of police and approved by the city manager. All names upon a list of eligibles shall subscribe to an oath that he will observe and obey the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of this state, and the laws of this nation, this state and this city and that he will carry out the duties of a member of the police reserve force of this city to the best of his ability. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 4, art. 2, § 3)  
Sec. 22-54. - Duties generally. 
(a)  The duties of the police reserve force, subject at all times to the direction, supervision and control of the chief of police, shall be to assist the regular members of the police department of this city in the enforcement of law and the maintenance of peace and order. The chief may by order establish rules and regulations to govern the police reserve force, to fix specific duties of its members, and to provide for the maintenance of discipline. He may change such orders from time to time, and may command members of the police reserve force to obey the instructions of regular police officers in carrying out their orders. 
(b)  The chief may prescribe other duties than those mentioned herein to be performed by the police reserve force, not inconsistent with the provisions hereof or state law. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 4, art. 2, § 4; Ord. No. 97-4, § I, 1-28-97)  
Sec. 22-55. - Identification, expiration, renewal. 
An identification card or such other insignia or evidence of identity as the chief may prescribe shall be issued to each member of the police reserve, who must carry the card and other identification at all times while on duty, and he must surrender them upon the termination of his membership. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 4, art. 2, § 5; Ord. No. 97-4, § I, 1-28-97)  
Sec. 22-56. - Removal from membership; resignation. 
Membership of any person in the police reserve may be terminated by the chief of police at any time for any cause deemed sufficient by the chief of police. Any member may resign from the police reserve at any time, but it shall be his duty to notify the chief of his resignation. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 4, art. 2, § 6)  
Sec. 22-57. - Diminishing the force. 
The chief of police may by order diminish or expand the membership of the police reserve force as exigency may require, within the limit hereinbefore established. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 4, art. 2, § 7)  
Sec. 22-58. - Power and authority. 
(a)  Carrying of firearms. Members of the police reserve force shall while on duty carry firearms on the express written order of the chief of police. 
(b)  Breaking and entering. No member of the police reserve force shall break into or otherwise forcefully enter upon private property or enter the dwelling or habitation of another person without the consent of the member of the police department of this city who then and there requests his aid in the enforcement of the law. 
(c)  Power of arrest. A member of the police reserve force shall have the following powers of arrest and none others: 
(1)  He may arrest for a public offense committed in his presence. 
(2)  He may arrest a person who had in fact committed a felony not in his presence. 
(3)  When a felony has in fact been committed, he may make an arrest when he has reasonable cause for believing the person arrested to have committed it. 
(4)  He may go lend physical aid to any regular member of the police department in making any lawful arrest, when authorized by the chief of police, or requested by any regular member of the police department of this city. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 4, art. 2, § 8)  
Sec. 22-59. - Summary dismissal and publication. 
In addition to the penalties provided for by law, any violation of law under color of the performance of his duties as a member of the police reserve force, and any breach of the rules and regulations established by the chief of police shall subject any member to summary expulsion and the fact thereof may be published at the order of the chief. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 4, art. 2, § 10)  
Chapter 23 - RAILROADS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 15; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 25; traffic, Ch. 28. 
 
Sec. 23-1. - Penalty. 
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-8.  
Sec. 23-2. - Obstruction of crossing. 
If any conductor or engineer of any railroad train, or any other person whosoever shall obstruct any street, alley, sidewalk, crossing a thoroughfare of the city by leaving thereon any car, engine, or train, or cars, for a longer time than five (5) minutes or shall stop or cause to be stopped, any railroad engine, car or train or cars across any street, alley, road, highway, or other passageway, so as to obstruct or interfere with the free passage thereon, for a longer time than five (5) minutes, he shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 3, § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. Stat. art. 6701d-5.  
Sec. 23-3. - Speed. 
It shall be unlawful for any train, car or locomotive to be run at a greater rate of speed than thirty (30) miles an hour within the city. Any engineer or conductor having charge of any train, car or locomotive, who shall violate the provisions of this article, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 3, § 3 [Ord. No. 76-62, § 1, 10-26-76])  
Chapter 24 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Powers relative to solid waste, § 12. 
Cross reference— Health and human services, Ch. 13; nuisances, Ch. 18; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 30. 
State Law reference— Solid Waste Disposal Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 361.001 et seq.; Solid Waste Recovery Financing Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 362.001 et seq.; Comprehensive Municipal Solid Waste Management, Resource Recovery and Conservation Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 363.001 et seq.; Texas Litter Abatement Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 365.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 24-1. - Penalty. 
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-8.  
Secs. 24-2—24-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL SERVICE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local solid waste management plan, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code §363.004; municipal collection and disposal services, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 363.111 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 24-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approved receptacle shall mean: 
(a)  A container of various sizes furnished by the city to residential and commercial customers to store solid waste for collection. 
(b)  A plastic bag having sufficient wall strength, a thickness of not less than 1.2 mils, to maintain physical integrity when lifted at the top, the opening closed by tie or other seal, and contents not weighing more than fifty (50) pounds. 
Automated collection - the use of mechanical devices to lift and empty solid waste containers into solid waste collection vehicles. 
Automated container - a container provided by the city of varying capacity used for garbage/rubbish collection. 
Boxes - corrugated cardboard boxes with dimensions not exceeding 2 ft x 2 ft × 2 ft, and/or a volume of 8 cubic feet, capable of holding the materials therein, when lifted. Solid waste materials placed in the box shall be acceptable materials for collection, and shall be contained so as not to cause windblown litter. 
Brush - cuttings or trimmings from trees or shrubs of such length and bulk that cannot be placed in a container. 
Bulky waste shall mean large items, objects, or stable matter, which because of their bulk, size, weight, and/or dimensions, can not be placed in an approved receptacle or container, and require special collection methods. Examples include furniture items, appliances, tree limbs, and construction debris. 
Business, as used herein, shall mean any commercial operation, or any usage of property for other than residential purposes, involving the employment of any individual, or the sale or manufacture of any product. 
Chlorinated fluorocarbon (CFC) - a refrigerant used in freezers, refrigerators, and air conditioners. 
City - the city of Killeen, Bell County, Texas. 
Collection - the act of removing accumulated solid waste from the point of collection and transporting it to a solid waste management facility; collection may also occur at centralized points where generators deliver their solid waste. 
Collection day - for residential collection is 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, and Friday, as designated for a particular service area or geographical region. 
Collection frequency - the number of times per week that collection service is provided. 
Collection/service stop - a term used to describe a unique address that is a point of collection and requires collection services, i.e., a geographical point within a service area that requires the collection vehicle to stop and collect solid waste and/or recyclables, or other materials. 
Collection system - a combination of the various components that are necessary to provide a collection service, including the system design, equipment and human resources, point of collection, frequency, system costs, and method of financing. 
Commercial customer - any enterprise or establishment whose main purpose is to carry on a business activity whether for profit or not, and typically includes, but not limited to, such enterprises as: hotels, motels, restaurants, fast food establishments, retail stores, schools, offices, shopping centers/malls/plazas, factories/manufacturing facilities, warehouses, and high density occupied dwellings such as apartment complexes and mobile home parks. 
Compost - compost is an organic soil conditioner that has been stabilized to a humuslike product that is free of viable human and plant pathogens and plant seeds, that does not attract insects or other vectors (organisms that transmit pathogens), that can be handled and stored without nuisance, and that is beneficial to the growth of plants. 
Construction debris shall mean building material waste resulting from demolition, remodeling, repair, or construction. 
Curbline - the area directly behind the curb. In the absence of a curb, the area directly behind the edge of the roadway. 
Curbside collection - the collection of solid waste, recyclables, or other materials placed in front of the property (curbside) by the generator who then returns the container to its normal location after it has been emptied. 
Disabled household shall mean a residential dwelling unit where all occupants over the age of sixteen (16) are physically incapable of transporting garbage and/or rubbish to the property curbside. A statement or certification from a licensed medical doctor may be required to substantiate the incapacity. 
Dumpster - a common term used to describe storage bins (containers) for commercial, institutional, and industrial solid waste. 
Garbage shall mean solid waste consisting of putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage facilities, handling and sale of produce and other food products. 
Hazardous waste material shall mean any solid waste identified or listed as a hazardous waste by the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the Federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, section 42 USC, section 6901 et seq., as amended. 
Manual collection - a method of collecting solid waste where the operator and/or collector(s) leave the collection vehicle and manually empties the container(s). Storage containers may be brought to the point of collection by the generator or a member of the collection crew. 
Materials recovery facility - a term used for a facility that separates mixed (commingled) recyclables into various components and processes those components for sale as secondary materials. 
Noncollection material - materials that shall not be collected by the solid waste services division, including, but not limited to, rock, dirt, manure, dead animals, tires, tire and wheel combinations, hazardous waste material, lead acid batteries, engines, lawn mowers, riding mowers, liquid waste of any kind, vehicle bodies, boats, mobile homes, trailers, campers, and other items of like size; waste from undeveloped property, and landscaping waste for new homes or commercial sites. 
Point of collection - a geographical point on a generator's property where storage containers are placed for collection service. 
Premises - businesses, houses, boarding and rooming houses, theaters, hotels, restaurants, cafes, eating houses, tourist camps, apartments, sanitariums, schools, private residences, vacant lots, and all other places within the city where garbage, trash or rubbish accumulates in ordinary quantities. 
Putrescible garbage, as used herein, shall be held and construed to mean animal or vegetable matter, such as waste material from kitchens, grocery stores, butcher shops, restaurants, cafes, hotel, rooming and boarding houses, such as scraps of meat, bread, bones, and peelings of fruit and vegetables. 
Recycling - the diversion of specific materials from a solid waste stream and the processing of those materials for use as new products and/or other productive uses including composting. 
Recycling drop-off center - a location, either temporary or permanent, established for the receipt of recyclable solid waste including, but not limited to, aluminum, cardboard, metal, paper, glass, and plastic. 
Residential solid waste - solid waste generated from single and multi-family sources; frequently called household solid waste, or household wastes. 
Roll-off container - a container used for the storage, collection and transport of commercial, institutional, or industrial solid waste. The container is pulled onto the tilt-frame of the collection vehicle with a cable by winch, reeving cylinders, or by hooks and taken to a solid waste management facility for emptying. Normally, an empty roll-off container is delivered to a customer at the time of collection, rolled off, and left for future use. 
Route - a round of stops to collect solid waste; a path regularly visited by a collection vehicle. 
Rubbish, as used herein, shall mean nonputrescible solid waste, consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste materials; including, but not limited to, paper, rags, cartons, excelsior, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves, glass, crockery, tin cans, aluminum cans, and other such waste generated from residential and commercial sources. 
Scavenging - the uncontrolled and unauthorized removal of materials from any container, bag, or receptacle within the corporate limits of the city. 
Scrap tire - any tire that can no longer be used for its original intended purpose. 
Service area - a geographic area provided solid waste collection service; service areas are normally divided into districts or routes to provide collection services. 
Special wastes - a term commonly used to describe specific materials that may require special collection and management approaches. 
Transfer station - a facility where the transfer of collected solid wastes from collection vehicles to transfer vehicles takes place. 
White goods - used to denote large household appliances such as refrigerators, stoves, ranges, air conditioners, dryers, and washing machines. 
Yard waste, as used herein, shall mean leaves, grass clippings, shrubs or plant cuttings, yard and garden debris, resulting from yard maintenance, that can be placed in a plastic bag for disposal. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 24-27. - Placement in receptacle. 
Each person within the city having garbage and rubbish to be disposed of is hereby required to place same in approved receptacles. It is unlawful for any person to place any garbage or rubbish on the ground, or in anything other than an approved receptacle. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 24-28. - Customers required to maintain sufficient disposal capacity. 
Each owner, occupant, tenant, or lessee using or occupying any residence or structure or who has a place of business within the city is required to keep and maintain at all times at such residence or structure or place of business approved receptacles in sufficient numbers to properly contain all garbage and rubbish disposed of from such residence or structure or place of business. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 24-29. - City to provide solid waste services. 
(a)  The city's solid waste services division shall be the exclusive provider of residential and commercial garbage, rubbish, and solid waste collection and disposal services for all premises within the city. It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to provide residential or commercial garbage, rubbish, or solid waste collection or disposal services to any person for compensation within the city, or to make use of the public streets for that purpose, without first obtaining an approved permit from the city council. 
(b)  All residential and commercial premises shall subscribe to the city solid waste services. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 24-30. - Solid waste compliance. 
The city's solid waste services division shall not make collection of garbage, trash, recycling, rubbish, brush, large items, and white goods, where same are not prepared for collection and placed as designated by the terms of this article. Failure to comply will be an offense and each day's failure to comply will constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 24-31. - Securing receptacles required. 
All plastic bags shall be securely closed at all times and other approved receptacles shall be equipped with adequate lids or coverings and shall be covered by such lids or coverings at all times. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 24-32. - Noncollection material. 
Noncollection material shall be hauled away from the premises by the owner, occupant, tenant or lessee thereof at his own expense and by his own means. Such material shall not be considered garbage or rubbish and shall not be collected by the solid waste services division. Such material shall not be dumped, placed in alleys, streets, or retained on the premises so as to become a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 24-33. - Collection of fees. 
The charges for the removal and disposal of all garbage, trash or rubbish shall be entered by the city in their respective amounts as charges against each such person on the utility bill of such person and the amount so fixed and charged shall be collected monthly in connection with and as a part of the utility bills of the city. Should any person of any place of abode or of any place of business fail or refuse to pay the charges fixed against him and his place of abode or his place of business when due, the city shall be authorized to cut off and disconnect the water and sewer services to his place of abode or place of business and against which such solid waste pickup fees have been fixed and assessed, and in addition thereto shall be authorized to discontinue solid waste pickup services until such fees have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 24-34. - Hauling to transfer station does not avoid charges. 
Should any person, owner, occupant, tenant or lessee within the city haul all or any part of his garbage or rubbish to the transfer station, he shall nevertheless be required to pay garbage and rubbish collection fees in accordance with this article, and shall be required to deposit his garbage and rubbish at the transfer station in accordance with and subject to the rules and regulations of the solid waste services division. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03)  
Secs. 24-35—24-45. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RESIDENTIAL COLLECTION 
 
Sec. 24-46. - Residential collection services. 
(a)  Utility account: All residential units that subscribe to water service shall establish a solid waste account with the utility collection division. A mandatory monthly collection fee shall be assessed and shall entitle the residential unit to receive standard weekly collection services. A separate deposit as stated in the rate schedule, division 6, shall be required for solid waste services. A waiver of the deposit maybe given to all active military members. All residential customers who maintain their utility account without incurring a penalty for late payment for a period of twelve (12) months shall receive a refund of their deposit. Such refund shall be credited to the customer's utility account. If the customer incurs more than one (1) late charge during any subsequent twelve (12) month period, a deposit in the amount of the solid waste deposit charge in effect at the time the penalty is incurred will be billed to the customer's account. 
(b)  Standard weekly collection service: Standard weekly collection services that are included in the base monthly rate (fee) shall be: 
(1)  Once per week collection of garbage/rubbish placed in the city provided roll-out container(s). 
(2)  Once per week collection of brush, up to six (6) cubic yards. 
(3)  Once per week collection of yard waste (leaves, grass clippings, shrubs/tree trimmings), placed in bags only. 
(c)  Special collection services: 
(1)  Special collection services will be provided weekly, for an additional fee, on the scheduled collection service day for the pickup of large items such as furniture; white goods such as appliances; excess garbage/rubbish in bags; excess waste in boxes as defined under section 24-26, definitions; construction and demolition debris such as dismantled fencing material, lumber, floor coverings, plumbing fixtures, and other materials as approved by the solid waste director, or appointed designee. 
(2)  The additional fees for this special collection service are stated in the adopted fee schedule, and shall be charged to the monthly utility bill for the residential unit or address that generated the waste. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 05-12, § I, 2-8-05; Ord. No. 19-047 , § XI, 9-17-19)  
Sec. 24-47. - Title to solid waste placed for collection. 
(a)  Title to all solid waste placed at the curb or collection point for collection by the city shall be vested in the city immediately upon placement by the person disposing of such solid waste. 
(b)  This section does not apply to solid waste that shall not be placed for collection under this chapter and solid waste that the city is prohibited by law or permit condition from collecting, handling or disposing. The responsibility for properly disposing of such solid waste shall remain with the person placing such waste for disposal. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 24-48. - Prohibited materials. 
The following categories of solid waste are defined as non-collection items and shall not be placed at curbside at any residence or premises for collection by the solid waste services division. 
(a)  Rock. 
(b)  Dirt. 
(c)  Dead animals or dead animal waste. 
(d)  Tires; tire and wheel combinations (see sections 24-85 and 24-108). 
(e)  Hazardous waste material. 
(f)  Lead acid batteries (see section 24-85). 
(g)  Vehicle bodies, engines, boats, camper shells. 
(h)  Lawn mowers; riding mowers (see section 24-104). 
(i)  Liquid waste of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 24-49. - Automated residential collection system. 
(a)  Container selection (size and quantity): Residential units shall be provided roll-out containers of various sizes or volume. The customer may select the size of container(s) that best fulfills their disposal needs for once per week collection. The monthly base rate assessed on the customer utility bill shall be based on size and number of containers requested by the customer. 
(b)  The container(s) shall be issued to a residential address and shall not be removed from the premises, except by employees of the solid waste services division. 
(c)  Containers are city property: The roll-out containers shall be the property of the city and must not be painted, marked, abused, mutilated, altered, or modified in anyway. Abuse and damage to a container by customers shall result in an assessment equal to the replacement cost of the container and/or time and materials involved to repair such container. Collection service may be discontinued until the assessed fees are paid to the city. Without limiting the foregoing general statement, examples of abuse include, but are not limited to: overloading the container beyond the rated weight capacity of the container; fire damage caused by hot coals and/or ashes; painting or marking the container in any manner; or failing to follow the proper care and use instructions for the container. 
(d)  Point of collection: The container must be placed at the curbside or designated collection point not earlier than 8:00 p.m. prior to the collection day and no later than 7:00 a.m. on the scheduled collection day. The container must be placed at or near the driveway at least four (4) feet from any mailbox or other obstacle. On streets where "no parking" is allowed, the container shall be placed behind the curb. On streets where parking is allowed, the container shall be placed in the street with wheels against the curb. The solid waste division director may make reasonable exceptions to the foregoing location requirements as needed to meet unique circumstances or to avoid undue hardship caused by literal compliance. 
(e)  Container(s) shall be removed from the curbside or designated collection point not later than 9:00 p.m. on the scheduled collection day. Container(s) shall be kept or stored on the premises no closer to the street than the front of the residence. Container(s) observed to be on the street at times not allowed shall be removed from the curbside by employees of the solid waste services division, and placed near the front edge of the residence or near the garage area. A tag shall be left on the container handle explaining the infraction and service performed. A fee as stated in the rate schedule, division 6, for this service will be charged to the monthly utility bill. 
(f)  Missed service: Residents whose containers were not collected because they were not placed at the required time or location as required by subsection (d) above are considered a "missed service." Customers with "missed service" may receive collection service for a fee as stated in the rate schedule, division 6, which will be added to the monthly utility bill for that residence. 
(g)  Stolen or missing container procedures: A stolen container shall be reported to the police department and the solid waste services division. If a container is stolen at a time other than that described in subsections (d) and (e) above, the customer shall be assessed a fee to replace the container. If the container is later recovered, the replacement fee will be refunded to the customer. 
(h)  Container exchange: A customer may request a different sized container. A container exchange fee will be charged for an exchange to a larger container. There is no exchange fee for requesting a smaller container. An additional container of any size may be acquired by paying the fee stated in the rate schedule, division 6, for the size of the additional container requested. 
(i)  Excess household garbage or rubbish placed in plastic bags: Excess garbage or rubbish that will not fit into the automated container may be put in plastic bags, not larger than 33 gallons, and placed at the curb at least four feet from the container. After dumping the container provided for the base service, the driver will load the excess bagged garbage into the container for dumping. The driver will reload the container a maximum of twice per collection day. An additional fee for this service will be assessed to the residential unit as stated in the rate schedule, division 6. 
(j)  Overloaded container: An overloaded container is one in which the capacity is exceeded, which is indicated by trash extending above the container rim, so the lid will not close properly. The driver will remove the excess bagged garbage or rubbish level to the top rim of container, dump the container, and reload the excess garbage into the container for dumping. The "overloaded container" fee, as stated in the rate schedule, division 6, shall be charged to the monthly utility bill for that residence. 
(k)  Assistance to disabled households: Disabled households desiring special assistance on collection day must apply for that service by contacting the solid waste services division and providing the information and verifications required by the solid waste director. At qualifying residential units, the employees of the solid waste services division shall roll the container from its storage location to the curbside for emptying, and return the container to its storage location. The storage location shall be coordinated with the household, but shall be on the premises outside the residence and safely accessible to the employee. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 24-50. - Brush collection. 
(a)  Brush collection shall be done once per week on the scheduled collection day for that service area. 
(b)  Brush, tree limbs, and tree trunks must be cut in lengths not more than twelve feet in length, and the pile shall not be mixed with any other waste, because it is taken to a location to be shredded/chipped into mulch. 
(c)  Brush must be set within 3 feet of the curb by 7:00 a.m. on the scheduled collection day, and be placed away from fences, shrubs, signs, fire hydrants, gas meters, mailboxes, overhead wires or other obstacles so as not to restrict pickup by a vehicle with a mechanical boom and grapple. Brush shall be placed at least four (4) feet away from the roll-out container so as not to interfere with the automated emptying of the container. 
(d)  The collection of brush is part of the standard weekly collection service, provided that the brush pile does not exceed six (6) cubic yards or the representative dimensions of 4 ft wide x 4 ft high x 12 ft long. Collection of brush in excess of six (6) cubic yards shall be assessed an excess brush fee as established in the rate schedule, division 6. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 24-51. - Yard waste - grass clippings, leaves, shrubs, and garden trimmings. 
(a)  Yard waste shall be placed at curb in bags and shall not weigh more than fifty (50) pounds each. The bags shall have sufficient wall strength and thickness (a minimum of 2.0 mils) to maintain physical integrity when lifted at the top, with the opening closed. 
(b)  Yard waste, in bags, shall be placed at curb not later than 7:00 a.m. on the scheduled collection day for that service area. 
(c)  The bags of yard waste shall be placed at least four (4) feet away from the roll-out container so as not to interfere with the automated emptying of the container. 
(d)  The collection of yard waste in plastic bags is included in the base monthly rate for standard weekly collection service. Additional fees are not assessed. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 24-52. - Move-in cardboard boxes and packing materials. 
(a)  A special one-time pickup of move-in cardboard boxes is offered to newcomers to Killeen. The pickup service must be requested by contacting the solid waste services division within six (6) months of establishing an account with the utility collection division. This service shall be provided free of charge on a one time basis to residential customers. 
(b)  The collection is done on Wednesdays only. The cardboard boxes (ten or more) must be flattened and placed at curb side by 7:00 a.m. Up to six (6) boxes are allowed to be filled with paper wrappings. Boxes that contain garbage or styrofoam are not allowed, these materials shall not be collected and are the responsibility of the resident for proper disposal. 
(c)  Inclement weather notice: corrugated cardboard boxes and paper have no recycling value if they become wet. Do not place at curbside for collection if inclement weather is eminent or forecast. A fee is charged for the pickup of wet cardboard and paper. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 24-53. - Special free collection of excess Christmas garbage/rubbish. 
On the first scheduled collection day after Christmas day, the excess garbage/rubbish that accumulates during the holidays may be placed in plastic bags, not larger than 33 gallons or boxes not greater in volume than 8 cubic feet, and placed at the curb for pickup. There shall be no charge for this service. This special free service does not apply to other collections such as white goods and large items such as furniture. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 24-54. - Special collection services. 
(a)  Fees shall be assessed for collection services not included in the standard weekly collection service. Fees shall be assessed to the residential address that generated the waste materials. The rates are as stated in the adopted fee schedule. 
(b)  Special collection services are provided on the same day as the scheduled collection day. Waste materials shall be placed at curbside not later than 7:00 a.m. 
(c)  Examples of waste material collected for a fee are: 
(1)  Bulky waste. 
(2)  Home furnishing or furniture items such as chairs, tables, couches, and mattresses. 
(3)  White goods or appliances such as washers, dryers, and stoves. See other instructions pertaining to white goods in section 24-55. 
(4)  Excess household garbage/rubbish placed in plastic bags or boxes. The boxes must have dimensions not greater than 2 ft x 2 ft x 2 ft, and sufficiently sturdy to hold the materials therein when lifted. Waste materials in boxes must be secured so as not to cause litter. 
(5)  Construction and demolition debris such as carpet, padding, dismantled fences, sinks, commodes, and etc. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 19-047 , § XI, 9-17-19)  
Sec. 24-55. - White goods collection. 
(a)  White goods must be separated from other waste to allow pickup by a collection vehicle equipped with a mechanical boom and grapple. The vehicle must have safe clearance for its operation, both lateral and overhead clearance. 
(b)  Special provisions apply to air conditioning units, freezers, and refrigerators. The refrigerant or chlorinated fluorocarbons (CFC) must be removed by a licensed technician. The appliance must be free of CFC before the item can be picked up. The solid waste services division must be called for instructions. Forms required for certification by a licensed technician can be obtained from the solid waste services division. 
(c)  White goods must be placed at curb not later than 7:00 a.m. on the scheduled collection day, but not earlier than one day prior to collection day. 
(d)  A fee is charged for the collection as stated in the adopted fee schedule, under "collection fees for special collection services." 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 19-047 , § XI, 9-17-19)  
Sec. 24-56. - Transfer station use. 
Residential customers are authorized one free disposal of not more than 300 pounds per calendar month at the transfer station, when presenting a current utility bill for their residence showing that solid waste services is a paid utility. Weight in excess of 300 pounds shall be assessed at the current scale rate. Items which shall be accepted for disposal are brush, yard waste, grass clippings, leaves, garbage, rubbish, furniture items, building waste, demolition or construction materials or debris such as carpet, padding, roofing shingles, doors, lumber, sinks, commodes, and sheetrock. Walk behind lawnmowers may also be discarded provided it is demonstrated that the mower does not contain fuel or engine oil. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 24-57. - Premium service. 
Premium service includes collection on a day other than the normal scheduled collection day for that residential service area. Premium service is available upon request and charges are as stated in the adopted fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 19-047 , § XI, 9-17-19)  
Sec. 24-58. - Evictions, move-outs, and households with inactive accounts. 
Nuisance conditions or garbage/trash rubbish at curb for residential evictions, move-outs, and households with an inactive solid waste utility account shall be abated at the direction of the solid waste director. All costs associated with the cleanup shall be billed to the owner of the property, or the responsible party, or the responsible property management office. The fee shall be the greater of: fees as stated in the adopted fee schedule, or actual costs related to the cleanup, including but not limited to: employee wages, vehicle hourly rates, and the transport and disposal costs for all solid waste collected. An active utility account, including water, sewer, and solid waste, shall not be allowed until fees are paid for the nuisance abatement. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 19-047 , § XI, 9-17-19)  
Secs. 24-59—24-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - COMMERCIAL COLLECTION 
 
Sec. 24-61. - Commercial collection services. 
(a)  Utility account: All commercial businesses shall establish a solid waste account with the utility collections division. 
(b)  Service level: Commercial businesses shall select a level of service sufficiently adequate to prevent a health, sanitation, or litter problem. Service options that are available, but subject to approval by the solid waste director, or appointed designee, are: 
(1)  Once per week collection using the 96-gallon container. 
(2)  Once per week collection using the 300-gallon container. 
(3)  One to six collections per week using a selected size and quantity of dumpster container(s). Available sizes are 2, 3, 4, 6, and 8 cubic yard. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 24-62. - Special collection services. 
For additional fees as stated in the adopted fee schedule, commercial customers may request special collection services for: 
(a)  The pickup of segregated brush. 
(b)  The pickup of bulky waste, such as furniture items and appliances. 
(c)  The cleanup of excess garbage and rubbish on the site. 
(d)  The removal of large or bulky items placed in containers. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 19-047 , § XI, 9-17-19)  
Sec. 24-63. - Shared containers. 
To the maximum extent possible, container(s) shall be issued to each commercial customer necessary to accommodate their specific disposal needs. However, there are areas in the city that have limited space for container storage, or access is restricted for collection vehicles. In such cases, as approved by the solid waste director, or his appointed designee, a container may be placed in a common area to serve several business activities or commercial customers. Shared container service shall be prorated by the number of customers using the container. The fee for use of the container shall be based on the adopted fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 19-047 , § XI, 9-17-19)  
Sec. 24-64. - City-furnished containers. 
The city shall furnish all commercial container(s) to be used in the collection and removal of garbage, trash, and rubbish with the exception of compactors. See section 24-66 regarding collection services for privately-owned compactors. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 06-132, § I, 12-12-06)  
Sec. 24-65. - Roll-off services. 
(a)  Roll-off containers are large, open top containers used primarily on construction sites to store construction and demolition debris. Roll-off containers are available for rental in sizes of 20 and 30 cubic yards. 
(b)  To obtain the service, an account shall be established with the utility collections division, and a pre-paid deposit shall be made based on size of the container, estimated number of container pickups per month, and the average weight of contents as historically determined by the solid waste director. An additional deposit may be required if the actual expenses incurred over a monthly billing cycle exceed the initial deposit. 
(c)  The fees for roll-off services are as shown in the adopted fee schedule, but include the following: 
(1)  A monthly rental fee for use of the container. 
(2)  A service fee to pickup, transport, and return container to the site or return to stock. 
(3)  Weight of container contents. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 19-047 , § XI, 9-17-19)  
Sec. 24-66. - Compactor services. 
(a)  The city provides collection services for compactors owned by the customer. The city does not own, rent, or repair compactors. 
(b)  Privately owned compactors must be compatible with the city's hauling equipment. 
(c)  The fees for servicing compactors are as shown in the adopted fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 06-132, § I, 12-12-06; Ord. No. 19-047 , § XI, 9-17-19)  
Sec. 24-67. - Litter, odor, and insect control. 
(a)  Sides and doors of all containers shall be kept closed at all times except when the container is being filled or unloaded for disposal. 
(b)  Putrescible waste shall be placed in disposable containers or plastic bags of sufficient wall strength to maintain physical integrity and capable of being secured from leaking. The disposable container with contents shall be placed unbroken, into the container. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 24-68. - Prohibited items for commercial containers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to place any item in any container that because of weight, size, or other physical property, could cause damage to the collection vehicle. These items include, but are not limited to, any one (1) item over three (3) feet in any dimension, any one (1) item weighing in excess of fifty (50) pounds, any concrete, masonry products, earthen materials or furniture items such as couches and mattresses. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to start a fire, burn any material in a city-owned solid waste container, or to paint or mark the same, or to place any poster, placard, or sign upon the same. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the owner or occupant of any premise that is paying for the collection service, to deposit any garbage, trash, or other material in any container. 
(d)  Other items prohibited for placement in a container are: tires, tire and wheel components, dead animals, dead animal waste, lead acid batteries, paint, lawn mowers, liquid waste of any kind, engines, unbagged or unsealed putrescible waste, and hazardous waste materials of any type. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 24-69. - Container site location and accessibility. 
Commercial businesses using the city's container system for the removal of garbage, trash, and rubbish shall provide a readily accessible site for placement of container(s) on the establishment's property. Locating containers in streets, right-of-ways, the traveled portion of alleys, and intersection sight triangles is strictly prohibited. The site must have overhead clearance to allow pickup and emptying of containers by the city's collection vehicles. The site location shall be subject to approval of the solid waste director, or appointed designee. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 24-70. - Site maintenance. 
Maintenance of the site, together with the approach, shall be the responsibility of the owner. The city shall not be responsible for damage caused by collection vehicles to driveways, parking lots, or other traveled surfaces. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 24-71. - Compactor maintenance. 
(a)  The city maintains and repairs city-owned containers on a cycle and as needed basis, such as washing, painting, replacement of lids and doors, and welding repairs to the container body. 
(b)  Customers shall not paint, mark, abuse, damage, alter, or modify the container in any way. Only those decals authorized by the solid waste director, or his appointed designee, may be affixed to containers and the installation shall only be done by city employees. 
(c)  Containers, or parts thereof, that are damaged through other than fair wear and tear shall be charged to the customer. For example, any container that is destroyed or damaged by hot ashes or coals shall be the responsibility of the customer and shall be repaired or replaced at the customer's expense. 
(d)  Maintenance and/or repair of privately owned compactors is the responsibility of the commercial customer or owner. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 06-132, § I, 12-12-06)  
Sec. 24-72. - Site clean up. 
It is the responsibility of the customer to keep the area around the point of collection clean and sanitary. If conditions are a nuisance, thereby causing a litter, odor, environmental, unsanitary, or potential health hazard, the condition shall be abated as directed by the solid waste director. The customer shall pay all costs related to the cleanup, including but not limited to employee hourly wages, collection vehicle hourly rates, and the transport, and disposal costs for all solid waste collected. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 24-73. - Container locking devices. 
Locking devices are available to secure the container lid to prevent unauthorized access. The locking device allows the container to be secured at times needed, and does not have to be unlocked for the city to service the container. Fees are as stated in the adopted fee schedule, and include a one time installation fee of the locking device and a monthly fee. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 19-047 , § XI, 9-17-19)  
Sec. 24-74. - Container pads for commercial containers. 
As of the effective date of this article, all new container service requests must first comply with the following standards for container pads and screening prior to collection by the city. 
(a)  Concrete pad and approach apron shall be constructed from concrete and shall be deemed to support the collection equipment. 
(b)  The minimum dimensions of the approach apron shall be fourteen (14) feet wide and a depth of six (6) feet. 
(c)  The minimum dimensions of the concrete pad, where a single container sits, shall be fourteen (14) feet wide and a depth varying from six (6) feet to fourteen (14) feet, depending on size of container. All containers have a width of eighty (80) inches. 
(d)  All pads shall have screening on at least three (3) sides. Screens shall be constructed of masonry block, wood, or chain link fencing with slats. Doors are optional, but if installed, shall have features to secure doors in an open position while the collection vehicle is emptying the container. 
(e)  The orientation of the pad shall accommodate a safe approach by the collection vehicle. The pad shall be level with the roadway or slope to roadway for easy access. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03)  
Secs. 24-75—24-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - RECYCLING PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 24-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the following meaning ascribed to them. 
(a)  Recycle materials means materials such as, but not limited to, paper products, glass, aluminum and other metals, plastic, and containers made in whole or in part of aluminum, metal, or plastic, which are separated and segregated from other garbage, trash, or refuse for the purpose of recycling and which are placed in a recycling receptacle for use in a recycling program. 
(b)  Recycling means the process of collecting and turning used products into new products by reprocessing or remanufacturing them. 
(c)  Recycling program means the organized collection of recyclable material for the purpose of resource recovery and recycling in pursuit of the goals of the city. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 24-82. - Ownership of recyclable material. 
Placing recyclable material in an authorized recycling receptacle at a designated recycling location shall be deemed to vest title to the material to the city and shall not constitute abandonment of the material. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 24-83. - Value. 
It is hereby declared that recyclable material has value. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 24-84. - Theft of recyclable material prohibited. 
Any person, other than an authorized city employee, who collects, obtains, possesses, picks up, takes, or otherwise removes any recyclable material from an authorized recycling receptacle or removes an authorized recycling receptacle that has been placed at a designated recycling location or both, commits the offense of "theft" as defined in the Texas Penal Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 24-85. - Recycling drop-off center. 
(a)  The city operates two (2) citizen drop-off sites for recyclable materials. One is the Killeen recycle center located at 111 East Avenue F and the other at the transfer station, 90648 South Hwy. 195. 
(b)  Acceptable materials vary by drop-off site, but are as posted at the site. Generally, acceptable materials include: paper products, metals, plastic containers #1 and #2, glass jars and bottles, and automotive materials such as waste oil, oil filters, transmission oil, hydraulic oil, differential oil, and lead acid batteries. Fees are not charged for depositing these materials. 
(c)  Scrap tires are accepted at the drop-off center, but a fee is charged per tire as stated in the adopted fee schedule. 
(d)  Materials brought to the drop-off sites shall be placed in the designated container, or as directed by a site attendant. Materials shall not be left at drop-off sites during non-operational or non-public access hours. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 19-047 , § XI, 9-17-19)  
Sec. 24-86. - Public scale. 
The Killeen recycling center operates a certified public scale which can accommodate most vehicles, except large tractor trailers. A fee is charged for the use of scales as stated in the adopted fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 19-047 , § XI, 9-17-19)  
Sec. 24-87. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-038, § I, adopted Aug. 23, 2016, repealed § 24-87, entitled "Residential Curbside Recycling Service", derived from Ord. No. 03-41, adopted Aug. 26, 2003.  
Sec. 24-88. - Move-in cardboard boxes and packing materials. 
(a)  A special one-time pickup of move-in cardboard boxes is offered to newcomers to Killeen. The pickup service must be requested by contacting the solid waste services division within six (6) months of establishing an account with the utility collection division. This service shall be provided free of charge on a one time basis to residential customers. 
(b)  The collection is done on Wednesdays only. The cardboard boxes (ten or more) must be flattened and placed at curb side by 7:00 a.m. Up to six (6) boxes are allowed to be filled with paper wrappings. Boxes that contain garbage or Styrofoam are not allowed; these materials shall not be collected and are the responsibility of the resident for proper disposal. 
(c)  Inclement weather notice: corrugated cardboard boxes and paper have no recycling value if they become wet. Do not place at curbside for collection if inclement weather is eminent or forecast. A fee is charged for the pickup of wet cardboard and paper. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 24-89. - Freon or chlorinated fluorocarbon (cfc) evacuation service. 
(a)  Appliances, such as refrigerators, that contain Freon or CFC's, are accepted if delivered to the Killeen recycling center. A fee is charged for the evacuation of CFC's by a licensed technician and the disposal of the appliance; the fee is stated in the adopted fee schedule. 
(b)  For residences without transportation means, the pickup of an appliance that contains CFC's may be arranged with the Killeen recycling center for a curbside collection. A fee is charged for the collection, the CFC evacuation service, and the disposal of the appliance, as stated in the adopted fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 19-047 , § XI, 9-17-19)  
Sec. 24-90. - Roll-off service for special recycling purposes or events. 
(a)  The solid waste services division may offer roll-off containers for occasional use for the restricted collection of recyclable materials. The use of a roll-off shall be coordinated with the recycling manager. 
(b)  It is the responsibility of the roll-off customer to insure only designated recyclables are placed in the roll-off container. Roll-offs with garbage/rubbish will be charged standard rates. 
(c)  A roll-off rental fee as stated in the adopted fee schedule, shall be paid at the time the roll-off service is coordinated with the recycling manager. 
(d)  Recyclable material placed in the roll-off becomes the property of the city. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 19-047 , § XI, 9-17-19)  
Secs. 24-91—24-99. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - TRANSFER STATION 
 
Sec. 24-100. - Authorized users of the transfer station facility. 
The transfer station facility is the central receiving and transfer point for all municipal solid waste generated by the city. Persons authorized to dispose of waste at the facility are: 
(a)  Killeen residents and commercial businesses. 
(b)  Citizens and businesses in the rural areas (counties). 
(c)  Citizens from other municipalities. 
(d)  Out-of-town contractors or businesses who have a work permit in Killeen. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 24-101. - Hours of operation. 
The hours of operation for the public are 8:00 a.m. - 5:00 p.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, Friday; and 8:00 a.m. - 3:00 p.m. on Wednesday and Saturday. The facility is closed to the public on Sunday and the holidays: Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, and New Year's Day. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 24-102. - Permit restrictions. 
(a)  The transfer station must operate in compliance with the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) rules and regulations, and the approved site operating plan. The facility is not permitted to accept hazardous waste or special waste. Special waste is any solid waste that because of quantity, concentration, physical or chemical characteristics or biological properties, requires special handling and disposal to protect human health or the environment. 
(b)  Special waste NOT ACCEPTED: 
•  Septic tank pumpings. 
•  Medical waste from health care facilities. 
•  Grease and grit trap waste. 
•  Discarded materials containing asbestos. 
•  Segregated hazardous waste from small quantity generators. 
•  Slaughter house waste and dead animals. 
•  Other waste classified as special waste by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) Rules and Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 24-103. - Military material prohibited. 
Garbage, rubbish, or other solid waste generated on the Fort Hood military reservation shall not be accepted at the transfer station without prior approval from the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 24-104. - Transfer station use and charges for Killeen residents. 
Residential customers are authorized one free disposal of not more than 300 pounds per calendar month at the transfer station, when presenting a current utility bill for their residence showing that solid waste services is a paid utility. Weight in excess of 300 pounds shall be assessed at the current scale rate. Items which shall be accepted for disposal are brush, yard waste, grass clippings, leaves, garbage, rubbish, furniture items, building waste, demolition or construction materials or debris such as carpet, padding, roofing shingles, doors, lumber, sinks, commodes, and sheetrock. Walk behind lawnmowers may also be discarded provided it is demonstrated that the mower does not contain fuel or engine oil. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 24-105. - Charges for non-residents, commercial businesses and all others. 
Disposal of acceptable waste materials at the transfer station shall be calculated by weight as determined by the on-site scales. The fees are as stated in the adopted fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 19-047 , § XI, 9-17-19)  
Sec. 24-106. - Surcharge for unsecured loads. 
Vehicles hauling waste to the site must be enclosed or provided with a tarpaulin, net, or other means to secure the load to prevent blowing litter or spillage. A surcharge shall be assessed for unsecured loads as stated in the adopted fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 19-047 , § XI, 9-17-19)  
Sec. 24-107. - Recycling drop off-site. 
(a)  A citizen's drop-off site for recyclable materials is located at the transfer station. Recycle materials that are accepted are posted at the site. Fees are not charged for depositing these materials. 
(b)  White goods are accepted at the facility without payment of fees. However, any appliance such as freezer, air conditioning unit, or refrigerator must have a certification from a licensed technician that the appliance is free of refrigerant or chlorinated fluorocarbon (CFC). 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 24-108. - Scrap tires. 
(a)  The facility accepts most tires from cars and pick-up trucks for disposal. A fee is charged for each tire based on size, as stated in the adopted fee schedule. 
(b)  Tires that have a bead of two (2) inches or greater shall not be accepted for disposal. The bead is the thickness of the tire that fits against the wheel rim. Most tires from off-road construction equipment are in the unacceptable category. 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 19-047 , § XI, 9-17-19)  
Secs. 24-109—24-114. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - RATE SCHEDULE 
 
Sec. 24-115. - Residential rates. 
(a)  Variable rates shall be charged depending on the size and quantity of containers selected. This monthly base rate includes the standard weekly services as stated in subsection 24-46(b). Sales tax shall be added to fees for goods and services where required by state law. A separate deposit of $30.00 shall be required for solid waste services when establishing a water services account with the utility collections division. 
Container Size(s) Available 	Monthly Base Rate 
96 gallon 	$19.78 
64 gallon 	$17.63 
32 gallon 	$16.25 
 
(b)  Additional container(s) of the same or different size may be subscribed by paying the fee stated above for the additional container(s). 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 09-057, § I, 9-15-09; Ord. No. 10-048, § I, 9-14-10; Ord. No. 11-081, § I, 9-13-11; Ord. No. 15-020 , § II, 3-31-15; Ord. No. 19-047 , § XI, 9-17-19)  
Sec. 24-116. - Commercial rates. 
(a)  Once per week collection using a 96-gallon container: $21.30 per month. 
(b)  Once per week collection using a 300-gallon container: $57.10 per month. 
(c)  Dumpster container rates are based on size of container and frequency of weekly collection. 
(1)  Monthly fees: 
Dumpster
Size 	Collections Per Week 
	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 
2 cu yd 	$78.72 	$120.06 	$167.91 	$215.76 	$264.93 	$311.46 	$359.31 
3 cu yd 	$96.07 	$149.04 	$209.89 	$270.77 	$331.65 	$392.50 	$453.40 
4 cu yd 	$112.37 	$177.00 	$250.89 	$324.77 	$398.70 	$472.61 	$546.50 
6 cu yd 	$147.77 	$234.92 	$334.87 	$434.81 	$534.76 	$634.70 	$734.65 
8 cu yd 	$181.85 	$292.69 	$418.81 	$544.82 	$670.81 	$796.83 	$922.82 
 
(d)  Fees for collection from privately owned, small compactors are based on size of compactor and frequency of weekly collection: 
Compactor
Size 	Collections Per Week 
	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 
4 cu yd 	$149.03 	$292.59 	$436.15 	$579.67 	$723.26 	$866.82 	$1,010.38 
6 cu yd 	$199.95 	$395.15 	$588.21 	$782.35 	$976.47 	$1,170.60 	$1,364.72 
8 cu yd 	$250.92 	$495.54 	$739.95 	$985.19 	$1,229.94 	$1,474.70 	$1,719.45 
 
(e)  Fees for roll-off container service: 
(1)    
Size of Container 	Rental Fee(a) 	Service 
20 yd open top 	$133.55 	$136.70 +weight b 
30 yd open top 	$157.75 	$136.70 +weight b 
40 yd open top 	$180.90 	$136.70 +weight b 
20 yd compactor 	Must own 	$136.70 +weight b 
30 yd compactor 	Must own 	$136.70 +weight b 
42 yd compactor 	Must own 	$136.70 +weight b 
(a) minimum fee: one month rental for first month; prorated for subsequent months 
b weight fee is $61.64 per ton 
 
(2)  Prepaid deposit based on number of services per month: 
Size of
Roll Off 	Number of Services Per Month 
	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 	7 	8 
20 yd open top 	$430.12 	$749.64 	$1,069.16 	$1,388.68 	$1,708.20 	$2,027.72 	$2,347.24 	$2,666.76 
30 yd open top 	$522.29 	$904.49 	$1,287.91 	$1,671.33 	$2,054.75 	$2,438.18 	$2,776.13 	$3,158.32 
40 yd open top 	$602.17 	$1,050.73 	$1,499.28 	$1,944.15 	$2,309.25 	$2,836.36 	$3,284.90 	$3,733.46 
 
(Ord. No. 03-41, § I, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 04-70, § I, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 05-72, § I, 9-13-05; Ord. No. 06-132, § I, 12-12-06; Ord. No. 09-057, § I, 9-15-09; Ord. No. 10-048, § I, 9-14-10; Ord. No. 11-081, § I, 9-13-11; Ord. No. 15-020 , § II, 3-31-15; Ord. No. 19-047 , § XI, 9-17-19)  
Sec. 24-117. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-047 , § XI, adopted Sept. 17, 2019, repealed § 24-117 which pertained to recycling rates and derived from Ord. No. 03-41, § I, adopted Aug. 26, 2003; Ord. No. 09-057, § I, adopted Sept. 15, 2009; Ord. No. 10-048, § I, adopted Sept. 14, 2010; Ord. No. 11-081, § I, adopted Sept. 13, 2011; Ord. No. 15-020 , § II, adopted March 31, 2015; and Ord. No. 16-038 , § I, adopted Aug. 23, 2016.  
Sec. 24-118. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-047 , § XI, adopted Sept. 17, 2019, repealed § 24-118 which pertained to transfer station rates and derived from Ord. No. 03-41, § I, adopted Aug. 26, 2003; Ord. No. 09-057, § I, adopted Sept. 15, 2009; Ord. No. 10-048, § I, adopted Sept. 14, 2010; Ord. No. 11-081, § I, adopted Sept. 13, 2011; and Ord. No. 15-020 , § II, adopted March 31, 2015.  
Sec. 24-119. - Annual Consumer Price Index rate adjustment. 
Rates established in this division 6 shall be adjusted annually and become effective on October 1 of each successive year by the same percentage as the Consumer Price Index (CPI) (Dallas/Fort Worth Region for all urban consumers, less energy) as published by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, during the preceding twelve (12) month period as measured from July of the previous year through June of the then-current year. 
(Ord. No. 15-020 , § II, 3-31-15)  
Secs. 24-120—24-125. - Reserved.  
Chapter 25 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND MISCELLANEOUS PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— General powers relative to streets, §§ 10, 11, 124. 
Cross reference— Railroads, Ch. 23; traffic, Ch. 28. 
State Law reference— General powers with reference to streets, sidewalks, etc., Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. arts. 1105b, 1175. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 25-1. - Penalty. 
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-8.  
Sec. 25-2. - Obstruction to sidewalks—Generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in this city to place, keep or suspend any merchandise on or over the sidewalks, in front of any house or tenement or upon the sidewalk, to expose or offer any merchandise or other property for sale at auction or otherwise, or to obstruct any sidewalk by placing or leaving or causing to be placed or left thereon any vehicle, chicken coop, coal box, barrel, table, box or other articles or things whatever. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in a sum not less than one (1) nor more than ten dollars ($10.00). Each act as well as each day's violation of this section thereof shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. Each member of a firm, partnership or corporation shall be deemed guilty and prosecuted as other individual persons. Notwithstanding the provisions contained in this section, a citywide sales promotional sidewalk sale may be held after a written permit has been obtained from the city council; such permit shall specify the days and hours such sidewalk sales are to be held. Any merchant or merchants may make an application for a sales permit to the city council in writing stipulating the time for such promotional sale. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 11, art. 1, § 1 [Ord. No. 67-11, § 1, 5-8-67])  
Sec. 25-3. - Same—Exception. 
Section 25-2 shall not apply to any merchant or trader placing packages or merchandise which he may be receiving or sending away upon the sidewalks, if the same do not occupy more than one-half of the width thereof, nor remain there more than three (3) hours, nor to any merchant or trader, occupying a house, and exhibiting samples for show, only upon or above the inside line of the sidewalk within a space not exceeding two (2) feet. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 11, art. 1, § 2)  
Sec. 25-4. - Sidewalk construction—Generally. 
Sidewalks shall be required for all new residential and commercial buildings, and whenever any construction, addition or structural alteration on any building or other structure where a permit to do so is required by the provisions of this code on any property in the city on or abutting a public street(s), and no certificate of occupancy may be issued until the provisions of this code are met. If no sidewalk(s) exists, or existing sidewalk(s) abutting a public property do not conform to the standards, specifications, details and designs provided for and established by the director of public works, such sidewalk(s) shall conform to the standards set forth by this code and the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(Ord. No. 93-26, § I, 4-13-93)  
Sec. 25-5. - Same—Location. 
(a)  All required public sidewalks shall be located on public property (right-of-way). Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four (4) feet wide and located not more than six (6) inches from the property line abutting a public street. 
(b)  Sidewalk elevation shall be not less than the top elevation of the existing curb, nor more than twenty-four (24) inches above the height of the street curb. 
(c)  Obstructions such as, but not limited to, fire hydrants, telephone poles, and street signs, shall not be located within a sidewalk, unless approval of such is obtained from the director of public works or his designate. 
(Ord. No. 93-26, § I, 4-13-93) 
Cross reference— Construction, alteration, etc. of curbs and gutters, § 25-76 et seq.  
Sec. 25-6. - Same—Alternate design/location. 
An alternate design and/or location of sidewalk(s) may be submitted for approval by the director of public works, where there are unusual and practical difficulties in carrying out the provisions set forth by this code. The irregular shape of a lot, unique topography, and other atypical conditions may be considered by the director of public works, provided the alternate design/location will not adversely affect any adjoining property or the general public. 
(Ord. No. 93-26, § I, 4-13-93)  
Sec. 25-7. - Same—Exemption. 
Upon the approval of the building official or his designee, and upon evidence that at least fifty (50) percent of the block on the same side of the street in which a person desires to build has improvements on it without sidewalks, then such person may be exempted from the provisions of sections 25-4 through 25-7. 
(Ord. No. 93-26, § I, 4-13-93)  
Secs. 25-8—25-10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT: EXCAVATION, CONDUITS, ETC.[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-045, § I, adopted Aug. 22, 2017, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 25-31—25-38, 25-51—25-55, pertained to excavation, conduits, etc., and derived from Code 1963, Ch. 11, art. 2, §§ 3, 4 [Ord. No. 81-24, § 1, adopted June 23, 1981]; Code 1963, Ch. 11, art. 2, §§ 1(a)—(c) [Ord. No. 71-17, § 1, adopted Apr. 26, 1971]. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 25-11. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for safe and appropriate use of the public right-of-way by regulating placement and maintenance of facilities and equipment within the public right-of-way. 
( Ord. No. 17-045 , § I, 8-22-17)  
Sec. 25-12. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Certificated telecommunications provider means a person who has been issued a certificate of convenience and necessity, certificate of operating authority, or service provider certificate of operating authority by the Public Utility Commission of Texas to offer local exchange telephone service or a person who provides voice service. 
Collocate and collocation mean the installation, mounting, maintenance, modification, operation, or replacement of network nodes in a public right-of-way on or adjacent to a pole. 
Decorative pole means a streetlight pole specially designed and placed for aesthetic purposes and on which no appurtenances or attachments, other than specially designed informational or directional signage or temporary holiday or special event attachments, have been placed or are permitted to be placed according to nondiscriminatory municipal codes. 
Emergency means an unexpected event that could not have reasonably been anticipated requiring immediate action to protect the health, safety, or welfare of the public. 
Local exchange telephone service has the meaning assigned by V.T.C.A., Utilities Code § 51.002. 
Network node means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term: 
(1)  Includes: 
a.  Equipment associated with wireless communications; 
b.  A radio transceiver, an antenna, a battery-only backup power supply, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration; and 
c.  Coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is immediately adjacent to and directly associated with a particular collocation; and 
(2)  Does not include: 
a.  An electric generator; 
b.  A pole; or 
c.  A macro tower. 
Network provider means: 
(1)  A wireless service provider; or 
(2)  A person that does not provide wireless services and that is not an electric utility but builds or installs on behalf of a wireless service provider: 
a.  Network nodes; or 
b.  Node support poles or any other structure that supports or is capable of supporting a network node. 
Node support pole means a pole installed by a network provider for the primary purpose of supporting a network node. 
Public right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway, or utility easement in which the municipality has an interest. The term does not include: 
(1)  A private easement; or 
(2)  The airwaves above a public right-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications. 
Public right-of-way rate means an annual rental charge paid by a network provider to a municipality related to the construction, maintenance, or operation of network nodes within a public right-of-way in the municipality. 
Public utility, utility or user includes but is not limited to any electric utility, gas utility, telecommunications utility, cable company, water utility, or sewer utility, but does not include a network provider. 
Service pole means a pole, other than a municipally owned utility pole, owned or operated by a municipality and located in a public right-of-way, including: 
(1)  A pole that supports traffic control functions; 
(2)  A structure for signage; 
(3)  A pole that supports lighting, other than a decorative pole; and 
(4)  A pole or similar structure owned or operated by a municipality and supporting only network nodes. 
Telecommunications utility pole means a pole that provides: 
(1)  Electric distribution with a voltage rating of not more than 34.5 kilovolts; or 
(2)  Services of a telecommunications provider, as defined by V.T.C.A., Utilities Code § 51.002. 
Transport facility means each transmission path physically within a public right-of-way, extending with a physical line from a network node directly to the network, for the purpose of providing backhaul for network nodes. 
Voice service means voice communications services through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public right-of-way, without regard to the delivery technology. The term does not include voice service provided by a commercial mobile service provider as defined by 47 USC Section 332(d) 
Wireless service means any service, using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using a network node. 
Wireless service provider means a person that provides wireless service to the public. 
( Ord. No. 17-045 , § I, 8-22-17)  
Sec. 25-13. - Penalty. 
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 [of this Code]. 
( Ord. No. 17-045 , § I, 8-22-17)  
Secs. 25-14—25-31. - Reserved.  
Sec. 25-32. - Supervision of work. 
Work coming under this article must be performed strictly in accordance with the requirements of the public works and planning and development services departments and not otherwise; and shall be performed in such manner and at such times and within such time as the building official or his designee shall prescribe and approve. The excavations and the depth, grade and location of any pipes, mains, laterals, sewer or wiring shall be as prescribed by an approved permit in each case. 
( Ord. No. 17-045 , § I, 8-22-17)  
Sec. 25-33. - Barricades. 
The permittee under this article shall erect barricades around the area being excavated in accordance with the requirements of the Manual of Uniform Traffic-Control Devices. 
( Ord. No. 17-045 , § I, 8-22-17)  
Sec. 25-34. - Compliance. 
(a)  All excavations made within the public right-of-way of any street or alley or across any square or public grounds within the city shall be made in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  All excavations, backfills and repair in streets and alleys shall be in accordance with applicable City of Killeen standard details. 
(c)  The permittee shall correct defects in patching, or restoration performed by permittee or its agents. Permittee, upon notification from the city, shall correct all restoration work to the extent necessary, using the method required by the city. Said work shall be completed within five (5) days of the receipt of the notice from the city, not including days which work cannot be done because of circumstances constituting force majeure. If permittee fails to restore the public right-of-way in the manner and to the condition required by the city, the city at its option may do the work and bill the permittee for the cost of restoring the public right-of-way. 
( Ord. No. 17-045 , § I, 8-22-17)  
Sec. 25-35. - Backfilling. 
Backfilling shall be completed pursuant to applicable City of Killeen standard details and the Infrastructure Design and Development Standards Manual (IDDSM). 
( Ord. No. 17-045 , § I, 8-22-17)  
Sec. 25-36. - Resurfacing. 
Resurfacing shall be completed pursuant to applicable City of Killeen standard details and the Infrastructure Design and Development Standards Manual (IDDSM). 
( Ord. No. 17-045 , § I, 8-22-17)  
Sec. 25-37. - Work at expense of applicant. 
All such work shall be performed at the sole expense of the person making such application, and without expense to the city. If the work is not completed within the time limit set by the building official or his designee, the city may have the work done by an independent contractor. All such work shall be chargeable to the permittee and no permit for such cuts shall be issued until such time as the city is reimbursed such expense by the permittee. 
( Ord. No. 17-045 , § I, 8-22-17)  
Sec. 25-38. Interference - with public right-of-way. 
A permittee shall not so obstruct a public right-of-way that the natural free and clear passage of water through the gutters or other waterways shall be interfered with. Private vehicles of those doing work in the public right-of-way may not be parked within or next to a permit area, unless parked in conformance with city parking regulations. The loading or unloading of trucks must be done solely within the defined permit area unless specifically authorized by the permit. 
( Ord. No. 17-045 , § I, 8-22-17)  
Sec. 25-39. - Poles, towers, and other structures. 
Poles, towers, and other structures shall be so erected as not to unreasonably interfere with traffic over streets, alleys and highways. Any attachment to a pole, tower, or other structure overhanging a street, alley, or highway must have a minimum clearance height of fourteen (14) feet from top of the pavement unless approved in writing by the director of public works. 
( Ord. No. 17-045 , § I, 8-22-17)  
Sec. 25-40. - Construction and removal of facilities. 
(a)  This city may lay, and permit to be laid, storm, sewer, gas, water, wastewater and other pipe lines, cables, and conduits, or other improvements and to do and permit to be done any underground or overhead work that may be necessary or proper in, across, along, over, or under public right-of-way occupied by a permittee. The city may also change in any manner any curb, sidewalk, highway, alley, public way, street, utility line, storm sewer, drainage basin, drainage ditch, and the like. 
(b)  A permittee shall remove or relocate its facilities in the public right-of-way when it is determined by the director of the public works department that removal, relocation, change, or alteration of the facilities in the public right-of-way is reasonably necessary for the construction, operation, repair, maintenance, or installation of a city or other governmental entity's public improvements. 
(c)  A permittee shall remove, relocate, change, or alter the position of its facilities that are in the public right-of-way no later than the 120th day after receiving written notice from the director of the public works department. All relocation expenses shall be paid by the permittee except as otherwise required by law. 
(d)  This section does not prevent a permittee from recovering the cost of relocating or removing facilities in the public right-of-way from a non-governmental third party that initiates a request for relocation or removal, or from a governmental entity that has authorized payment for relocation or removal costs. 
( Ord. No. 17-045 , § I, 8-22-17)  
Secs. 25-41—25-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 25-51. - Public right-of-way permit required. 
No person shall dig any holes or trenches over eighteen (18) inches deep upon, through, or beneath any public right-of-way, lay any pipes, mains, laterals, or any connecting or service pipes, nor any underground sewer or underground wiring along, across or beneath any public right-of-way, or install any new equipment or facility within the public right-of-way, without first having filed with the building official or designee an application and documents as required by section 25-54 to do so and without having first obtained a formal written approval of such application and map and a permit to perform such work. 
( Ord. No. 17-045 , § I, 8-22-17)  
Sec. 25-52. - Public utility poles. 
A permit from the building official or his designee shall be required of all public utility companies to set utility poles in any street or alley, and each public utility company shall make a report in writing to the building official or his designee by the first day of each calendar year, giving the location of each public utility pole which it has set in the public right-of-way of any and all streets and alleys in the city during the preceding calendar year. 
( Ord. No. 17-045 , § I, 8-22-17)  
Sec. 25-53. - Emergency work. 
In cases of emergency that may arise on holidays or outside of prescribed working hours of city hall offices, utility companies may cut or puncture the public right-of-way of streets and alleys without first getting a permit to do such work, provided that where such cuttings or punctures are made by any such utility company in the public right-of-way of a street or alley, such company shall apply for and obtain a permit for such work on the first working day after the work is done. 
( Ord. No. 17-045 , § I, 8-22-17)  
Sec. 25-54. - Application. 
Application for a permit required by this division shall be submitted in such form as the building official or his designee may prescribe from time to time, and, insofar as applicable, shall follow generally the requirements prescribed by the city for applications for building permits, in addition to any other information prescribed by the building official or his designee. The application shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Permittee's name, address, and email if applicable, and telephone number; 
(2)  A certificate of insurance (the city may require a copy of the actual insurance policies); 
a.  Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the registrant by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Texas, or a form of self insurance acceptable to the city; 
b.  Verifying that the registrant is insured against claims for personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage arising out of the (i) use and occupancy of the public right-of-way by the registrant, its officers, agents, employees and permittees, and (ii) placement and use of facilities and equipment in the public right-of-way by the registrant, its officers, agents, employees and permittees, including, but not limited to, protection against liability arising from completed operations, damage of underground facilities and collapse of property; 
c.  Naming the city as an additional insured as to whom the coverages required herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will be provided as to all such coverages; 
d.  Requiring that the city be notified thirty (30) days in advance of cancellation of the policy or material modification of a coverage term; 
e.  Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile liability coverage, workers compensation and umbrella coverage established by the city in amounts sufficient to protect the city and the public and to carry out the purposes and policies of this chapter. 
(3)  Map or plan of such proposed work, including any construction any engineering drawings necessary to confirm compliance with any applicable statutory and/or city design requirements. 
(4)  Payment of applicable permit fees and applicable public right-of-way rate fees. 
(5)  A copy of the person's order granting a certificate of authority from the public utilities commission or other applicable state or federal agency where the person is lawfully required to have such certificate from said commission or other state or federal agency. 
( Ord. No. 17-045 , § I, 8-22-17)  
Sec. 25-55. - Bond. 
No permit to puncture, open, dig, or excavate with the public right-of-way shall be issued under this division to any person until such person shall have filed a bond in the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) with a good and sufficient surety with the city secretary. Such bond shall be effective as to any permit for a period of one (1) year after such permit is issued and shall cover all permits issued to the principal of such bond as long as such bond is on file. The form of the bond shall be as follows: 
STATE OF TEXAS 
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS: 
COUNTY OF BELL 
That we, ________ as principal and ________ as surety, are held and firmly bound unto the City of Killeen, Texas in the penal sum of $2,000.00 to the payment of which well and truly to be made, we hereby bind ourselves, our heirs, executors, administrators, successors and assigns by these presents: 
The condition of the above obligation is such that, whereas the above principal has obtained a permit and/or permits to puncture, open, dig or excavate within the public right-of-way within the City of Killeen, Texas, in accordance with an application and/or applications heretofore filed by him with said City of Killeen: 
Now, if the above bound principal, his heirs, executors, administrators, successors, and/or assigns, shall well and truly keep, do and perform all laws and ordinances of the City of Killeen, regulating excavations or punctures within the public right-of-way of the City of Killeen and will refill said excavations or punctures according to the ordinances and specifications prescribed by the City of Killeen, and will replace all pavement as required by said specifications and will hold the City of Killeen harmless from all damages that may occur by reason of said punctures, holes or excavations made by said principal, for a period of one year from the date each said permit is issued, then this obligation shall be null and void; otherwise, to be and remain in full force and effect. Successive recoveries may be made on this bond and one or more recoveries thereon shall not exhaust or terminate this bond. 
Witness the execution hereof, on this the ________ day of ________, ________. 
Surety Principal 
Approved this the ________ day of ________, ________. 
	/s/   
      City Secretary 
 	 
( Ord. No. 17-045 , § I, 8-22-17)  
Sec. 25-56. - Permit fees. 
(a)  Network node permit fee: five hundred dollars ($500.00) per application covering up to five network nodes; two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each additional network node per application up to thirty (30) network nodes. 
(b)  Excavation over eighteen (18) inch deep/setting pole: one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per application/pole (including a node support pole, but not including a telecommunications utility pole) 
(c)  If applicant is covered by a current franchise agreement, fees are paid pursuant to the franchise agreement and exempt from fees in this section. 
(d)  A network provider shall not be required to submit an application, obtain a permit, or pay a rate for routine maintenance or replacement of substantially similar existing equipment. 
( Ord. No. 17-045 , § I, 8-22-17)  
DIVISION 3. - USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY BY TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS. 
 
Sec. 25-57. - Authority; scope. 
(a)  This division shall be read in accordance with Article XI (Franchises and Public Utilities) of the City Charter and V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 283 (Management of Public Right-of-Way Used by Telecommunications Providers in Municipality). 
(b)  This division does not give a telecommunications provider the right to use utility infrastructure or to excavate in the public right-of-way. All excavation in the public right-of-way must be done in accordance with chapter 25, article II, division 2, of the Code. 
(c)  This chapter does not apply to a private line telecommunication network. 
( Ord. No. 17-045 , § I, 8-22-17)  
Sec. 25-58. - Construction and removal of facilities. 
(a)  A certificated telecommunications provider is subject to the construction rules and standards set forth in chapter 25, article II, division 2, of the Code. 
(b)  A certificated telecommunications provider shall remove or relocate its facilities in the public right-of-way when it is determined by the director of the public works department that removal, relocation, change, or alteration of the facilities in the public right-of-way is reasonably necessary for the construction, operation, repair, maintenance, or installation of a city or other governmental entity's public improvements. 
(d)  A certificated telecommunications provider shall remove, relocate, change, or alter the position of its facilities that are in the public right-of-way no later than the 120th day after receiving written notice from the director of the public works department. All relocation expenses shall be paid by the telecommunications provider. 
(d)  This section does not prevent a certificated telecommunications provider from recovering the cost of relocating or removing facilities in the public right-of-way from a non-governmental third party that initiates a request for relocation or removal, or from a governmental entity that has authorized payment for relocation or removal costs. 
( Ord. No. 17-045 , § I, 8-22-17)  
Sec. 25-59. - Compensation to the city. 
A certificated telecommunications provider shall pay a public right-of-way use fee as prescribed by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 283 (Management of Public Right-of-Way Used by Telecommunications Providers in Municipality). 
( Ord. No. 17-045 , § I, 8-22-17)  
Sec. 25-60. - Indemnity. 
A certificated telecommunications provider is liable for the acts and omissions of any entity involved in the construction or installation of facilities used by the provider. Acts and omissions of the entity shall be considered the acts and omissions of the provider. 
The city shall submit prompt, written notice to a provider of any claim for which the city is seeking indemnification. 
( Ord. No. 17-045 , § I, 8-22-17)  
Sec. 25-61. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY FOR DEPLOYMENT OF NETWORK NODES. 
 
Sec. 25-62. - General. 
(a)  A network provider is subject to the construction rules and standards set forth in chapter 25, article II, division 2, of the Code. 
(b)  A network provider shall remove or relocate its facilities in the public right-of-way when it is determined by the director of the public works department that removal, relocation, change, or alteration of the facilities in the public right-of-way is reasonably necessary for the construction, operation, repair, maintenance, or installation of a city or other governmental entity's public improvements. 
(c)  A network provider shall remove, relocate, change, or alter the position of its facilities that are in the public right-of-way no later than the 120th day after receiving written notice from the director of the public works department. All relocation expenses shall be paid by the telecommunications provider. 
(d)  This section does not prevent a network provider from recovering the cost of relocating or removing facilities in the public right-of-way from a non-governmental third party that initiates a request for relocation or removal, or from a governmental entity that has authorized payment for relocation or removal costs. 
( Ord. No. 17-045 , § I, 8-22-17)  
Sec. 25-63. - Compensation to the city. 
(a)  A network provider shall pay fees as prescribed by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284 (Deployment of Network Nodes in Public Right-of-Way) as amended in the following amounts: 
(1)  Public right-of-way rate: two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per network node located in the public right-of-way to be paid at the time of application and annually thereafter by the first day of the calendar year. 
(2)  Transport facility public right-of-way rate: twenty-eight dollars ($28.00)/month per network node located in the public right-of-way for which the installed transport facilities provide backhaul unless network provider has obtained transport service from a person that is paying municipal fees to occupy the public right-of-way that are the equivalent of not less than twenty-eight dollars ($28.00)/month per network node. 
(b)  A network provider shall be required to execute a standard service pole attachment agreement to be able authorized to collocate network nodes on service poles at a rate not greater than twenty dollars ($20.00) per year per service pole. 
( Ord. No. 17-045 , § I, 8-22-17)  
Sec. 25-64. - Indemnity. 
A network provider is liable for the acts and omissions of any entity involved in the construction or installation of facilities used by the provider. Acts and omissions of the entity shall be considered the acts and omissions of the provider. 
The city shall submit prompt, written notice to a provider of any claim for which the city is seeking indemnification. 
( Ord. No. 17-045 , § I, 8-22-17)  
Sec. 25-65. - Collocation of network nodes and new node support poles within historic district or design district. 
A network provider shall obtain advance approval from the city before collocating new network nodes or installing new node support poles in an area zoned or otherwise designated as a historic district or as a design district if the district already has decorative poles. Certain types of equipment shall be required as prescribed by the director of public works. 
( Ord. No. 17-045 , § I, 8-22-17)  
Sec. 25-66. - Design requirements. 
A network provider shall comply with requirements included in the design manual for the installation and construction of network nodes and new node support poles in the public right-of-way. 
For each permit application relating to a network node, an industry standard pole load analysis shall be completed and submitted to the city with the application indicating that the service pole to which the network node is to be attached will safely support the load. 
All network node equipment placed on new and existing poles shall be placed more than eight (8) feet above ground level. 
( Ord. No. 17-045 , § I, 8-22-17)  
Secs. 25-67—25-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CURBS AND GUTTERS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 25-76. - Penalty. 
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-8.  
Sec. 25-77. - City engineer's decisions. 
The decision of the city engineer with reference to any work done under the provisions of this article and with reference to all materials shall be fully binding on all parties in interest, and such decision shall be in all cases strictly in keeping with the intent and purpose of this article and free from all bias and unfairness. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 11, art. 4, § 6 [Ord. No. 69-42, § 6, 8-11-69])  
Sec. 25-78. - Appeals to board of adjustment and appeals. 
When any person coming within the provisions of this article shall consider that the application of this article is calculated to manifest injury to the property involved or its use, do to peculiar structural conditions of the property or its improvement, such interested person may appeal to the board of adjustments and appeals established by the Standard Building Code, which board is here vested with jurisdiction to hear the same and issue proper orders and directions to the city engineer based upon its findings. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 11, art. 4, § 7 [Ord. No. 69-42, § 7, 8-11-69])  
Sec. 25-79. - Notice of appeal; hearing. 
Notice of appeal under this article must be in writing, by noting the same upon any instrument furnished by the city engineer and signed by the person requesting the appeal. Upon such appeal having been made, the building official shall notify the board of adjustments and appeals and, upon a date being set for the hearing, the building official shall notify the appellant and the city engineer of the time and place of such hearing. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 11, art. 4, § 8 [Ord. No. 69-42, § 8, 8-11-69])  
Sec. 25-80. - Supervision generally. 
All construction, reconstruction, alteration, removal or replacement of curbs, gutters or street curbs on any public property within the city shall be under the supervision of the city engineer. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 11, art. 4, § 2 [Ord. No. 69-42, § 2, 8-11-69])  
Sec. 25-81. - Applicable plans and specifications. 
All construction, reconstruction, alteration, removal or replacement of curbs, gutters and street curbs on any public property within the city shall be in accordance with the plans and specifications as required by the city, specifically with the plans and specifications of the "Regulations for Access Driveways to State Highways," placed into effect in accordance with instructions contained in Texas Highway Commission Minute Order No. 45920, dated May 1, 1959, and any amendments thereto. Such regulations, although written to apply to state highways, shall apply to all streets and all curbs, gutters and street curbs on any public property within the city. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 11, art. 4, § 3 [Ord. No. 69-42, § 3, 8-11-69; Ord. No. 71-36, § 1, 7-26-71])  
Secs. 25-82—25-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CONSTRUCTION, ALTERATION, ETC., PERMIT 
 
Sec. 25-91. - When construction, reconstruction, alteration, etc., required; permit. 
Whenever any application is made to the building official by any person for a permit to make any construction, addition or structural alteration on any building or other structure, where a permit so to do is required by the provisions of this code or city ordinance on any property in the city on or abutting a public street, and the existing curbs, street curbs and gutters abutting such property do not conform to the standards, specifications, layout, details and designs provided for and established by the city, copies of which are attached hereto and made a part hereof and referred to as Exhibit "A," or if no curbs, street curbs or gutters exist or existing curbs, street curbs or gutters are required to be torn out a permit will not be issued by the building official until such person shall obtain a permit as provided for in this division to construct, reconstruct or make such alterations necessary to meet the requirements of the city engineer, and the construction, addition or alteration to such buildings or other improvements shall not be approved by the building official, until such time as the curbs, street curbs and gutters have been constructed or reconstructed and comply with the provisions of the city engineer. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 11, art. 4, § 1 [Ord. No. 69-42, § 1, 8-11-69])  
Sec. 25-92. - Application. 
An applicant for a permit under this division shall file with the city engineer an application showing: 
(1)  Name and address of the owner, or agent in charge, of the property abutting the proposed work area. 
(2)  Name and address of the party doing the work. 
(3)  Location of the work area. 
(4)  Attached plans showing details of the proposed alteration or construction, and the proposed use of the public street or alley during the period of construction. 
(5)  Estimated cost of the construction or alteration. 
(6)  Such other information as the city engineer shall find reasonably necessary to the determination of whether a permit should issue hereunder. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 11, art. 4, § 4 [Ord. No. 69-42, § 4, 8-11-69])  
Sec. 25-93. - Performance bond. 
The city engineer shall require a good and sufficient performance bond issued by a surety company authorized to do business as such in the state, in the penal sum equal to the total estimated cost of the proposed curb, gutter or street curb alteration or improvement, in favor of the city, conditioned that such construction shall be completed in accordance with the city's standards and specifications and such construction. Such bond shall be approved by the city attorney prior to the issuance of permit hereunder. In lieu of such performance bond, the applicant may deposit in cash with the city engineer a sum equivalent to the estimated cost of the improvements or alteration to secure the completion of such construction in accordance with the city's standards and specifications. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 11, art. 4, § 5 [Ord. No. 69-42, § 5, 8-11-69])  
Secs. 25-94—25-115. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - STREET NAME CHANGES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 95-21, § I, adopted March 14, 1995, amended Art. IV to read as set out herein. Prior to such amendment, Art. IV consisted of §§ 25-116-25-121, which contained similar provisions and derived from Ch. 11, Art. 6, §§ 1-5 of the 1963 Code. 
 
Sec. 25-116. - Purposes. 
The purpose of this article is to establish uniform criteria and procedures, applicable to the city and all persons, groups, firms, and agencies, for the permanent change of a city street name. 
(Ord. No. 95-21, § I, 3-14-95)  
Sec. 25-117. - Penalty. 
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Ord. No. 95-21, § I, 3-14-95)  
Sec. 25-118. - Statement of reasons. 
Applications for a street name change may be considered for any one (1) of the following reasons, which must be specified in the application: 
(1)  To establish continuity of the street's name; 
(2)  To eliminate name spelling duplication, phonetic duplication, or misspelling; 
(3)  To bring coherence to the street numbering designation (east, west, north, south); 
(4)  To provide necessary roadway designation (street, road, lane, circle, drive, boulevard, and similar designations); 
(5)  To honor a person, place, institution, group, entity, event or similar subject; 
(6)  To enhance a neighborhood through association of the street name with its location, area characteristics, history and similar factors. 
(Ord. No. 95-21, § I, 3-14-95)  
Sec. 25-119. - Application by petition. 
(a)  An application for a change of the name of a street may be filed by any person, group, firm or agency with the department of planning and economic development in the form of a petition signed by not fewer than fifty (50) percent of all owners, or owner's attorney-in-fact of property abutting the subject street. "Owners" of such abutting property shall be determined by the then current city real property ad valorem tax roll. 
(b)  The application shall state the present official name of the city street, the proposed new name, and the name and address of each person, group, agency or entity requesting the street name change; a statement of reason or reasons from among those listed above, claimed for such a name change; and the person, group, agency or entity responsible for payment of the city's costs for installing standard city street name signs. 
(Ord. No. 95-21, § I, 3-14-95)  
Sec. 25-120. - City-initiated changes. 
In all instances where it is the city's recommendation that a street name be changed, the department head shall file a request for a change of the name of a street with the department of planning and economic development. The written request shall state the present official name of the city street, the proposed new name, and a statement of reason or reasons from among those listed above, claimed for such a name change. 
(Ord. No. 95-21, § I, 3-14-95)  
Sec. 25-121. - Processing. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application by petition, the department of planning and economic development shall confirm that the petition meets the requirements of section 25-119 above and the city-initiated request meets the requirements of section 25-120 above. 
(b)  Upon confirming that the petition or city-initiated request meets the requirements of this article, the department of planning and economic development shall forward such to the department of public works to determine the costs associated with installation of new city street name signs. The department of planning and economic development shall, no earlier than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the proposed public hearing, mail written notice of the public hearing to property owners abutting the street in which the street name is proposed to be changed and publish notice of the date and time of the public hearing in the local newspaper. 
(c)  A public hearing shall be held by the city council prior to disposing of the petition or city-initiated request. 
(d)  In all cases where the application by petition has been approved by the city council, such approval is contingent on the city's receipt of payment for the costs associated with the installation of new city street name signs by the person, group, agency or entity designated on the application as responsible for such payment. 
(Ord. No. 95-21, § I, 3-14-95)  
Sec. 25-122. - Post-council procedure. 
(a)  All city council approved street name changes shall be forwarded to the department of public works for implementation upon receipt of payment for the costs associated with installation of the new city street name signs. 
(b)  The city secretary shall provide a copy of each street name change ordinance, as recorded in official minutes of the city council, to the local utility companies, U.S. Postal Service, and county voter registrar's office. 
(Ord. No. 95-21, § I, 3-14-95)  
Secs. 25-123—25-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PARADES AND ASSEMBLIES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 25-141. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and referred to as the "Parade and Assembly Ordinance of the City of Killeen." 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 7, § 1 [Ord. No. 72-72, § 2, 11-16-72])  
Sec. 25-142. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Assembly shall mean any concerted meeting together of twenty-five (25) or more individuals or persons for a substantial period of time at a specific place upon any public roadway, sidewalk, or other public place or property at a place within the regulatory jurisdiction of the city. 
Assembly permit shall mean a written authorization to assemble issued by the city of Killeen as required by this article. 
Association shall mean a group of individuals or persons who are joined together for a specific purpose at a specific time and are acting together without the issuance of a charter by a unit of government; it is not a legal entity separate from the individuals or persons who compose it. 
Parade shall mean any concerted walk, column, march or procession of any kind, or any similar display consisting of twenty-five (25) or more individuals, or five (5) or more vehicles, moving together in or upon any public roadway, sidewalk, or other public property in a place within the regulatory jurisdiction of the city. 
Parade permit shall mean a written authorization to parade issued by the city of Killeen as required by this article. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 7, § 2 [Ord. No. 72-72, § 3, 11-16-72]; Ord. No. 98-29, § I, 4-28-98) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 25-143. - Penalty. 
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-8.  
Sec. 25-144. - Unlawful actions not permitted. 
Nothing in this article authorizes the use of public sidewalks, streets, roadways, alleys, parks, or grounds, or the use of any private or public property, by any person in or by any manner, means or method, that violates the laws of the United States, the state, or ordinances of the city applicable thereto. Any person who violates such other laws and ordinances are punishable according to the provisions of such other applicable laws and ordinances. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 7, § 4 [Ord. No. 72-72, § 5, 11-16-72])  
Sec. 25-145. - Exceptions. 
This article does not apply to parades or assemblies consisting of a funeral or funeral procession, nor to students in grades one (1) through twelve (12) going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities when such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of school authorities, nor to governmental bodies or units of the city. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 7, § 4 [Ord. No. 72-72, § 5, 11-16-72])  
Sec. 25-146. - Compliance generally. 
It is unlawful for any person applying for a permit, or engaging, participating or aiding in, or forming or starting, any parade or assembly for which a permit has been issued, to fail to comply with all the directions and conditions of such permit and all laws and ordinances applicable to such parade or assembly. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 7, § 4(c) [Ord. No. 72-72, § 5, 11-16-72])  
Secs. 25-147—25-155. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 25-156. - Required. 
(a)  Every individual has the right to engage in, participate in, form, start or aid in engaging in, participating in, forming, starting or continuing any parade or assembly if a parade permit or assembly permit for such parade or assembly has first been obtained from the city by some individual. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade or assembly unless a parade permit or assembly permit therefor has first been obtained as required by this section. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 7, § 4(a), (c) [Ord. No. 72-72, § 5, 11-16-72])  
Sec. 25-157. - Procedures. 
Any person desiring to parade or assemble within the regulatory jurisdiction of the city, and seeking issuance of a parade permit or an assembly permit, therefor, shall deliver a completed application therefor to the city secretary on forms available upon request to the city secretary. 
(1)  Who may apply. An individual may apply for a parade or assembly permit. An individual may apply for a parade or assembly permit on behalf of a group if the individual is a member in good standing and submits written authorization to apply for the group. The written authorization must accompany every application. 
(2)  When to apply. An application for a parade permit or an assembly permit shall be delivered to the city secretary not less than twenty-one (21) days prior to the date upon which the applicant proposes to conduct the parade or assembly, except in an emergency as hereinafter provided for in this section. 
(3)  Only one (1) parade or one (1) assembly may be held at any one (1) given time on a day. 
(4)  Emergency application. No application shall be considered unless made in the manner herein prescribed, unless the failure to apply in such manner is due to the emergency nature of the occasion for a parade or assembly. For purposes of this subsection, an "emergency" is specifically defined as a sudden, unexpected and unforeseeable occurrence that gives rise to the desire to lawfully communicate concerning such occasion or event by parade or assembly, and of such a nature as to make compliance with the timing requirements for application specified herein impossible. The applicant must completely describe in the application the facts constituting the alleged emergency, specifying how and why such facts constitute an emergency under this subsection, and making sworn verification as to the truth of the facts constituting such emergency before an officer authorized to administer oaths, and attaching such sworn affidavit to the application. Emergency applications for a parade permit must be filed with the city secretary not less than forty-eight (48) hours prior in time to the proposed commencement of the proposed parade or assembly. 
(5)  Contents of application. An application for a parade or assembly permit shall provide the following information: 
a.  The name, address and telephone number of the individual applying. 
b.  If the applicant is applying on behalf of another person or group, then the person or group's address and telephone number of the main office, location or headquarters of the group or person, the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the authorized and responsible officers and leaders of such person. In those instances where the main office, location or headquarters of the person is not within the city limits, then state the address and telephone numbers of the office, location or headquarters located nearest to the city, and the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the authorized and responsible officers and leaders located nearest to the city. 
c.  The name, address, and telephone number of the individual who will be parade or assembly leader, and who agrees to be responsible for the parade and assembly conduct in accordance with any permit issued, together with a signed statement agreeing to be responsible for the conduct of the assembly and parade, in accordance with the permit and all laws applicable thereto. 
d.  The proposed date for the parade or assembly. 
e.  The proposed starting point, termination point, and route of a parade; and the proposed place, address and street, or building name, designated for an assembly. 
f.  The approximate number of individuals that will be in the proposed parade or assembly, and the number and kinds of animals and vehicles proposed to be in the parade or assembly. 
g.  The hours when the proposed parade or assembly will begin and terminate. 
h.  A statement describing the specific portion of particular streets, sidewalks, or other public property proposed to be used, in connection with the parade or assembly. 
i.  The specific location of the staging area for a proposed parade. 
j.  The time at which participants in a proposed parade or assembly will actually begin to arrive at the proposed designated staging or assembly area. 
k.  An accurate written description of sound, or sounds, planned to be produced incidental to the proposed parade or assembly, whether by human speech, music, or otherwise, and whether, how, and to what extent, it is to be amplified in volume. 
l.  An accurate written description of proposed planned conduct of participants incidental to the proposed parade or assembly. 
(6)  Number of copies. Not less than two (2) copies of each application for a parade or assembly permit shall be delivered to the city secretary. 
(7)  Rejection. Any application for a parade or assembly permit that does not substantially comply with this division shall not be considered by the city manager. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 7, § 5 [Ord. No. 72-72, § 6, 11-16-72]; Ord. No. 98-29, §§ I, 4-28-98)  
Sec. 25-158. - Granting and appeal from refusal to consider, modification, or denial of application. 
(1)  Upon receipt of an application, the city secretary shall immediately forward it to the city manager for review. The city manager must approve, modify and approve, or deny the application within 7 days. The city manager must make the decision based upon the standards for issuance stated in this article. The manager may modify the application and grant a permit as provided in section 25-161. If the city manager refuses to consider an application because of applicant's failure to comply with the prescribed required procedures for application, or denies a permit, or modifies a permit, the specific reasons for such shall be sent to the applicant in writing. 
(2)  If an application is not considered by the city manager, or is modified or denied, any appeal from the decision shall be made to the city council in the following manner: 
(a)  A written letter of appeal, signed by the permit applicant, stating the grounds therefor, shall be delivered to and filed with the city secretary. 
(b)  A true copy of the application refused shall be attached to the petition. 
(c)  The city secretary shall place a copy of the appeal letter and application, along with any pertinent documents, on the agenda for the next regular city council meeting. 
(d)  The council shall consider the contents of the application; the city manager's letter stating the reasons for the refusal to consider, modification, or denial; the letter of appeal; the facts surrounding the matter as shown by testimony of parties; any argument of counsel; and the standards for issuance stated in this article. 
(e)  It shall be presumed that the only reasons for refusal, modification, or denial are those set out in the city manager's written explanation. 
(f)  The city council may consider the application at that meeting or set a date, time, and place for a hearing on each appeal, and shall notify the appealing individual or person thereof. 
(g)  The order of procedure upon such hearing is as follows. 
i.  The city attorney or a person designated to do so shall present any evidence justifying the modification, denial, or refusal to consider the application. 
ii.  The applicant or applicant's attorney shall have the right to cross-examine any witness and see any documents relied upon by any witness testifying, and to challenge or object to such evidence. 
iii.  The applicant or applicant's attorney shall thereafter present any rebutting evidence justifying consideration and approval of the application or rebutting the modification. 
iv.  The city attorney shall have the right of cross-examination and inspection. 
v.  Both the applicant and the city may offer rebuttal evidence. 
vi.  The applicant shall open and close argument. 
vii.  The mayor or other person presiding shall determine what evidence will be accepted. The city council is not a court and is not bound by nor required to follow formal rules of evidence or judicial procedure, beyond those described in paragraphs i—vi above. The council will not debate questions of law or admissibility. 
(h)  By majority vote, the city council shall either affirm the city manager's denial, modification, or refusal to consider, or vote to reverse the city manager and grant the application for a permit. 
(i)  If the city council affirms the manager's decision, it shall have prepared written findings of fact and references to this division, specifically indicating the reason or reasons justified, supporting the decision. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 7, § 6 [Ord. No. 72-72, § 7, 11-16-72]; Ord. No. 98-29, §§ I, 4-28-98)  
Sec. 25-159. - Standards for issuance. 
The city manager and city council shall consider, and issue or deny, parade permits and assembly permits, in the order in which applications for same are received by the city secretary. The following standards shall be considered by the city manager and city council in evaluating all information gathered through the application and hearing process: 
(1)  The conduct of a proposed parade, or the location of a proposed assembly, will substantially interrupt either the safe and orderly movement of other vehicular and pedestrian traffic, in and through the city, or adversely affect the safety and health of the individuals participating, or those normally situated immediately adjacent to the site of a parade or an assembly; or 
(2)  The conduct of a proposed parade or assembly will require the use of a greater number of police officers of the city, to properly police the assembly event, than are regularly scheduled to be on duty at the proposed time, and will substantially curtail necessary police protection of other areas of the city; or 
(3)  The conduct of a parade or assembly will require the diversion of so great a number of the ambulances available in the city as to substantially curtail and interfere with necessary ambulance services to all individuals within any portion of the city; or 
(4)  The concentration of individuals, animals, or vehicles at the proposed staging points of a proposed parade, in the parade, or at the proposed assembly, will substantially interfere with the ability to provide necessary fire and police protection or ambulance service to and for the remainder of the individuals and portions of the city; or 
(5)  The conduct of a parade or assembly will substantially and unreasonably interfere with and curtail necessary garbage collection or street cleaning services; or 
(6)  The conduct of a parade or assembly will substantially interfere with and curtail necessary movement of firefighting equipment en route to fires, or with the necessary movement of ambulances en route to emergencies; or 
(7)  There is a high degree of probability or likelihood that the conduct of the particular proposed parade or assembly will cause, or will tend to cause, injury or damage to individuals, persons or property, or to provoke extremely disorderly conduct, or to create a great disturbance of the peace; or to cause entry upon private property, or upon public property lawfully dedicated to purposes which are inconsistent with the particular parade or assembly; or 
(8)  A proposed parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination, with delays en route, entailing such a substantial total period of time as to thereby necessarily require an assembly permit; or 
(9)  A proposed assembly is scheduled to convene and disperse at such time or times, and in such manner, means or methods as to require a parade permit; or 
(10)  The route of a parade, or the place of an assembly, is so close to a building or place in or at which a school, church, or class thereof is in session, or is so close to a particular building or place in or at which there is being conducted a specific lawful activity normally requiring, for its accomplishment, quiet and orderly deliberation and consideration, or absence of and freedom from the intrusion of loud noise or disruptive acts, similar to the requirements of a school, and, that the paraders or assemblers will in reasonable probability, make noise or engage in acts that would cause, or tend to cause, imminent disruption and interference with the normal activity of such school, class, or other lawful activity or occupation with which such noises or disruptive acts are incompatible or inconsistent; or 
(11)  The conduct of a particular proposed parade or assembly will necessarily result in an expenditure of so large a sum or sums of public monies that, in relative proportion to other needs of the public for the use of the same public monies as to be unreasonable, inequitable or confiscatory in nature, and, in determining same, the city council may consider the total amount of monies expended for parades and assemblies held at the request of the same, or substantially the same individuals and persons, during the twelve-month period immediately preceding the date for which the permit is sought; or 
(12)  The particular individual, or person, or some substantial combination thereof, seeking a permit has applied for and received a permit to parade, or assemble, for substantially the same purpose, or purposes, one (1) or more times during the twelve-month period next immediately preceding the date for which the permit is being sought, and therefore the issuance of another or new permit would unreasonably, unfairly, or inequitably prevent another applicant from obtaining a permit to parade or assemble; or 
(13)  A permit for another parade or assembly has previously been issued, scheduling and lawfully permitting another parade or assembly, for the date sought by the applicant. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 7, § 7 [Ord. No. 72-72, § 8, 11-16-72]; Ord. No. 98-29, §§ I, 4-28-98)  
Sec. 25-160. - Modification of application. 
The city manager or city council may modify in writing the route, time, number of participants and manner of conduct of a proposed parade, and the place, boundaries of location, time, number of participants and manner of conduct of a proposed assembly, in such manner, means, or methods as it deems or finds necessary or conducive to ensure compliance with the criteria provided in section 25-159. If an applicant is dissatisfied with any modification of an application which has been properly filed and accepted, he or she may present evidence in support of the original application and argue for its approval, as provided for in section 25-158.(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 7, § 9 [Ord. No. 72-72, § 10, 11-16-72]; Ord. No. 98-29, §§ I, 4-28-98)  
Sec. 25-161. - Issuance. 
A permit is issued under this division to the individual applicant and, if applicable, to another person or group for whom the application is made, and is binding on all individuals and persons who participate in the parade or assembly. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 7, § 10 [Ord. No. 72-72, § 11, 11-16-72]; Ord. No. 98-29, §§ I, 4-28-98)  
Sec. 25-162. - Contents of the permit. 
Each parade permit issued by the city shall state the starting and termination time; the portions of the sidewalks, streets, roadways, highways, alleys, and other public thoroughfares and property to be traversed and that may be occupied by the parade; and such other information as the city manager and city council finds necessary to the enforcement of this article and other city ordinances and laws of the state and the United States. 
Each assembly permit shall state the starting and termination time of the assembly; the boundaries of the location of the assembly area; and such other information or conditions as the city manager or city council finds necessary to the enforcement of this article, other city ordinances, the laws of the state and of the United States, and to protect the public health and safety. 
All parade and assembly permits shall identify by name and address the applicant and the person, or persons, to whom the permit is issued. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 7, § 11 [Ord. No. 72-72, § 12, 11-16-72]; Ord. No. 98-29, §§ I, 4-28-98)  
Sec. 25-163. - Duties of permittees. 
All persons to whom a parade or assembly permit is issued must comply with all the permit directions and conditions, and with all applicable laws and ordinances, and they must inform all those who participate of all permit directions and conditions. The named parade or assembly leader must carry the parade or assembly permit upon his person at all times during the parade or assembly, and must produce such permit upon request of the police chief or his subordinate officers. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 7, § 12 [Ord. No. 72-72, § 13, 11-16-72]; Ord. No. 98-29, §§ I, 4-28-98)  
Secs. 25-164—25-199. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - OBSTRUCTIONS OF ROADWAYS, ALLEYS OR RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
 
Sec. 25-200. - Definition. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
(A)  "Alley" means a street that: 
(1)  is not used primarily for through traffic; and 
(2)  provides access to rear entrances of buildings or lots along a street. 
(B)  "Right-of-way" means the traveled portion of the roadway, including any public property within ten (10) feet of the curb line, and in the absence of a curb, the public property within ten (10) feet of the outside edge of the roadway. Right-of-way includes all medians within the public right-of-way. 
(C)  "Roadway" means the portion of a street, other than the berm or shoulder that is improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. 
(D)  "Vehicle" means a device used to transport or draw persons or property on a street, but the term does not include a device used exclusively on stationary rails or tracks, or a manufactured home. 
(Ord. No. 01-15, § I, 4-24-01)  
Sec. 25-201. - Encroaching on or obstructing roadways, alleys and rights-of-way. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, maintain, or cause to be placed or maintained any object in such a manner as to encroach upon or obstruct any portion of a roadway, alley or right-of-way to the degree that the object impedes the free passage on and use of the entire width of the roadway, alley or right-of-way by the public. 
(B)  This section does not apply to: 
(1)  Vehicles lawfully traveling on, or parked or stopped in or upon, the roadway or alley; 
(2)  Signs barricades or other traffic control devices lawfully in place; 
(3)  Objects lawfully in place for the purpose of providing utilities or governmental services, such as utility lines, fire hoses or waste collection containers; or 
(4)  Any other object otherwise permitted or required by law to encroach upon or obstruct the roadway or alley. 
(Ord. No. 01-15, § I, 4-24-01)  
Sec. 25-202. - Notice of violations. 
(A)  Whenever the code enforcement officer shall determine that any violation of this article has occurred, he shall send a written notice to the violator. 
(B)  In addition to the written notice, the code enforcement officer may also post notice on the obstruction itself. 
(C)  The notice must state that the violation must be corrected and removed not later than the 10 th day after the date of the notice. 
(Ord. No. 01-15, § I, 4-24-01; Ord. No. 02-6, § I, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 25-203. - Remedies, expenses, and citation. 
(A)  If the violation is not corrected or remedied within ten (10) days following the date of the notice required by this section, the code enforcement officer is authorized to correct or remove the violation. City will store the removed object for thirty (30) days, after which it shall be disposed of pursuant to state law. The cost of correction, removal, storage and/or disposal shall be assessed against the violator. Payment of such expenses shall not relieve any person from prosecution for violation of sec. 25-201. 
(B)  The code enforcement officer may issue a citation or summons to a person in charge of property within the city limits who violates this article. A person receiving a citation or summons who is convicted of violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Such remedy under this section is in addition to the abatement restitution. 
(C)  This section shall not be construed to limit the authority granted by any other law for a police officer or other authorized person to remove an object that is obstructing traffic. 
(D)  The court may order abatement and removal of the source of an obstruction or encroachment on conviction of an offense under this article. 
(Ord. No. 02-6, § I, 2-26-02)  
Sec. 25-204. - Repeat violations. 
The code enforcement officer shall inform the violator, in his written notice to abate, that if the violator commits another violation of the same kind on or before the first anniversary (12 months) of the date of the notice, the code enforcement officer without further notice may correct the violation as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 02-6, § I, 2-26-02)  
ARTICLE VII. - STREET MAINTENANCE FEE 
 
Sec. 25-225. - Definitions. 
In this article: 
Benefitted property means a residence; a business; or a lot or parcel on which improvements have been constructed and that generates motor vehicle trips. 
Monthly street maintenance cost per unit means the annual cost of street maintenance and operations including related materials, supplies, contracted treatments, pavement, concrete, signs, signals, marking, salaries, and equipment, and not including capital expenses such as existing debt or any new construction, divided by the total number of single family equivalents divided by twelve (12) months. The total number of single-family equivalents is total units within the city multiplied by each corresponding single-family equivalent. 
Nonresidential benefitted property means benefitted property not defined as residential benefitted property under this article. Nonresidential property shall include, but not be limited to, property being used for the following purposes: commercial, industrial, institutional, lodging, medical, office, or religious. 
Residential benefitted property means a single-family residence, modular home, townhouse, two-family housing, multi-family housing, mobile home, travel trailer, or manufactured home. 
Street maintenance fee means the fee established by this article. 
Transportation system means the structures, streets, rights-of-way, bridges, alleys, and other facilities within the city limits that are dedicated to the use of vehicular traffic; the maintenance and repair of those facilities; and the operation and administration of such maintenance and repair. 
Unit means a unit of measurement equaling: 
(1)  Residential benefitted property: One (1) per dwelling unit; or 
(2)  Nonresidential benefitted property: One (1) per one thousand (1,000) square feet of improvements designated as living area/floor area as applicable in the records of the Bell County Appraisal District; or 
(3)  Hotel/motel: One (1) per room; or 
(4)  Self-service car wash: One (1) per stall. 
Single-family equivalent is the equivalent number of trips per any other land use to single- family land use and is the principle basis of service measurement derived from trip generation rates, pass by percentages, and trip lengths published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. The single-family equivalents of the following uses per unit are: 
Land Use 	Single-family Equivalent
Rate	Billing Code 
1. Single-family detached housing dwelling unit 	1.00 	SFH 
2. Multi-family housing (low-rise) dwelling unit 	0.57 	MFL 
3. Multi-family housing (mid-rise) dwelling unit 	0.44 	MFH 
4. Mobile home dwelling unit 	0.47 	MH 
5. Assisted living 1,000 SF GFA 	0.49 	ALV 
6. Intermodal truck terminal 1,000 SF GFA 	2.31 	ITT 
7. General light industrial 1,000 SF GFA 	0.78 	GLI 
8. Industrial park 1,000 SF GFA 	0.49 	IPK 
9. Manufacturing 1,000 SF GFA 	0.83 	MFG 
10. Warehousing 1,000 SF GFA 	0.23 	WHS 
11. Mini warehouse 1,000 SF GFA 	0.21 	MWH 
12. Hotel room 	0.50 	HRM 
13. Motel/other lodging facilities room 	0.31 	MLF 
14. Multipurpose recreational facility 1,000 SF GFA 	2.84 	MPR 
15. Bowling alley 1,000 SF GFA 	0.92 	BWA 
16. Adult cabaret 1,000 SF GFA 	2.32 	ACB 
17. Ice skating rink 1,000 SF GFA 	1.05 	ISR 
18. Health/fitness club 1,000 SF GFA 	2.74 	HFC 
19. Athletic club 1,000 SF GFA 	4.99 	ATC 
20. Recreational community center 1,000 SF GFA 	1.83 	RCC 
21. Elementary school 1,000 SF GFA 	1.01 	ES 
22. Middle school/junior high school 1,000 SF GFA 	0.88 	MS 
23. High school 1,000 SF GFA 	0.72 	HS 
24. Private school (K-8) 1,000 SF GFA 	4.83 	PVS 
25. Junior/community college 1,000 SF GFA 	1.37 	JCC 
26. Place of Worship 1,000 SF GFA 	0.24 	PLW 
27. Reserved 	0.00 	— 
28. Day care center 1,000 SF GFA 	4.60 	DCC 
29. Museum 1,000 SF GFA 	0.13 	MSM 
30. Nursing home 1,000 SF GFA 	0.44 	NSH 
31. Clinic 1,000 SF GFA 	2.42 	CLC 
32. Animal hospital/veterinary clinic 1,000 SF GFA 	1.83 	AVC 
33. General office building 1,000 SF GFA 	0.85 	GOB 
34. Corporate headquarters building 1,000 SF GFA 	1.03 	CHB 
35. Single tenant office building 1,000 SF GFA 	1.26 	STO 
36. Medical - Dental office building 1,000 SF GFA 	2.56 	MDO 
37. Office Park 1,000 SF GFA 	0.98 	OFP 
38. Construction equipment rental store 1,000 SF GFA 	0.82 	CER 
39. Building materials and lumber store 1,000 SF GFA 	1.70 	BML 
40. Free-standing discount superstore 1,000 SF GFA 	2.53 	DSS 
41. Variety store 1,000 SF GFA 	3.72 	VRS 
42. Free-standing retail store 1,000 SF GFA 	2.79 	RTS 
43. Hardware/paint store 1,000 SF GFA 	1.63 	HPS 
44. Nursery (garden center) 1,000 SF GFA 	4.01 	NGC 
45. Shopping center 1,000 SF GLA 	2.07 	SHC 
46. New and used car sales 1,000 SF GFA 	2.38 	CRS 
47. Recreational vehicle sales 1,000 SF GFA 	0.61 	RVS 
48. Automobile parts sales 1,000 SF GFA 	2.22 	APS 
49. Tire store 1,000 SF GFA 	2.28 	TRS 
50. Tire superstore 1,000 SF GFA 	1.20 	TSS 
51. Supermarket 1,000 SF GFA 	4.88 	SPM 
52. Convenience market (open 24 hours) 1,000 SF GFA 	19.85 	CVM 
53. Convenience market w/ gasoline pumps 1,000 SF GFA 	13.83 	CMG 
54. Discount supermarket 1,000 SF GFA 	5.46 	DSM 
55. Home improvement superstore 1,000 SF GFA 	1.11 	HIS 
56. Office supply superstore 1,000 SF GFA 	2.29 	OSS 
57. Discount home furnishing superstore 1,000 SF GFA 	1.30 	DHF 
58. Department store 1,000 SF GFA 	1.13 	DTS 
59. Apparel store 1,000 SF GFA 	3.40 	AST 
60. Pharmacy/drugstore w/o drive-through window 1,000 SF GFA 	3.30 	PDS 
61. Pharmacy/drugstore w/drive-through window 1,000 SF GFA 	4.33 	PDT 
62. Furniture store 1,000 SF GFA 	0.20 	FTS 
63. Walk-in bank 1,000 SF GFA 	3.05 	WKB 
64. Drive-in bank 1,000 SF GFA 	5.31 	DIB 
65. Hair salon 1,000 SF GFA 	0.43 	HRS 
66. Drinking place 1,000 SF GFA 	3.83 	DRP 
67. Sit down restaurant 1,000 SF GFA 	2.58 	SDR 
68. High turnover (sit-down) restaurant 1,000 SF GFA 	3.29 	HTR 
69. Fast food restaurant without drive-thru window 1,000 SF GFA 	8.38 	FFR 
70. Fast food restaurant with drive-thru window 1,000 SF GFA 	9.66 	FFD 
71. Coffee/donut shop without drive-through window 1,000 SF GFA 	2.36 	CDS 
72. Coffee/donut shop with drive-thru window 1,000 SF GFA 	2.82 	CDW 
73. Quick lubrication vehicle shop 1,000 SF GFA 	4.14 	QLV 
74. Automobile care center 1,000 SF GFA 	1.48 	ACC 
75. Automobile parts & service center 1,000 SF GFA 	1.00 	APC 
76. Self-service car wash stall 	0.49 	CWS 
77. Automated car wash 1,000 SF GFA 	1.00 	ACW 
 
User or utility customer means the person who is responsible for the payment of charges on a city utility meter for a benefitted property. 
( Ord. No. 18-045 , § I, 12-11-18; Ord. No. 19-010 , § I, 3-26-19)  
Sec. 25-226. - Creation of street maintenance special revenue fund; audit. 
A separate fund, within the city's fund structure, shall be created as of the effective date of the ordinance, known as the Street Maintenance Special Revenue Fund, for the purpose of maintenance of the transportation system. 
Such street maintenance revenues shall be used only for maintenance and operations costs of the transportation system. Money from sources other than the street maintenance fee may be deposited in the street maintenance special revenue fund. An expenditure from the street maintenance special revenue fund need not specifically relate to the property of a particular user from whom the street maintenance fee was collected. 
The street maintenance special revenue fund shall be audited twice annually, once by the city's internal auditor and once by the external auditor. Audits should occur approximately six (6) months apart, as feasible. 
( Ord. No. 18-045 , § I, 12-11-18)  
Sec. 25-227. - Administration; calculation of street maintenance costs; review. 
The city manager, or designee, shall be responsible for the administration of this ordinance including, but not limited to, creating a policy for the administration of the street maintenance fund and the street maintenance fee; enacting any procedures necessary for the administration of the street maintenance fees and the consideration of petitions for exemption or adjustment; developing maintenance programs; and establishing transportation system criteria and standards for the operation of maintenance of the transportation system. 
The estimated annual cost of the city's street maintenance and operations is six million two hundred twenty-one thousand six hundred forty dollars ($6,221,640.00). The total single-family equivalents within the city limits equal eighty thousand seventy-seven and fifty-six hundredths (80,077.56). The monthly street maintenance cost per unit is six dollars and forty-seven cents ($6.47). ($6,221,640.00/80,077.56/12 months = $6.47) 
The annual street maintenance and operations costs and total single-family equivalents above shall be reviewed annually and updated as needed. A road condition survey shall be conducted every three (3) years. 
( Ord. No. 18-045 , § I, 12-11-18)  
Sec. 25-228. - Findings. 
The city council finds and determines the following: 
(1)  It is appropriate that a benefitted property pay the prorated annual cost of the maintenance of the transportation system that can reasonably be attributed to the benefitted property. 
(2)  The number of motor vehicle trips generated by a benefitted property may reasonably be used to estimate the prorated cost of the maintenance of the transportation system attributable to a benefitted property. 
(3)  The size and use of a property may reasonably be used to estimate the number of motor vehicle trips generated by and single-family equivalent associated with the property. 
(4)  Based on the best available data, the method of imposing the Street Maintenance fee reasonably prorates the cost of maintenance of the transportation system among benefitted properties. 
(5)  If available, appraisal district property tax records may be relied on to determine the size of nonresidential benefitted property. 
(6)  It is reasonable and equitable to derive trip generation rates or single-family equivalents for residential and nonresidential benefitted property as determined and published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. 
(7)  It is reasonable and equitable to assume that each utility meter in the service area serves a benefitted property. 
(8)  It is reasonable to calculate the single-family equivalent and the monthly street maintenance cost components based on a representative year. 
(9)  For purposes of this article, a property's use does not depend on the property's zoning. If a property fits more than one (1) category of land use, the city manager, or designee, shall assign a composite single-family equivalent which will be calculated by combining the single-family equivalents for the existing land uses in percentages corresponding to the percentage of property used for each land use. 
( Ord. No. 18-045 , § I, 12-11-18)  
Sec. 25-229. - Fee established. 
The city council hereby establishes a street maintenance fee intended to fund approximately twenty-six and 35 hundredths (26.35) percent of annual street maintenance and operations costs. The street maintenance fee shall be calculated as provided herein and be paid by each City of Killeen utility customer within the city limits of Killeen, Texas.  
Sec. 25-230. - Calculation of fee. 
The street maintenance fee shall be calculated using the following formula: 
Monthly Street Maintenance Cost per unit x Number of Units x Single-Family Equivalent x Percentage Funded by Fee= Monthly Bill 
For example, a similarly situated customer shall pay an amount equal to the following each month: 
Single-family: $6.47 x 1 unit x 1 x .2635 = $1.70 
Multi-family (Low-Rise): $6.47 x 4 units x .57 x .2635 = $3.89 
Shopping Center: $6.47 x 20 units (1 per 1,000 sq. ft.) x 2.07 x .2635 = $70.58 
( Ord. No. 18-045 , § I, 12-11-18)  
Sec. 25-231. - Allocation. 
If one (1) benefitted property is served by multiple meters or where one (1) meter serves multiple benefitted properties, the city manager, or designee, may determine the allocation of the fee among the users by any reasonable method that takes into account the relative contribution of each to traffic generation. In the absence of better information, the city manager, or designee, may allocate the fee equally among the users. 
( Ord. No. 18-045 , § I, 12-11-18)  
Sec. 25-232. - Exemptions. 
(a)  This article does not apply to property owned by the city. 
(b)  This article does not apply to a property that is vacant and not generating any traffic. The city manager, or designee, may adopt any reasonable method to determine whether a property is vacant. 
(c)  A user entitled to an exemption under this section must notify the city manager, or designee, of the applicable exemption. A fee paid before the city manager, or designee, is notified of an exemption may not be refunded. 
( Ord. No. 18-045 , § I, 12-11-18)  
Sec. 25-233. - Adjustments. 
(a)  A user may apply to the city manager, or designee, for an adjustment in the user's monthly street maintenance fee if: 
(1)  the user disputes the category of land use used in calculating the fee for the owner's benefitted property; or 
(2)  the user believes the fee has been calculated in error. 
(b)  The city manager, or designee, may adjust the street maintenance fee for a user who has applied for an adjustment under this section according to best professional judgment. 
(c)  A user who disagrees with a determination of the city manager, or designee, under this section may apply for a hearing. The city manager shall designate a hearing officer with authority to hold the hearing. The user requesting the hearing shall have the burden of proof to show by a preponderance of evidence that the adjustment should be granted. On completion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall recommend a disposition of the matter to the city manager who may revise or reinstate the original determination. 
( Ord. No. 18-045 , § I, 12-11-18)  
Sec. 25-234. - Billing and payment. 
(a)  Bills or statements for the street maintenance fee shall be rendered by the city for all properties subject to the fee. Bills shall be payable when rendered and shall be considered as received by the customer/owner, whether actually received or not, when deposited in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the utility customer. 
(b)  Bills shall be rendered monthly, and subject to late charges. 
(c)  Bills shall be for services for the preceding month. 
(d)  Street maintenance fees shall be billed with the city's utility billings and shall be identified separately on the bill as a street maintenance fee. 
( Ord. No. 18-045 , § I, 12-11-18)  
Sec. 25-235. - Recovery of unpaid fees; enforcement. 
The city may recover a street maintenance fee that is not paid when due in an action at law. 
( Ord. No. 18-045 , § I, 12-11-18)  
Sec. 25-236. - Liability. 
This article does not imply that a benefitted property will be free from inadequately maintained roads, and does not create additional duties on the part of the city. This article does not waive the city's immunity under any law. 
( Ord. No. 18-045 , § I, 12-11-18)  
Chapter 26 - SUBDIVISIONS AND OTHER PROPERTY DEVELOPMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 95-38, § I, adopted Apr. 25, 1995, amended Ch. 26 to read as set out herein. Prior to such amendment, Ch. 26 consisted of §§ 26-1-26-6, 26-41-26-43, 26-56-26-60, 26-71-26-76, 26-86-26-91, 26-111, 26-131-26-133, 26-146-26-152m and 26-166-26-182, which contained similar provisions and derived from Ch. 9, Art. 1 of the 1963 Code; Ord. No. 88-79, adopted Aug. 9, 1988; Ord. No. 91-67, adopted Nov. 12, 1991; Ord. No. 92-17, adopted Apr. 28, 1992; Ord. No. 93-8, adopted Jan. 26, 1993; and Ord. No. 93-28, adopted Apr. 27, 1993. 
Cross reference— Building and construction regulations, Ch. 8; flood damage prevention, Ch. 12; mobile homes, mobile home parks, etc., Ch. 17; planning and development, Ch. 21; zoning, Ch. 31. 
State Law reference— Municipal regulation of subdivisions and property development, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 26-1. - Short title. 
The following regulations are hereby adopted and shall be known and may be cited as "City of Killeen Subdivision and Property Development Regulations." 
(Ord. No. 95-38, § I, 4-25-95)  
Sec. 26-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Words not specifically defined shall have the meanings given in Webster's Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary, as revised. 
Accessory structure or building shall mean a subordinate structure or building customarily incident to and located on the same lot occupied by the main structure or building. 
Applicant shall mean the owner(s) of the property to be developed. 
Bond shall mean any form of security, including a cash deposit, surety bond, or instrument of credit in an amount and form approved by the city. 
Brother-sister group means a group of two (2) or more organizations where the same five (5) or fewer common owners own a controlling interest in each group and taking into account the ownership of each common owner only to the extent ownership is identical with respect to each organization, the common owners are in control of more than fifty (50) percent of each organization. 
Building shall mean any structure designed or built for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattel or property of any kind. 
City standards shall mean those standards and specifications, together with all tables, charts, graphs, drawings and other attachments hereinafter approved and adopted by the city council, which may be amended from time to time, and are administered by the city staff for the construction and installation of streets, sidewalks, drainage facilities, water and sanitary sewer mains and any other public facilities. All such facilities which are to become the property of the city upon completion must be constructed in conformance with these standards. 
Commission shall mean the duly organized body appointed by the city council as the planning and zoning commission. 
Common ownership shall mean owned by the same person or owned by persons within a parent-subsidiary group, brother-sister group, or a combination of those groups subject to the constructive ownership and attribution rules located in the Internal Revenue Code, I.R.C. § 1563(e). 
Common plan of development shall mean a construction activity that is completed in separate stages, separate phases, or in combination with other construction activities. A common plan of development (also known as a "common plan of development or sale") is identified by the documentation for the construction project that identifies the scope of the project, and may include plats, blueprints, marketing plans, contracts, building permits, a public notice or hearing, zoning requests, or other similar documentation and activities. A common plan of development does not necessarily include all construction projects within the jurisdiction of a public entity (e.g. a city or university). Construction of roads or buildings in different parts of the jurisdiction would be considered separate "common plans," with only the interconnected parts of a project being considered part of a "common plan" (e.g. a building and its associated parking lot and driveways, airport runway and associated taxiways, a building complex, etc.). Where discrete construction projects occur within a larger common plan of development or sale, but are located one-fourth (¼) mile or more apart, and the area between the projects is not being disturbed, each individual project can be treated as a separate plan of development or sale, provided that any interconnecting road, pipeline or utility project that is part of the same "common plan" is not included in the area to be disturbed. 
Construction plans shall mean the maps, drawings and technical specifications, including bid documents and contract conditions, where applicable, which provide a graphic and written description of the character and scope of the work to be performed prepared for approval by the city for construction. 
Controlling interest shall mean the following: 
In the case of a corporation, ownership of stock having at least eighty (80) percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote of such corporation or at least eighty (80) percent of the total value of shares of all classes of stock of such corporation. 
In the case of a trust or estate, ownership of an actuarial interest of at least eighty (80) percent of such trust or estate. 
In the case of a partnership, ownership of at least eighty (80) percent of the profits interest or capital interest of such partnership. 
In the case of a sole proprietorship, ownership of the sole proprietorship. 
Developer shall mean any person, corporation, governmental or other legal entity engaged in the development of property by improving a tract or parcel of land for any use. The term "developer" is intended to include the term "subdivider." 
Development shall mean the construction of one (1) or more new buildings or structures, or the structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of one (1) or more new buildings or structures of an existing building or structure on one (1) or more building lots or sites, or the installation of site improvements. 
Development review committee shall mean a committee consisting of members of the plat review committee, the local utility companies, and the plat applicant and/or his or her designated agent. 
Drainage design manual shall mean the City of Killeen's adopted Drainage Design Manual, as amended, providing definitions, formulae, criteria, procedures, data, parameters, and methodology governing the planning, design, construction, and maintenance of drainage infrastructure within the city's jurisdiction. 
Easement shall mean a grant by a property owner to the public, a corporation, or persons for a general or specific use of a defined strip or parcel of land, for such purpose as the installation, construction, maintenance and/or repair of utility lines, drainage ditches or channels, or other public services, the ownership or title to the land encompassed by the easement being retained by the owner of the property. 
Engineer shall mean any person duly authorized under the Texas Engineering Practice Act (V.A.C.S. art. 3271a), as amended, to practice the profession of engineering. 
Engineering plans shall mean the maps and drawings required for plat approval. 
Extraterritorial jurisdiction shall mean that unincorporated area, not a part of any other city, which is contiguous to the corporate limits of the city, the outer boundaries of which are measured from the extremities of the corporate limits of the city outward for such distances as may be stipulated in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, section 42.001 et seq. 
Infrastructure Design and Development Standards Manual (IDDSM) shall mean the city of Killeen's adopted infrastructure design and development standards manual, as amended, providing definitions, formulae, criteria, specifications, details, procedures, data, parameters and methodology governing the planning, design, construction, and maintenance of water, sewer, drainage, street and associated infrastructure and, further detailing pollution control measures within the city's jurisdiction. 
Land disturbing activity shall mean any activity including, without limitation, the clearing, grading, filling, grubbing, scraping, dredging, mining, paving, excavating, drilling or movement of land, or the construction of any building or structure, the stockpiling of soil or materials, the baring of soil or rock, the diversion or piping of any natural or man-made watercourse, or any other activity that will or may result in soil erosion from water or wind, the movement of solid materials into waters or onto adjacent lands, or that changes the volume or peak flow discharge rate of storm water runoff from the land surface. 
Lacustrine shall mean pertaining to, formed in, growing in, or inhabiting lakes. 
Lot shall mean an undivided tract or parcel of land having access to a street, which is designated as a separate and distinct tract or lot number or symbol on a duly approved plat filed of record. The terms "lot" and "tract" shall be used interchangeably. 
Master plan shall mean the comprehensive plan of the city adopted by the city council. 
Notice of Intent (NOI) - see Texas Commission on Environmental Quality General Permit TXR150000, as amended. 
Off-site shall mean any premises not located within the property to be developed, regardless of ownership. 
Owner shall mean any persons, firm or corporation having legal title to the property. 
Parent-subsidiary group means a group of two (2) or more organizations connected through a common parent who owns a controlling interest in the other organization(s). 
Person shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association, estate, trust or organization. It also includes the singular and plural. 
Plat shall mean a map representing a tract of land showing the boundaries of individual properties and streets or a map, drawing, chart, or plan showing the layout of a proposed subdivision into lots, blocks, streets, parks, school sites, commercial or industrial sites, drainageways, easements, alleys, which an applicant submits for approval and a copy of which he intends to record with the county clerk of Bell County. 
Plat, final, shall mean the map or plan of a proposed development submitted for approval by the planning and zoning commission, where required, prepared in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and requested to be filed with the county clerk of Bell County. 
Plat, preliminary, shall mean the initial map or plan of a proposed development showing the general layout of streets, blocks and lots, utility systems, and drainage systems. 
Plat review committee shall mean a committee consisting of city staff members which shall review all plats submitted to the city for consideration for compliance with the city's standards, policies, resolutions, codes and ordinances. 
Right-of-way shall mean a strip of land acquired by dedication, prescription or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a road, sidewalk, railroad, electric transmission facility, oil or gas pipeline, water mains, sewer mains, storm drainage or other similar facility. Rights-of-way intended for streets, sidewalks, water mains, sewer mains, storm drainage, or any other use involving maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated to the public use by the plat applicant either by easement or in fee simple title. 
Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) - see Texas Commission on Environmental Quality General Permit TXR150000, as amended. 
Streets and alleys shall mean a way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, alley, place or however otherwise designated. City streets shall conform to the following classifications: 
(1)  Arterial streets and highways are those which are used primarily for higher speed and higher volume traffic. Routes for such streets shall provide for cross-town circulation and through-town movements. 
(2)  Collector streets are those which carry traffic from minor streets to the major system of arterial streets and highways, including the principal entrance, circulation streets of a residential development and streets for circulations within such a development of a residential subdivision. 
(3)  Minor streets are those which are used primarily for access to abutting properties. 
(4)  Marginal access streets are minor streets located parallel to and adjacent to arterial streets and highways, providing access to abutting properties and protection from the traffic of the thoroughfares. 
(5)  Alleys are minor ways used primarily for access to abutting properties for vehicle service usually to the back or side of a property. 
Structural alterations shall mean the installation or assembly of any new structural components, or any change to existing structural components, in a system, building or structure. 
Structure shall mean anything constructed or erected, which requires location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings of all types and ground signs, but exclusive of customary fences or boundary or retaining walls. 
Subdivision shall mean dividing a tract in two (2) or more parts for the purpose of creating lots, including an addition to the city, to lay out suburban, building or other lots or to lay out streets, alleys, squares, parks, or other parts of the tract intended to be dedicated to the public use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or adjacent to the streets, alleys, squares, parks or other parts. "Subdivision" refers to any division irrespective of whether the actual division is made by metes and bounds description in a deed of conveyance or a contract for a deed, by using a contract of sale or other executory contract to convey, or by using any other method. A subdivision does not include a division of land into parts greater than five (5) acres, where each part has access and no public improvement is being dedicated. 
(Ord. No. 95-38, § I, 4-25-95; Ord. No. 05-127, § II, 12-20-05; Ord. No. 07-045, § II, 5-22-07; Ord. No. 07-069, § I, 8-14-07; Ord. No. 11-107, § II, 11-8-11; Ord. No. 12-042, § II, 7-24-12; Ord. No. 12-046, § III, 8-7-12; Ord. No. 19-015 , § I, 4-23-19)  
Sec. 26-3. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth the procedures and standards for development of property, layout and design of subdivisions or real property within the corporate limits of the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction which are intended to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the city and the safe, orderly, and healthful development of the city. 
(Ord. No. 95-38, § I, 4-25-95; Ord. No. 07-045, § III, 5-22-07)  
Sec. 26-4. - Enforcement; penalty. 
(a)  Unless otherwise stated, violations of this chapter shall be punishable under the provisions of section 1-8 of the city code of ordinances and/or as provided in paragraphs (b) through (g) below. 
(b)  If it appears that a violation or threat of a violation of this subchapter or plan, rule, or ordinance adopted under this subchapter consistent with this subchapter exists, the municipality is entitled to appropriate injunctive relief against the person who committed, is committing, or is threatening to commit the violation. 
(c)  A suit for injunctive relief may be brought in the county in which the defendant resides, the county in which the violation or threat of violation occurs, or any county in which the municipality is wholly or partly located. 
(d)  In a suit to enjoin a violation or threat of a violation of this subchapter or a plan, rule, ordinance, or other order adopted under this subchapter, the court may grant the municipality any prohibitory or mandatory injunction warranted by the facts including a temporary restraining order, temporary injunction, or permanent injunction. 
(e)  A person commits an offense if the person violates this subchapter or a plan, rule, or ordinance adopted under this subchapter or consistent with this subchapter within the limits of the municipality. An offense under this subchapter is a Class C misdemeanor. Each calendar day the violation continues constitutes a separate offense. 
(f)  A suit under this section shall be given precedence over all other cases of a different nature on the docket of the trial or appellate court. 
(g)  It is no defense to a criminal or civil suit under this section that an agency of government other than the municipality issued a license or permit authorizing the construction, repair, or alteration of any building, structure, or improvement. It also is no defense that the defendant had no knowledge of this subchapter or of an applicable plan or rule. Reference L.G.C. § 212.050 (a)(f). 
(Ord. No. 95-38, § I, 4-25-95; Ord. No. 07-045, § IV, 5-22-07)  
Sec. 26-5. - Compliance required. 
(a)  The owner of a lot or tract of land located within the corporate limits of the city or the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city who divides the lot or tract in two (2) or more parts for sale or to lay out a subdivision of the tract, including an addition to the city, to lay out suburban, building, or other lots, or to lay out streets, alleys, squares, parks, or other parts of the lot or tract intended to be dedicated to public use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or adjacent to the streets, alleys, squares, parks, or other parts shall have a plat of the lot or tract of land or subdivision prepared and approved in accordance with this chapter and recorded with the county clerk of Bell County. A division of a lot or tract under this code includes a division regardless of whether it is made using a metes and bounds description in a deed of conveyance or in a contract for a deed, by using a contract of sale or other executory contract to convey, or by using any other method. A division of land under this code does not include a division of land into parts greater than five (5) acres within the corporate limits of the city, or greater than ten (10) acres in the extraterritorial jurisdiction, where each part has access to and no public improvement is being dedicated. 
(b)  Notwithstanding paragraph (a) above, a plat shall not be required where the development of the lot or tract of land is for the sole purpose of performing alteration(s) or improvements to an existing single-family residence or the auxiliary uses thereto. All such alterations or improvements must be permitted in compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 95-38, § I, 4-25-95; Ord. No. 07-045, § V, 5-22-07)  
Sec. 26-6. - Adoption of local government code regulation for development plats. 
The city of Killeen hereby adopts and approves Texas Local Government Code, chapter 212, subchapter B, and the law codified by that subchapter, as such may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 04-59, § I, 7-27-04)  
Sec. 26-7. - Application of other regulations. 
The provisions of this chapter and Texas Local Government Code, chapter 212, subchapter A, apply to development plats, to the extent that they do not conflict with sections 26-6 through 26-13 of the Killeen code of ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 04-59, § I, 7-27-04)  
Sec. 26-8. - Plans, rules, and ordinances. 
After a public hearing on the matter, the city council may from time to time adopt general plans, rules, or ordinances governing development plats of land within the limits and in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the municipality to promote the health, safety, morals, or general welfare of the municipality and the safe, orderly, and healthful development of the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 04-59, § I, 7-27-04)  
Sec. 26-9. - Development plat required. 
(a)  Any person who proposes the development of a tract of land located within the limits of the city must have a development plat of the tract prepared in accordance with this subchapter and the applicable plans, rules, or ordinances of the municipality. 
(b)  The development plat must be prepared by a registered professional land surveyor as a boundary survey showing: 
(1)  Each existing or proposed building, structure, or improvement or proposed modification of the external configuration of the building, structure, or improvements involving a change of the building, structure, or improvement. 
(2)  Each easement and right-of-way within or abutting the boundary of the surveyed property. 
(3)  The dimensions of each street, sidewalk, alley, square, park, or other part of the property intended to be dedicated to public use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or adjacent to the street, sidewalk, alley, square, park, or other part. 
(c)  New development may not begin on the property until the development plat is filed with and approved in accordance with this chapter. 
(d)  If a person is required under this chapter, as amended, to file a subdivision plat, a development plat is not required in addition to the subdivision plat. The development plat shall be accompanied by the following minimum documentation: 
(1)  Completed plat application signed by the property owner or in the case of a corporation/partnership, a party empowered to sign such actions (supported with authorizing documentation); 
(2)  Five (5) copies of the plat; 
(3)  Deed showing current ownership of the platted property; 
(4)  Tax certificates showing property owner is not in arrears in payment of taxes; and 
(5)  Nonrefundable application fee, as established by the city council. 
(6)  Preliminary Access/Drainage Letter granted by the Texas Department of Transportation for any plat with frontage on state managed rights of way identifying TxDOT's preliminary determination of access points and any drainage concerns that TxDOT desires to call to the city's attention. 
(e)  Development plats must meet the following criteria and contain the following information: 
(1)  Scaled drawing no smaller than 1" = 200' on a sheet size no greater than twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches (multiple sheets may be submitted; however, each sheet must be registered and match lines to allow assembly of the multiple sheets). 
(f)  The engineering plans shall be in compliance with the city's currently adopted construction standards, infrastructure design and development standards manual, and drainage design manual and shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Layout of all needed off-site utilities; 
(2)  Water system layout, including size of line and fire hydrant location; 
(3)  Sewer system layout, including size of line, location of manholes and cleanouts; 
(4)  All drainage infrastructure designs, analysis of as-is and full development conditions, analysis of all storm water conveyance systems, FEMA floodplain and floodway boundaries (if applicable), Creek Buffer Zone(s) (CBZ) in accordance with section 32-56 of this code of ordinances, letter(s) of release from property owners affected by diversion of water (except for watercourse(s) designated on current city topography maps), drainage construction and maintenance agreements (if applicable). 
(Ord. No. 04-59, § I, 7-27-04, Ord. No. 14-009, § D - F, 02-11-14)  
Sec. 26-10. - Restriction on issuance of permits. 
The municipality, a county or an official of another governmental entity may not issue a building permit or any other type of permit for development on lots or tracts subject to this subchapter until a plat is filed with and approved in accordance with this chapter and chapter 212 of the Local Government Code. 
(Ord. No. 04-59, § I, 7-27-04; Ord. No. 10-061, § I, 10-12-10)  
Sec. 26-11. - Approval of development plat. 
(a)  Development plats shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission in accordance with procedures established by this chapter. 
(b)  The development plat shall be approved if the plat conforms to: 
(1)  The general plans, rules, and ordinances of the municipality concerning its current and further streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks, playgrounds, and public utility facilities. 
(2)  The general plans, rules, and ordinances for the extension of the municipality or the extension, improvement, or widening of its roads, streets, and public highways within the municipality taking into account access to and extension of sewer and water mains and the instrumentalities of public utilities. 
(3)  Any general plans, rules, or ordinances adopted under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 04-59, § I, 7-27-04; Ord. No. 10-061, § I, 10-12-10; Ord. No. 14-009, § a, 02-11-14)  
Sec. 26-12. - Effect of approval or dedication. 
The approval of a subdivision or development plat is not considered an acceptance of any proposed dedication for public use or use by persons other than the owner of the property covered by the plat and does not impose on the municipality any duty regarding the maintenance or improvement of any purportedly dedicated parts until the appropriate municipal authority makes an actual appropriation of the dedicated parts by formal acceptance, entry, use, or improvement. 
(Ord. No. 04-59, § I, 7-27-04; Ord. No. 10-061, § I, 10-12-10)  
Sec. 26.13. - Enforcement; penalty. 
(a)  If it appears that a violation or threat of a violation of this subchapter or plan, rule, or ordinance adopted under this subchapter consistent with this subchapter exists, the municipality is entitled to appropriate injunctive relief against the person who committed, is committing, or is threatening to commit the violation. 
(b)  A suit for injunctive relief may be brought in the county in which the defendant resides, the county in which the violation or threat of violation occurs, or any county in which the municipality is wholly or partly located. 
(c)  In a suit to enjoin a violation or threat of a violation of this subchapter or a plan, rule, ordinance, or other order adopted under this subchapter, the court may grant the municipality any prohibitory or mandatory injunction warranted by the facts including a temporary restraining order, temporary injunction, or permanent injunction. 
(d)  A person commits an offense if the person violates this subchapter or a plan, rule, or ordinance adopted under this subchapter or consistent with this subchapter within the limits of the municipality. An offense under this subsection is a Class C misdemeanor. Each day the violation continues constitutes a separate offense. 
(e)  A suit under this section shall be given precedence over all other cases of a different nature on the docket of the trial or appellate court. 
(f)  It is no defense to a criminal or civil suit under this section that an agency of government other than the municipality issued a license or permit authorizing the construction, repair, or alteration of any building, structure, or improvement. It also is no defense that the defendant had no knowledge of this subchapter or of an applicable plan or rule. 
(Ord. No. 04-59, § I, 7-27-04) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate extraterritorial jurisdiction, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.003.  
Secs. 26-14—26-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PLATS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-21. - Fees. 
The applicant for approval of a preliminary plat, final plat, replat, amended plat, minor plat or modified final plat, or development plat shall, upon submission of the plat application and all required documentation, pay a nonreturnable fee, as established by the city council, for the review and processing of the plat application. Upon approval of the final plat, replat, amended plat, final minor plat, or development plat, the applicant shall pay an additional recording fee established by the county for recording the plat with the county clerk. 
(Ord. No. 95-38, § I, 4-25-95; Ord. No. 10-061, § I, 10-12-10)  
Sec. 26-22. - Schedule. 
The planning and zoning commission, at its first regular meeting in December of each year, shall adopt a schedule for the next calendar year establishing dates for filing plat applications and meetings of the plat review committee and development review committee based upon the established schedule of regular meetings of the planning and zoning commission. 
(Ord. No. 95-38, § I, 4-25-95)  
Sec. 26-23. - Process for approval. 
(a)  The planning and development services department shall convene a meeting of the plat review committee for review of the plat. The plat review committee shall assure conformance with the city's standards, policies, resolutions, codes, and ordinances. 
(b)  The plat review committee shall document its comments in writing and forward their report to the plat applicant and/or his or her designated agent for corrective action. The applicant shall assure that there is no outstanding debt owed the city required by this chapter on a previous plat(s) submitted by the applicant. Failure to pay the debt prior to the plat's submission to the planning and zoning commission shall result in the planning and zoning commission's disapproval of the plat. 
(c)  A meeting of the development review committee, consisting of members of the plat review committee and the local utility companies, shall be convened to discuss requirements to meet their needs. The plat applicant and/or his or her designated agent may attend as part of the application process. The development review committee shall document its comments in writing and forward its report to the plat applicant and/or his or her designated agent for corrective action. 
(d)  When the applicant has completed all corrective actions, the plat will be forwarded to the planning and development services department for continued processing. Plats submitted on or before the scheduled plat correction submission date, will be forwarded to the staff plat correction validation meeting. When plat corrections are validated, the plat application process shall be considered complete. The date of the staff plat correction validation meeting in which the plat corrections are validated, shall be designated to be the date the plat is filed with the City of Killeen. Those plats not eligible for administrative approval under the provisions of subsections 26-61 and 26-74 that are validated in the staff plat correction validation meeting will be scheduled for the next regular meeting of the planning and zoning commission. If the plat applicants do not agree with a requested correction comment, they may state their objection in writing and request that the plat be considered filed, and the plat will be considered filed and passed to the planning and zoning commission for action. 
(e)  Within thirty (30) days of the date that a plat application is deemed filed, those plats meeting the requirements of sections 26-61 and 26-74 of this chapter shall be approved by the executive director of planning and development services or the city planner. In those instances where the plat applicants do not agree with a requested correction comment, they may state their objection in writing and request that the plat be considered filed, and the executive director of planning and development services or the city planner shall not disapprove the plat, but shall be required to forward the plat to the planning and zoning commission for action. 
(f)  If the plat is disapproved by the planning and zoning commission, the applicant may correct the items of concern and resubmit the plat for approval one (1) time within six (6) months without paying any additional fees. If the plat is disapproved a second time or if a second request is not received within six (6) months of the first disapproval, the applicant will be required to repeat the plat application process from the beginning and pay all standard application fees. 
(g)  An applicant may withdraw his plat application from consideration at any time during the application process by filing a written notice of withdrawal with the planning and development services department. Upon filing the notice to withdraw, the planning and development services department shall discontinue processing the plat application. The applicant must file a written request to proceed with further consideration of the plat within six (6) months of withdrawal and the planning and development services department shall continue the application process. If the request to proceed with further consideration of the plat is filed more than six (6) months after filing the notice of withdrawal, the applicant shall be required to repeat the plat application process from the beginning and pay the standard application fees. 
(Ord. No. 95-38, § I, 4-25-95; Ord. No. 04-59, § II, 7-27-04; Ord. No. 10-061, § I, 10-12-10; Ord. No. 14-009, § b, f, 02-11-14; Ord. No. 19-015 , § I, 4-23-19) 
State Law reference— Plat approval, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.005 et seq.  
Sec. 26-24. - Requirements for approval of application by planning and zoning commission. 
(a)  Within thirty (30) days of the date that the application is deemed filed, the planning and zoning commission shall approve a plat if it complies with the requirements of this chapter, the applicant is not in arrears in the payment of any debts owed the city required by this chapter on a previous plat, it conforms to the general plan of the city and its current and future streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds, and public utility facilities plans, and it conforms to the city's general plan for the extension of roads, streets, and public highways, taking into account access to and extension of sewer and water mains and instrumentalities of public utilities to include public drainage infrastructure. 
(b)  A plat is considered approved by the planning and zoning commission unless it is disapproved within such thirty-day period. 
(Ord. No. 95-38, § I, 4-25-95; Ord. No. 10-061, § I, 10-12-10; Ord. No. 19-015 , § I, 4-23-19)  
Sec. 26-25. - Requirement for approval of application by city council. 
(Ord. No. 95-38, § I, 4-25-95; Ord. No. 10-061, § I, 10-12-10; Ord. No. 14-009, struck completely, 02-11-14)  
Sec. 26-26. - Recordation. 
(a)  Preliminary plats are not recorded with the county clerk. 
(b)  All plats pertaining to platted property located in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city shall only be recorded after approval by the planning and zoning commission, or the executive director of planning and development services, as applicable, and the commissioners' court of the county and the applicant's submission of the required recording fee. 
(c)  All plats meeting the criteria of sections 26-61 and 26-74 of this chapter shall be recorded with the county clerk upon the executive director of planning and development services' or city planner's approval of the plat and the applicant's submission of the required recording fee. 
(d)  All other plats shall be recorded with the county clerk upon the planning and zoning commission's approval of the final plat, the applicant's submission of the required recording fee, and all required municipal infrastructure is accepted per section 26-83. The applicant may elect to have the final plat recorded prior to acceptance of infrastructure by providing a guarantee of completion to the city in accordance with section 26-84. If all conditions, fees, or improvements are not completed within two years of being released for construction, then the final plat approval shall expire unless an extension is applied for and granted, due to ongoing progress towards completion of the project by the director of planning or designee. The request for an extension shall be submitted at least thirty (30) days prior to the date the final plat expires. 
(Ord. No. 95-38, § I, 4-25-95; Ord. No. 10-061, § I, 10-12-10; Ord. No. 14-009, § b, d, 02-11-14; Ord. No. 19-015 , § I, 4-23-19)  
Sec. 26-27. - Conflicts affecting property located in the extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
In cases where platted property is located in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city and conflicts exist between a city requirement and a county requirement, the more stringent shall control. 
(Ord. No. 95-38, § I, 4-25-95)  
Sec. 26-28. - Approval of preliminary plats. 
Approval of a preliminary plat shall be deemed to be an expression of approval to the layout submitted as a guide to the preparation of the final plat and shall not constitute approval of a final plat. 
(Ord. No. 95-38, § I, 4-25-95)  
Sec. 26-29. - Avigation notations. 
The planning and zoning commission shall require the execution of an avigation notation as a condition precedent to plat approval relating to any property or structure located within areas designated as being within the runway protection zone on the latest FAA (Federal Aviation Administration) approved airport layout plan for any airport within the city of Killeen, or any municipal or military airport adjacent to the city of Killeen which have runway protection zones that extend over any part of the city. An avigation release shall be included on the dedication page of any plat located within this area and shall have the following effect: 
(a)  Grant for the use and benefit of the public for continuing easement and right-of-flight for the passage of aircraft in the airspace above the surface of the land over which the easement is obtained, together with the right to cause, in said airspace, such noise as may be inherent in the operation of aircraft, now known or hereafter used for navigation of or flight in the airspace using said airspace for landing at, taking off from or operation on any municipal or military airport; and 
(b)  Will limit the height of any structure, tree or item of equipment to no more than the approach surface height for that location as specified in 14 CFR Part 77.25(d) (civil airport) or 14 CFR Part 77.28(a)(3) (military airport) as applicable. 
(c)  In addition to the height restrictions, an appropriate annotation will be made on plats of any land that lie within a 65 Ldn or greater noise contour as identified by the latest FAA approved airport master plan, utilizing the worst case noise contour map of either current or future contours for the applicable airport. In addition, the following avigation release format will be used: 
 
(Ord. No. 95-38, § I, 4-25-95; Ord. No. 04-59, § III, 7-27-04; Ord. No. 14-009, 02-11-14)  
Secs. 26-30—26-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PRELIMINARY PLATS 
 
Sec. 26-41. - Form, contents and required documentation. 
(a)  Preliminary plats shall include the entire tract of land under common ownership or common plan of development. 
(1)  Where property is part of a common plan of development, not under common ownership, a preliminary plat shall be filed that incorporates existing, approved preliminary or final plat(s) within the common plan area. 
(b)  Preliminary plats are optional for those submissions meeting the requirements of amending minor and development plats. Those plat applicants may elect to proceed to the final platting requirements in division 3 without filing a preliminary plat. Preliminary plats are mandatory for all other submissions. 
(c)  Preliminary plats shall be filed with the planning and development services department. The following words shall appear on the face of each preliminary plat: "Preliminary plat not for record." 
(d)  When a preliminary plat application is filed with the planning and development services department, it shall be accompanied by the following minimum documentation: 
(1)  Completed preliminary plat application; 
(2)  Five (5) copies of the plat and one (1) digital (.dwg or .shp format) version of the same; 
(3)  Five (5) copies of engineering plans and one (1) digital (.pdf format) version of the same; 
(4)  Deed showing current ownership of the platted property; 
(5)  Tax certificates showing property owner is not in arrears in payment of taxes; and 
(6)  Nonrefundable application fee, as established by the city council. 
(e)  Preliminary plats must meet the following criteria and contain the following information: 
(1)  Scaled drawing no smaller than 1" = 200' on a sheet size no greater than twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches (multiple sheets may be submitted; however, each sheet must be registered and match lines to allow assembly of the multiple sheets); 
(2)  Boundary of the subject tract with computed acreage; 
(3)  The location of all existing and/or proposed streets, alleys, sidewalks and multi-use paths, with street names, right-of-way widths and relation to surrounding existing street patterns; 
(4)  Location, size, and purpose of all existing easements and proposed municipal easements on or adjacent to the proposed subdivision; 
(5)  Location, size, and purpose of any existing or proposed areas dedicated for public use within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision; 
(6)  Conceptual location of all proposed lots with numbers or letters to identify each block and illustration of conceptual lot lines. Northings and eastings are not required for conceptual lot lines; 
(7)  Layout, in dashed lines, of all existing adjacent lots to the property being platted showing lot size, lot and block numbers, name of existing subdivision or property owner if undeveloped property; 
(8)  Location, size, and centerline of all existing and proposed utilities; 
(9)  Conceptual drainage information (i.e. detention pond location and approximate size, creek buffer zone, drainage infrastructure, other storm water conveyance systems, and location of the following proposed storm water management site plan areas: riparian buffers, preserved natural areas, linear parks, open space areas, protected environmentally sensitive areas, conservation easements, and preserved tree canopy, if applicable); 
(10)  FEMA designated special flood hazard boundaries, if applicable; 
(11)  Topographic information, including contours at two-foot intervals and identification of source with date: 
(12)  The location, approximate dimensions, and descriptions of existing watercourses and drainage infrastructure within and contiguous to the proposed subdivision: 
(13)  Label or identify number of residential lots, average lot size, and provide a typical detail for each size of proposed lot if applicable: 
(14)  Proposed phasing, with demonstrated sufficiency and viability of public infrastructure for each phase such that an undue burden is not placed on any particular phase. Phasing shall occur in sequential order in such a way as to not create phases that are not developable within compliance with other provisions of the Code; 
(15)  Date, scale, north point, and small scale location map; 
(16)  Name and address of all property owners of the property being platted; 
(17)  Name and address of engineer and surveyor; 
(18)  Signed statement of the engineer and/or surveyor who prepared the preliminary plat indicating the records or survey from which the property description of the boundary of the proposed plat was developed; and 
(19)  As-built drawing of existing structures, if applicable. 
(f)  A preliminary plat will expire five (5) years after the first application was filed. Each final plat, which is a phase of an approved preliminary plat, shall extend the expiration date of the preliminary plat an additional two (2) years from the date the final plat was approved by the planning and zoning commission. Nothing herein shall reduce the initial five-year permit period. 
(g)  All items submitted under subsection 26-1(e) shall be in compliance with the city's currently adopted zoning, construction standards, infrastructure design and development standards manual, drainage design manual, and master plans except as otherwise allowed by state law. 
(Ord. No. 95-38, § I, 4-25-95; Ord. No. 11-107, § II, 11-8-11; Ord. No. 12-042, § II, 7-24-12; Ord. No. 14-009, § c, e, 02-11-14; Ord. No. 19-015 , § I, 4-23-19)  
Secs. 26-42—26-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - FINAL PLATS 
 
Sec. 26-51. - Form, contents, and required documentation. 
(a)  Final plats are mandatory in accordance with section 26-5. 
(b)  In cases where a preliminary plat was previously approved, the final plat shall substantially conform to the approved preliminary plat. 
(c)  If the final plat requires the extension of public infrastructure, construction plans shall be released for construction before the plat can be deemed filed in accordance with subsection 26-23(d). 
(d)  Final plats shall be filed with the planning and development services department and shall be accompanied by the following minimum documentation: 
(1)  Completed final plat application signed by the property owner or in the case of a corporation/partnership, a party empowered to sign such actions (supported with authorizing documentation); 
(2)  Five (5) copies of the plat and one (1) digital (.dwg or .shp format) version of the same; 
(3)  Deed showing current ownership of the platted property; 
(4)  Tax certificates showing property owner is not in arrears in payment of taxes; 
(5)  A statement on the plat application showing that all fees owed the city on any prior projects has been paid in full at the time the application was filed; 
(6)  Nonrefundable application fee, as established by the city council; and 
(7)  Preliminary access/drainage letter granted by the Texas Department of Transportation for any plat with frontage on state managed rights of way identifying TxDOT's preliminary determination of access points and any drainage concerns that TxDOT desires to call to the city's attention. 
(e)  Final plats must meet the following criteria and contain the following information: 
(1)  Scaled drawing no smaller than 1" = 100'. If a scale other than 1" = 100' is used for the plat, a 1" = 100' inset will be included on the plat. Sheet size shall be no greater than twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches (multiple sheets may be submitted; however, each sheet must be registered and match lines to allow assembly of the multiple sheets and an index sheet shall be drawn on a sheet twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches showing the entire property being platted, date, scale, northpoint and a small scale location map); 
(2)  The shape and the exterior boundaries of the property being platted shall be indicated by the use of a distinctive line weight and individual symbol; 
(3)  The length of all-straight lines, deflection angles, radii, arcs, and central angles of all curves shall be given along the property lines of each street or tabulated on the same sheet showing all curve data with its symbol. All dimensions along the lines of each lot with the angles of intersections that they make with each other shall be indicated; 
(4)  The names of all adjoining subdivisions, the side lines of abutting lots, lot and block numbers, all in dotted lines, and accurate reference ties to at least two (2) adjacent, existing controlling property monuments shall be clearly indicated; 
(5)  The description and location of all survey monuments placed on the property being platted shall be indicated; 
(6)  A title shall be indicated, including the name of the property being platted, the name of the applicant and scale and location of the property being platted with reference to original surveys and a north point which may be magnetic or true north, with notation stating which. 
(7)  All FEMA-designated flood hazards shall be indicated. These shall include, the floodway boundary, 100-year floodplain limits, base flood elevation (BFE) contours, flood zone designations (Zone "X" inclusive), and all other essential flood insurance study data. The panel number, effective date, and map number of each referenced National Flood Insurance 
Program (NFIP) map shall be cited. Where required, the lowest finish floor elevation (FFE) shall be determined for each affected lot. The BFE and FFE for each lot shall be summarized in a table. All NFIP map changes or map revision data submitted to FEMA shall be indicated in like manner; 
(8)  Avigation notation, if required; 
(9)  A surveyor's certificate shall be placed on the final plat: 
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS: 
That I, ________, do hereby certify that I prepared this plat from an actual and accurate survey of the land and that the corner monuments shown thereon were properly placed under my personal supervision, in accordance with the Subdivision and Property Development Regulations of the City of Killeen, Texas. 
	/s/   
      Signature 
 	 
	/s/   
      Texas Reg. No. 
 	 
(10)  A certificate of ownership and of dedication of all streets, alleys, easements and lands to public use forever, signed and acknowledged before a notary public by the owner of the land, shall appear on the face of the map, containing complete and accurate description of the property being platted and the streets dedicated; 
(11)  A certificate of approval by the planning and zoning commission shall be placed on the plat. 
Approved this ________ day of ________, ________, by the Planning and 
Zoning Commission of the City of Killeen, Texas. 
	/s/   
      Chairman, Planning and Zoning Commission 
 	 
	/s/   
      Secretary, Planning and Zoning Commission 
 	 
(12)  The applicant will furnish the city a copy of the dedication at the same time the final plat is submitted for approval; and 
(14)  In the case of a minor or amended plat provided under section 26-61 or 26-74 of this chapter, as applicable, only a certificate of approval from the executive director of planning and development services or the city planner shall be required as follows: 
Approved this _________ day of ________________, _________, by the executive director of planning and development services or the city planner of the City of Killeen, Texas. 
	/s/   
      Executive Director of Planning and Development Services or the City Planner 
 	 
	/s/   
      Planning Secretary 
 	 
(f)  Construction plans shall be in compliance with the city's currently adopted zoning, construction standards, infrastructure design and development standards manual, drainage design manual, and master plans except as otherwise allowed by state law. 
(Ord. No. 95-38, § I, 4-25-95; Ord. No. 05-25, § I, 3-22-05; Ord. No. 10-061, § I, 10-12-10; Ord. No. 11-107, § II, 11-8-11; Ord. No. 12-042, § II, 7-24-12; Ord. No. 12-046, § III, 8-7-12; Ord. No. 14-009, § c, d, 02-11-14; Ord. No. 19-015 , § I, 4-23-19)  
Secs. 26-52—26-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - MINOR PLATS 
 
Sec. 26-61. - Conditions for approval. 
(a)  The executive director of planning and development services or the city planner is hereby authorized to approve a minor plat, without subsequent approval by the planning and zoning commission or when the property proposed to be platted or replatted is as follows: 
(1)  Four (4) or fewer lots fronting on an existing street; 
(2)  Street construction or the extension of municipal facilities is not required; and 
(3)  An agreement between the city and the plat applicant is not required. 
(b)  All other requirements of this chapter shall apply, except that subsequent approval by the planning and zoning commission shall not be required prior to recording the minor plat with the county clerk. 
(Ord. No. 95-38, § I, 4-25-95; Ord. No. 10-061, § I, 10-12-10; Ord. No. 14-009, § b, 02-11-14)  
Secs. 26-62—26-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - VACATION OF PLATS, REPLATS AND AMENDMENT OF PLATS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Vacating plats, amending plats, etc., V.T.C.A. Local Government Code § 212.013 et seq. 
 
Sec. 26-71. - Vacation of plats. 
(a)  Any plat, replat or amended plat previously recorded with the county clerk may be vacated by the property owner(s) at any time prior to the sale of any lot therein by filing a written signed and acknowledged instrument declaring the same to be vacated and recorded with the county clerk. 
(b)  If one (1) or more lots have been sold, the plat, replat or amended plat may be vacated by the property owners by filing a written signed and acknowledged instrument with the planning and development services department. The vacating instrument for an original plat, replat or amended plat must be approved by the planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning commission shall disapprove the vacating instrument which abridges or destroys public rights in any of its public uses, improvements, streets, or alleys. Upon approval by the planning and zoning commission, the vacating instrument may be recorded with the county clerk and the vacated plat, replat or amended plat shall have no effect. 
(Ord. No. 95-38, § I, 4-25-95; Ord. No. 10-061, § I, 10-12-10; Ord. No. 14-009, § b, 02-11-14) 
State Law reference— Vacating plats, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.013.  
Sec. 26-72. - Replats without vacating preceding plat. 
A replat may be recorded and controls over a previously recorded plat without vacation of that plat if the replat is signed and acknowledged by the owners of the property being platted, does not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions, and is approved, after a public hearing on the matter, by the planning and zoning commission. 
(Ord. No. 95-38, § I, 4-25-95; Ord. No. 14-009, 02-11-14)  
Sec. 26-73. - Additional requirements for certain replats. 
(a)  In addition to compliance with section 26-72, a replat without vacation of the preceding plat must conform to the requirements of this section if: 
(1)  During the preceding five (5) years, any of the area to be replatted was limited by an interim or permanent zoning classification to residential use for not more than two (2) residential units per lot; or 
(2)  Any lot in the preceding plat was limited by deed restrictions to residential use for not more than two (2) residential units per lot. 
(b)  Notice of the public hearing required under section 26-72 shall be given before the fifteenth day before the date of the public hearing by publication in the newspaper and by written notice, with a copy of section 26-73(c) attached, to the owners of any lots that are in the original subdivision and that are within two hundred (200) feet of the lots to be replatted, as indicated on the most recently approved tax rolls. 
(c)  If the proposed replat requires a variance and is protested in accordance with this subsection, the proposed replat must receive, in order to be approved, the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths (3/4) of the members present at the meeting of the planning and zoning commission. For a legal protest, written instruments signed by at least twenty (20) percent of the owners of the lots or land immediately adjoining the area covered by the proposed replat and extending two hundred (200) feet from that area, but within the original subdivision, must be filed with the planning and zoning commission prior to the close of the public hearing. 
(d)  In computing the percentage of land area under subsection (c), the area of streets and alleys shall be included. 
(Ord. No. 95-38, § I, 4-25-95; Ord. No. 14-009, § c, 02-11-14)  
Sec. 26-74. - Plat amendments or corrections. 
(a)  The executive director of planning and development services or the city planner may approve and issue an amended plat, which may be recorded with the county clerk and controls over the preceding plat without vacation of the plat, if the amended plat is signed by the applicant(s) and is solely for one (1) or more of the following purposes: 
(1)  To correct an error in a course or distance shown on the preceding plat; 
(2)  To add a course or distance that was omitted on the preceding plat; 
(3)  To correct an error in the description of the real property shown on the preceding plat; 
(4)  To indicate monuments set forth after death, disability, or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor responsible for setting monuments; 
(5)  To show the proper location or character of any monument which has been changed in location or character or which originally was shown incorrectly as to location or character on the preceding plat; 
(6)  To correct any other type of scrivener's or clerical error or omission previously approved by the planning and zoning commission, including lot numbers, acreage, street names, and identification of adjacent recorded plats; 
(7)  To correct an error in courses and distances of lot lines between two (2) adjacent lots where both lot owners join in the application for plat amendment and neither lot is abolished; provided, that such amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions and does not have a material adverse effect on the property rights of the other owners in the plat; 
(8)  To relocate a lot line in order to cure an inadvertent encroachment of a building or improvement on a lot line or on an easement; 
(9)  To relocate one (1) or more lot lines between one (1) or more adjacent lots where the owner(s) of all such lots join in the application for the plat amendment; provided, that such amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions and does not increase the number of lots; or 
(10)  To make necessary changes to the preceding plat to create six (6) or fewer lots in the plat if the changes do not affect applicable zoning and other regulations of the city, and the changes do not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions and the area covered by the changes is located in an area that the planning and zoning commission has approved, after a public hearing, as a residential improvement area. 
(11)  To replat one or more lots fronting on an existing street if the owners of all those lots join in the application for the amendment; the amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions or increase the number of lots; and, the amendment does not create or require the creation of a new street or make necessary the extension of municipal facilities. 
(b)  Notice, a hearing, and the approval of other lot owners are not required for the approval and issuance of an amended plat. 
(c)  All other requirements of this chapter shall apply, except that subsequent approval by the planning and zoning commission shall not be required prior to recording the amended plat with the county clerk. 
(Ord. No. 95-38, § I, 4-25-95; Ord. No. 96-43, § I, 5-14-96; Ord. No. 10-061, § I, 10-12-10; Ord. No. 14-009, § a, c, 02-11-14)  
Secs. 26-75—26-79. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DEVELOPMENT PROCESS 
 
Sec. 26-80. - Land disturbance permit required. 
(a)  When required. A land disturbance permit shall be obtained before any land disturbance activity, including grading or excavating, that disturbs one (1) or more acres of total land area, or is a part of a common plan that will result in the disturbance of one (1) or more acres of total land area within the corporate limits of the city of Killeen. A land disturbance permit application shall be submitted prior to or concurrent with the construction plans for a subdivision or, in the event that construction plans are not required, prior to the commencement of any land disturbing activity. The term "disturb" when used in this article shall be understood to be defined as provided in this chapter and also chapter 32, article III of this code of ordinances. 
(b)  When not required. A land disturbance permit is not required for the following land disturbing activities: 
(1)  The removal, transplanting, or planting of woody or herbaceous plants on existing, individual one to four family residential parcels. 
(2)  Agricultural activities such as clearing and cultivating ground for crops, construction of fences to contain livestock, construction of stock ponds, and other similar agricultural activities. 
(3)  Clearing for the specific purpose of conducting measurements and surveys. 
(4)  These provisions do not relieve any entity or property owner from storm water runoff related damages caused by their land disturbing activity. 
(c)  Required components. An applicant shall submit two (2) copies of their Notice of Intent (NOI) and accompanying Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) that comply with the requirements under the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality General Permit TXR150000, as amended, together with the following items: 
(1)  Completed permit application signed by the property owner or, in the case of a corporation/partnership, a party empowered to sign such actions (supported with authorizing documentation); 
(2)  Nonrefundable permit application fee, as established by the city council; 
(3)  Deed showing current ownership of the subject property; and 
(4)  Documentation required to comply with Chapter 32, Article III of this code of ordinances. 
(d)  Review process. The city staff agency responsible for the intake and review of land disturbance permit applications shall be the public works department. Applications shall be submitted on a form provided by the planning division and processing shall begin each Friday or the first business day following a Friday holiday. The public works department shall issue the land disturbance permit if all components required by this section and chapter 32, article III of this code of ordinances have been submitted and the fee paid. The public works department shall advise the applicant in writing of any concerns with the permit application held by the same. 
(e)  Additional components. In all other cases where the applicant will not be submitting construction plans prior to land disturbing activities and the applicant's activities may divert or impound the natural flow of surface waters in this state, and the applicant is disturbing more than one (1) acre of land, the applicant shall submit a land disturbance permit application with the components listed in paragraph (c) above and, in addition include two (2) copies of the following documents (as applicable) and shall not commence with land disturbing activity prior to issuance of a land disturbance permit: 
(1)  A site inventory showing riparian corridors (stream ways, river ways, lacustrine basins, and/or wetland areas) and land unsuitable for site improvements based on soil type, slope, and other geotechnical conditions. 
(2)  A pre-disturbance site drainage analysis prepared in accordance with the city's drainage design manual. 
(3)  A post-disturbance site drainage analysis prepared in accordance with the city's drainage design manual, and the provisions of article IV, division 2, sections 103 and 104 of this chapter, including all components of the pre-disturbance drainage analysis with modified calculations and storm water runoff paths resulting from the post disturbance contours. 
(4)  If these features and/or conditions listed in subparagraphs (1), (2), and (3) above will not be affected by the proposed land disturbing activity, the respective additional components of this paragraph will not be required. 
(f)  Issuance of permit. The public works department shall issue a permit within ten (10) working days beginning on the first subsequent processing date indicated in paragraph (d) of this section or give a detailed written notice to the applicant that the permit application is incomplete. If the permit application is returned as being incomplete or incorrect, the applicant may correct the deficiencies and resubmit the permit application for approval one (1) time within forty-five (45) calendar days of the date of written notice without paying any additional fees. If the permit application is returned a second time or if a second request is not received within forty-five (45) calendar days of the date of notice of the first written notice, the applicant will be required to resubmit the permit application and shall pay all standard permit application fees. 
(g)  Appeal. The applicant for a land disturbance permit may file an appeal of a non-issuance by staff with the city manager's office within fifteen (15) calendar days. The appeal request must detail the applicant's basis for challenging the written findings of the city engineer. The city manager or city manager's designee shall consider the merits of the appeal and shall either resolve the appeal in the applicant's favor and have the permit issued or schedule the appeal for the next available planning and zoning commission meeting agenda for final resolution. 
(Ord. No. 07-045, § VI, 5-22-07; Ord. No. 07-069, § II, 8-14-07; Ord. No. 11-061, § II, 7-12-11; Ord. No. 11-107, § II, 11-8-11; Ord. No. 14-009, § g, 02-11-14)  
Sec. 26-81. - Construction of infrastructure. 
(a)  Following approval of the final plat, the plat applicant shall submit full construction plans for all proposed infrastructure to be constructed for the platted property. Construction plans submitted shall be in conformance with the approved plat. The public works department shall review the submitted plans for compliance with the infrastructure design and development standards manual, the drainage design manual, and other applicable construction standards adopted by the city. 
(b)  Upon review and consideration of release for construction of construction plans by the public works department, the plat applicant and/or the plat applicant's contractor will provide written notification to the public works department of the intent to commence construction of the required infrastructure. No work may be performed unless written notification has been provided to the public works department. The written notification shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name of the plat or subdivision; 
(2)  Plat applicant's name; 
(3)  Contractor's name, address and phone number; 
(4)  Type of construction to be performed; and 
(5)  Estimated value of construction. 
(c)  The public works department shall issue an acknowledgment of receipt of notification to the developer and/or his contractor. 
(Ord. No. 95-38, § I, 4-25-95; Ord. No. 12-042, § II, 7-24-12; Ord. No. 14-038, (b), 05-13-14)  
Sec. 26-82. - Phasing of infrastructure construction. 
(a)  At the time the applicant submits his or her construction plans to the public works department, the applicant may request to phase construction of the subdivision improvements. The construction plans submitted for review and consideration of release for construction shall clearly delineate those facilities to be constructed in the current phase. Any infrastructure required to mutually support multiple phases of the subdivision shall be constructed as a part of the first phase of the subdivision development. All requests for phasing made after construction plans have been released for construction shall be resubmitted to the Director of Public Works or his appointee for review. 
(b)  Upon completion of each phase of infrastructure construction and satisfaction of the requirements of section 26-83 and/or section 26-84 of article III, the director of public works or his appointee shall issue a written letter of acceptance of the infrastructure, stating the specific street sections which have been accepted, and shall identify by lot and block numbers the lots which the building and development services department may issue building permits. 
(Ord. No. 95-38, § I, 4-25-95; Ord. No. 14-038, (a) ( b), 05-13-14)  
Sec. 26-83. - Acceptance of infrastructure. 
(a)  Upon completion of all required infrastructure, prior to the acceptance of the subdivision by the city for maintenance, the applicant, or applicant's agent, shall provide record (as-built) drawings of all constructed water, wastewater, street, and drainage infrastructure. Also, the applicant, or applicant's agent, shall post, or cause to be posted, a maintenance bond executed by a corporate surety or corporate sureties duly authorized to do business in this state, payable to the city and approved by the city as to form, to guarantee the maintenance of the construction for a period of one (1) year after its completion and acceptance by the city. However, a two-year maintenance bond shall be required for all drainage infrastructure. In cases where the entirety or a portion of a water or sewer main will be placed under a street, if the applicant, or applicant's agent, does not provide full base backfill from the bedding of a water or sewer main to the sub base of the street, a three (3) year maintenance bond shall be required for all water and sewer infrastructure placed under a street. In lieu of a maintenance bond, the applicant may submit either an irrevocable letter of credit payable to the city and approved by the city as to form or a cash bond payable to the city and approved by the city as to form. The actual value of the maintenance bond or letter of credit or cash bond shall be ten (10) percent of the full cost of the water and sewer system and fifteen (15) percent of the full cost of the cost of street and drainage construction, as determined by the actual construction costs. The values enumerated in the bond or letter of credit shall be supported by a construction take-off summarizing the lineal, areal and volumetric quantities, as applicable, for all constructed water, sewer, street, and drainage infrastructure. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the approved maintenance bond, irrevocable letter of credit or cash bond, the public works department shall issue a written letter of acceptance of the infrastructure and notify the building and development services department that the subdivision has been accepted by the city. 
(c)  All infrastructure including, but not limited to water, sewer, streets, transportation, drainage, environmental, and appurtenances shall be inspected by the public works department prior to acceptance and warranty period. The initial inspection shall be provided by the city at no cost to the developer. Should the inspected infrastructure not meet the IDDSM or other applicable local, state and/or federal regulations or if the inspection cannot be completed due to risk of injury to city personnel or equipment due to a condition created by the developer or his agents, a fee, as provided in chapter 2 of this Code or Ordinances, will be paid to the city by the developer for any additional inspections as required. In-lieu of paying a fee, the developer may contract a third party to make the required inspections and all documentation, including but not limited to, logs, videos, photos, and test reports shall be presented to the director of public works or his appointee for review and approval. 
(Ord. No. 95-38, § I, 4-25-95; Ord. No. 11-061, § II, 7-12-11; Ord. No. 14-038, (a) (c ), 05-13-14)  
Sec. 26-84. - Building permits issued prior to completion of infrastructure. 
(a)  In the event an applicant wishes to obtain building permits prior to acceptance of the subdivision by the city, the applicant shall post with the city a completion bond executed by a corporate surety or corporate sureties duly authorized to do business in this state, payable to the city and approved by the city as to form for all construction included in the approved construction plans that has not been completed. In lieu of a completion bond, the applicant may submit either an irrevocable letter of credit payable to the city and approved by the city as to form or a cash bond payable to the city and approved by the city as to form. 
(b)  Under no circumstances shall building above the foundation be permitted until adequate fire protection is available. Adequate fire protection means: 
(1)  City utilities are installed; 
(2)  Fire hydrants providing protection are operational; and 
(3)  Streets are open and driveable, having all curbs and gutters installed, where required, street subgrades worked to proper compaction and base course installed, graded and leveled, to facilitate vehicle movement. 
(c)  After the plat has been recorded and the completion bond, irrevocable letter of credit or cash bond has been received and approved by the city, the public works department shall notify the building and development services department, by lot and block numbers, that building permits may be issued. 
(Ord. No. 95-38, § I, 4-25-95)  
Sec. 26-85. - Agreements with the city. 
(a)  The city of Killeen may enter into a contract with a developer of a subdivision or land within the city to construct public improvements, not including a building, related to development. Under such contract, the developer shall construct the improvements and the city shall participate in the cost. All agreements under this section shall be in writing and set forth in a form agreement approved by the city attorney. 
(b)  General policies: 
(1)  The city/owner agreement must establish the limit of participation by the municipality at a level not to exceed thirty (30) percent of the total contract price. 
(2)  In addition, the contract may also allow participation by the municipality at a level not to exceed one-hundred (100) percent of the total cost for any oversizing of improvements required by the municipality, including but not limited to increased capacity of improvements to anticipate other future development in the area. The city shall be liable only for the agreed payment of its share of the contract which shall be determined and executed in advance. 
(3)  The owner must deliver a performance bond executed by a corporate surety or corporate sureties duly authorized to do business in this state, payable to the city and approved by the city as to form, for construction included in the approved construction plans, in the penal sum of one-hundred (100) percent of the cost to complete the public improvements insuring completion of the public improvements. A power of attorney shall be attached to the bond evidencing that the agent signing the bond has authority to sign the bonds on behalf of the surety. The city shall release the bond upon completion, final acceptance, and receipt of warranty bond for the public improvements subject to the city/owner agreement. The performance and warranty bond requirements set forth under this subsection may not be waived. 
(4)  The owner will deliver to the city a certificate of insurance listing the city of Killeen as an additional insured on its commercial general liability insurance policy. 
(5)  There may be instances outside the platting process when a person feels a city/owner agreement may be warranted. In these cases, the person seeking the city/owner agreement will notify the city manager in writing outlining the request and the approximate cost to the city. The city manager will respond and either set the agreement for city council consideration, or reject the proposal. 
(6)  All of the developer's books and other records related to the project shall be available for inspection by the municipality. 
(c)  Utilities: 
(1)  Water lines: 
(a)  City may pay oversize costs for all water lines required over eight (8) inches in diameter. 
(b)  Owner shall submit documentation to the public works department detailing the total costs of the improvements meeting the minimum standards required by the city including costs for the oversizing of any improvements. Upon review of the proposed project and all submitted documentation, the city may enter into a city/owner agreement whereby the city may agree to pay up to one-hundred (100) percent of the costs incident to the oversizing of improvements. 
(2)  Sewer lines: 
(a)  City may pay oversize costs for all sewer lines required over ten (10) inches in diameter. 
(b)  Owner shall submit documentation to the public works department detailing the total costs of the improvements meeting the minimum standards required by the city including costs for the oversizing of any improvements. 
(c)  Upon review of the proposed project and all submitted documentation, the city may enter into a city/owner agreement whereby the city may agree to pay up to one-hundred (100) percent of the costs incident to the oversizing of improvements. 
(d)  Roads and drainage: 
(1)  When an agreement to construct a road project is proposed, the owner shall provide a cost breakdown for the installation of a road required to provide the movement capacity for their development including all base material, asphalt, curb, gutter, engineering, and all other items associated with the construction of the road and drainage infrastructure. In no case shall less than a local or marginal access street be considered adequate to provide the required movement capacity for a development. 
(2)  The owner shall provide an estimate of the cost for the width of the road required by the city including all drainage, engineering, and added materials required to meet city standards for the width requested (e.g., additional flexible base, increased thickness of asphalt, larger drainage structures). 
(3)  The city may enter into a city/owner agreement wherein the city may pay the cost difference between the required road calculated per subsection 28-85 (d)(1) above, including appurtenances and engineering and the street width requested by the city with appurtenances, including engineering. In the event that a road is determined to require a thicker cross section due to proposed future additions to the road, the city will pay for all required asphalt and base to be installed initially to assure that the future cross sections are compatible. 
(4)  The owner shall provide all rights of way for the width of the road required by the city. To substantiate the cost of the right of way that exceeds the right of way to accommodate the movement capacity of the development, the developer shall provide a survey of the additional right of way and a copy of the property conveyance document that applies to the parcel upon which the additional right of way is requested. 
(5)  A city/owner agreement shall not be approved for local/marginal access roads within subdivisions or ingress/egress streets that must be wider than a local/marginal access road for safety reasons. 
(6)  The developer may submit a request for a city/owner agreement for city participation in a regional detention facility or for the oversizing of drainage infrastructure. The regional detention facility or oversized drainage infrastructure must be identified in the city's adopted current drainage master plan, provide benefit to more than two (2) subdivisions, and meet the requirements of the current drainage design manual and infrastructure design and development standards manual. 
(e)  Development process: 
(1)  Owner shall make known their intention in writing to seek a city/owner agreement at the time of plat submission. 
(2)  The owner shall identify the infrastructure for which they will seek a city/owner agreement and an estimate of the amount of oversized infrastructure that will be requested of the city. 
(3)  The city council will be briefed on the potential city/owner agreement and available funding. 
(4)  Prior to plat validation , the city council may agree in principle to the level of city participation and costs for the proposed infrastructure, and may instruct the city staff to proceed with detailed negotiations and empower the city manager to enter into the city/owner agreement at a cost not to exceed the estimated fund level. This agreement in principle shall be held in suspense within the planning division pending receipt of the final city/owner agreement. 
(5)  Following approval of the "agreement in principle," and prior to any construction activity on infrastructure included in the proposed agreement, the owner shall prepare construction drawings and provide the detailed cost for the areas for city participation. If the final detailed cost does not exceed the figure identified in the "agreement in principle," the city/owner agreement will be prepared in final form, signed by appropriate parties and filed in the appropriate plat file. 
(6)  If the final detailed cost exceeds the estimate identified in the "agreement in principle," the final agreement will be forwarded to the city council for approval and authorization of the city manager to execute the agreement. If the city council elects not to enter into agreement at the increased cost but desires to retain the engineered plans, the city may enter into agreement to retain the plans and reimburse the owner for their preparation. 
(Ord. No. 95-38, § I, 4-25-95; Ord. No. 07-045, § VII, 5-22-07; Ord. No. 11-107, § II, 11-8-11; Ord. No. 12-042, § II, 7-24-12; Ord. No. 14-009, § d, e, 02-11-14)  
Secs. 26-86—26-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-91. - Lots, blocks, and street layout. 
(a)  All lots of the plat shall front or have access to a dedicated street. Plats shall not be approved if the platting action creates land-locked parcels. A plat applicant may provide existing parcels access to a dedicated street through a passage easement granted into perpetuity if such easement is required to prevent land locking a parcel. The size of the required easement may vary in accordance with the land area to be land-locked. A land locked parcel of less than two acres existing on the effective date of this ordinance may be platted with access to a dedicated right of way through an easement only if extending or creating a public street is not required by the planning and zoning commission. 
(b)  In general, lots shall conform in width, depth, and area to the patter already established in the adjacent areas, having due regard to the character of the neighborhood, its particular suitability for residential purposes, and also taking into consideration the natural topography of the ground, drainage, sanitary sewage facilities, and the proposed layout of the streets. Emergency vehicles shall have ingress and egress access to all lots. 
(c)  Lots shall have the minimum width measurements, front, rear, and side yard and area requirements required by chapter 31 of the city code of ordinances. 
(d)  The area of the lots shall be computed by taking the average width of the lot times the average depth of the lot measured from the street line to the rear lot line. 
(e)  The lot line common to the street rights-of-way shall be front line. On corner lots, the front yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension. Side lot lines shall project away from the front line at approximately a right angle to street lines and radial to curved street lines. The rear line shall be opposite and approximately parallel to the front line. Variation from this rule is permitted, if in the opinion of the planning and zoning commission, such variation will produce a better lot plan and better utilize the proposed development. The length and bearing of all lot lines shall be indicated on the plat. 
(Ord. No. 95-38, § I, 4-25-95; Ord. No. 03-21, § I, 4-22-03; Ord. No. 05-25, § II, 3-22-05)  
Sec. 26-92. - Park sites. 
The planning and zoning commission and city council shall consider offers of land for parks or playgrounds which conform to the current master plan adopted by the city, provided such plan exists. 
(Ord. No. 95-38, § I, 4-25-95)  
Sec. 26-93. - Use of city condemnation authority. 
(a)  Water and sewer mains, force mains and lift stations, streets and drainageways shall be located in easements or rights-of-way secured and paid for by the applicant. Such easement shall be properly assigned to the city before service is extended to the subdivision. 
(b)  In cases where easements cannot be secured by the applicant, the applicant may file a written petition with the public works department , prior to the plat application, requesting that the city council utilize its condemnation authority. The written petition must satisfy all of the following criteria: 
(1)  The applicant must establish that clear evidence of public need exists; 
(2)  The applicant must establish that the proposed extension is in accordance with the current adopted master utility plan(s), if such plan(s) exists; 
(3)  The applicant must establish that the proposed extension will be able to serve other development areas; 
(4)  The applicant must agree to pay all costs of the condemnation; and 
(5)  The applicant must present written evidence that every practical attempt to secure the needed easements and/or right-of-way has been made by submitting the following: 
a.  A condemnation appraisal by an independent appraiser as to the current market value and damages, if any, of acquiring the easement and/or right-of-way; and 
b.  Documentation that a written offer has been made to purchase the easement and/or right-of-way for the appraised value and the offer was rejected. 
(c)  The petition shall be forwarded to the planning department for review and recommendation and scheduled for consideration by city council . The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 95-38, § I, 4-25-95; Ord. No. 14-009, § b, c, 02-11-14)  
Secs. 26-94—26-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - STREETS AND DRAINAGE 
 
Sec. 26-101. - Streets. 
(a)  All street improvements and infrastructure shall conform to the current thoroughfare plan and the IDDSM as adopted and amended by the city council. 
(b)  Existing streets shall be continued where practical, as determined by the planning and zoning commission. Continuations of existing streets shall have the same or greater right-of-way and pavement widths as the existing streets being connected. Street names shall be continuous. 
(c)  All necessary street rights-of-way as determined by the thoroughfare plan and the IDDSM shall be dedicated as part of the platting or permitting process. In the event the city requires a right of way width greater than the right of way necessary to accommodate the paved surface for the street required to provide the movement capacity for the development, the city will provide the additional right of way required. To substantiate the cost of the additional right of way, the developer shall provide a survey of the additional right of way and a copy of the property conveyance document that applies to the parcel upon which the additional right of way is requested. Street right of way and design requirements may be increased, to provide the additional capacity consistent with the impact of a proposed development. Additionally, the city engineer may increase, decrease or modify street right of way and design requirements based on sound engineering practice when safety concerns, topography, or development circumstances warrant. 
(d)  Dead-end streets may be platted where the land adjoining the plat has not been platted. In the event that such dead-end street exceeds one hundred fifty (150) feet in length or one (1) lot width, from the nearest street intersection, the street will be provided with a cul-de-sac, either permanent or temporary, having a minimum right-of-way radius of fifty (50) feet. 
(e)  Where dead-end streets are dictated by lot designs, such dead-end streets shall be provided with a permanent cul-de-sac having a minimum right-of-way radius of fifty (50) feet. 
(f)  No street intersection shall be designed having an inside angle of less than thirty (30) degrees between the two (2) intersecting street lines, nor more than one hundred fifty (150) degrees. 
(g)  A street section is herein defined as the length of a street between two intersections of any type or the length between an intersection and a street terminus with an engineered turnaround. Such sections should not exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet. Variation from this rule is permitted if, in the opinion of the planning and zoning commission, such variation provides for quality development and all lots have adequate access. 
(h)  Streets, where practical, as determined by the planning and zoning commission, shall be designed and platted with appropriate regard to connectivity to adjacent subdivisions, the existing and planned transportation network and topographical features, i.e., creeks and drainageways, wooded areas, etc., with the aim of creating desirable and attractive treatments of significant existing features. The commission may require modification be made to the street design to accommodate public health, safety and welfare considerations. 
(i)  Where a major entrance to a subdivision is not a planned collector on the thoroughfare plan, the local/marginal access street shall be a minimum of forty-eight (48) feet wide (back-of curb to back-of-curb) with a seventy (70) foot right of way for a minimum distance of one hundred and twenty (120) feet from the intersection. Where a subdivision has multiple points of ingress/egress, the major entrance shall be on the street with the most intense functional classification. In circumstances where the functional classifications are equal or both streets are local, the developer may select his major entrance subject to the approval of the city engineer. As a rule, new subdivisions must have at least two (2) access streets. A developer may request the planning and zoning commission waive this rule and approve one access street if the access street has no connecting streets, terminates in a permanent cul-de-sac, is not more than one thousand and two-hundred (1200) feet in length and provides access to not more than a total of thirty (30) single-family dwelling lots or an equivalent housing unit density comprised of duplex or multi-family structures. However, in no case shall lots platted in the city of Killeen have their sole access through an adjacent city. In addition to the single point of access situation presented by streets that end in permanent cul-de-sac, a single point of access may be dictated by property configuration, considerations the volume of property owned by the plat applicant, safety engineering, or access management restrictions. In determining if a new subdivision may have one point of ingress/egress, consideration shall be given to: 
(1)  traffic circulation and emergency vehicle access; 
(2)  traffic and pedestrian safety with due consideration given to school bus routes; 
(3)  topography and visibility distances; 
(4)  surrounding developed property and whether adjacent development is anticipated to provide additional access; 
(5)  whether the property owner owns sufficient property to provide a second access point. 
If a single access point is approved, the access must be constructed as a raised median divided street with a distance of one-hundred and twenty (120) feet. The city engineer will determine the number of lanes required and if turning or acceleration/deceleration lanes are required to provide safe ingress/egress after due consideration to the density of the subdivision and the functional clarification of the street intersecting with the access street. 
(Ord. No. 95-38, § I, 4-25-95; Ord. No. 03-21, § II, 4-22-03; Ord. No. 03-21, § III, 4-22-03; Ord. 
No. 03-51, § I, 9-23-03; Ord. No. 05-25, § III, 3-22-05; Ord. No. 07-045, § VIII, 5-22-07; Ord. No. 14-038, (a)(c ), 05-13-14)  
Sec. 26-102. - Alleys, reserve strips. 
(a)  In developments that include alleys, the alleys shall be laid in the rear of lots fronting on adjoining streets. In residential subdivisions, the minimum width of right of way of an alley shall not be less than twenty (20) feet. All alleys shall be paved for the entire width of the right of way to the same specifications as minor residential streets, less curb and gutter. The rear or side line easement, where alleys are not provided, shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet wide, arranged such that each lot shall have an equal ten (10) foot easement. 
(b)  A reserve strip is defined as any parcel of land that has the effect of controlling access to public utilities or right of way. No plat showing reserve strips of land shall be approved. Reserve strips may be created when a property owner submits a subdivision plat for only a portion of the owned property. In such instances, easements to provide connectivity to utilities being installed in the platted area and public right of way to connect to streets being installed in the platted area will be provided from the point where utilities and streets terminate in the platted area to the boundary of the property owned by the subdivider. 
(Ord. No. 95-38, § I, 4-25-95; Ord. No. 07-045, § IX, 5-22-07)  
Sec. 26-103. - Drainage in special flood hazard areas. 
(a)  Drainage improvements in areas of special flood hazard in the city shall comply with the provisions of chapter 12 of the city code of ordinances, the current drainage design manual, and the infrastructure design and development standards manual approved by the city council. 
(b)  All improved drainage courses and enclosed drainage structures shall be dedicated to the city and accepted for maintenance by the city upon meeting the requirements of 26-103(c). 
(c)  The city shall maintain all improved drainage courses, provided that the original design and construction has been released for construction and formally accepted for maintenance by the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 95-38, § I, 4-25-95; Ord. No. 11-107, § II, 11-8-11; Ord. No. 12-042, § II, 7-24-12)  
Sec. 26-104. - Drainage not in special flood hazard areas. 
(a)  Design of all drainage improvements shall be by a registered professional engineer in accordance with the current drainage design manual, and the infrastructure design and development standards manual approved by the city council. 
(b)  All improved drainage courses and enclosed drainage structures shall be dedicated to the city and accepted for maintenance by the city upon meeting the requirements of 26-104(c). 
(c)  The city shall maintain all improved drainage courses, provided that the original design and construction has been released for construction and formally accepted by the city for maintenance by the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 95-38, § I, 4-25-95; Ord. No. 11-107, § II, 11-8-11; Ord. No. 12-042, § II, 7-24-12)  
Sec. 26-105. - Sidewalks. 
(a)  All sidewalk and ramp construction shall conform to all applicable Texas Accessibility Standards and Americans with Disabilities Act design requirements, chapter 25 of the city of Killeen code of ordinances, and the infrastructure design and development standards manual. 
(b)  Sidewalk ambulatory ramps shall be constructed within each curb return at all street intersections within the subdivision prior to the granting of a certificate of occupancy for the applicable lot. The ramp dimensions and surface finish shall be uniform throughout the subdivision. 
(c)  The developer shall establish a uniform ground surface not to exceed the top of curb elevation for all right-of-way inside each curb return requiring sidewalk ambulatory ramps prior to the release of the subdivision. 
(d)  The city engineer may require construction of sidewalk ambulatory ramps prior to the release of the subdivision where utility appurtenances (e.g., manhole riser; fire hydrant assembly) or immobile landforms encroach into the right-of-way inside a curb return requiring sidewalk ambulatory ramps. 
(e)  All sidewalk and ramp construction shall conform to all applicable Texas Accessibility Standards and Americans with Disabilities Act design requirements, chapter 25 of the city of Killeen code of ordinances, and the infrastructure design and development standards manual. 
(Ord. No. 95-38, § I, 4-25-95; Ord. No. 07-045, § X, 5-22-07; Ord. No. 08-013, § I, 3-11-08; Ord. No. 12-042, § II, 7-24-12)  
Sec. 26-106. - Street name signs. 
Street name signs and markers and traffic control signs, in accordance with standards adopted by the city, will be required at each intersection. The city will provide street signs and posts for the markers and make the installations when the subdivision is accepted by the city for maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 95-38, § I, 4-25-95)  
Sec. 26-107. - Street lighting. 
(a)  Adequate street lighting shall be provided for the protection of the public and property and shall be installed in all new subdivisions within the corporate limits of the city of Killeen. 
(b)  Street lights will be installed at intersections, curves, dead ends, cul-de-sacs and where spacing exceeds twelve hundred (1,200) feet. 
(c)  A street light plan shall be submitted with the construction plans required by section 26-81 of this chapter. The city engineer shall approve the street lighting plan. 
(d)  The developer shall select and have installed all of the lines, poles, luminaries and lamps required to comply with the approved street light plan. The minimum acceptable design for street lights in the city of Killeen shall be embedded round fiberglass poles with post top lantern style fixtures. The city reserves the right to require round tapered galvanized steel poles with cobra head fixtures when essential to provide the necessary degree of illumination. All street light infrastructures shall be in dedicated utility easements or rights of way. Installation procedures and acceptable standards for street lights shall be governed by the design and specification standards of the electric utility company serving the subdivision. The use of special non-standard poles or fixtures from sources other than the electric utility shall not be accepted for dedication to the public. 
(e)  Street lights on local and collector streets shall be at least 100-watt high pressure sodium vapor or equivalent. Street lights on major collectors and arterials shall be at least 250-watt high pressure sodium vapor or equivalent. 
(f)  The developer shall be responsible for the cost of street light installation including the cost of service lines to supply electricity to the street lights and all engineering costs not borne by the electrical service provider. Developers may decrease their installation costs by completing all or part of the installation of street lighting to include the necessary trenching and installation of conduit to the location of required street light placement, as acceptable to the electric utility provider and as required by the street lighting plan. 
(g)  Once satisfactorily installed, approved, and accepted, the street lights shall be dedicated to public use with maintenance of the street light being provided by the electric utility company serving the area. The electric utility company providing service to the area shall furnish electric energy to installed and dedicated street lights. The city of Killeen will pay the energy costs of dedicated street lights located within the city. 
(h)  Extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) - A street lighting plan shall be developed for subdivisions in the ETJ and any utility easements required to execute the plan shall be dedicated for public use. Installation of street lights will not be required; however, in preparation for future street light installation, necessary trenching and installation of conduit to the location of required street light placement will be accomplished by the developer, as required by the street lighting plan. 
(Ord. No. 02-46, § I, 9-24-02)  
Sec. 26-108. - Postal service delivery. 
(a)  Adequate postal service shall be provided and installed in all new subdivisions in the corporate limits and within the extra-territorial jurisdiction of the city of Killeen. 
(b)  United States Postal Service policy assigns the responsibility for the acquisition and installation of mail receptacles to the customer. In the case of any new final, minor or development subdivision plats, the developer shall be responsible for acquiring and installing the appropriate mail receptacles to accommodate the delivery method prescribed by the U.S. Postal Service. 
(c)  The developer shall coordinate with the Killeen Postmaster and identify the type of mail receptacles to be used in the developer's subdivision and the location where the receptacles will be installed. In the event central delivery is prescribed, a postal service central mail receptacle layout sheet shall be submitted with the plat, replat or an amendment that creates lots. 
(d)  The developer shall be responsible to purchase and install mail receptacles in accordance with U.S. Postal Service material specifications and construction standards available from the Killeen Postmaster. When central mail receptacles are prescribed, pads shall be constructed concurrent with street curbing and central mail receptacles shall be installed prior to the subdivision or the respective phase of the subdivision being released for permitting. 
(e)  All mail receptacles shall be located in rights of way or within a dedicated postal service easement. When a mail receptacle is not planned to be located within dedicated right of way, the receptacle shall be in an easement identified on the plat as a postal easement. 
(f)  When the Postal Service determines that central delivery shall be used, once the central receptacle is satisfactorily installed, approved and accepted by the Killeen Postmaster, the Killeen Postmaster shall enter into a written agreement that all maintenance, replacement, or other actions with regards to damaged centralized receptacles shall be borne by the Postal Service. 
(g)  Extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) - When the Postal Service determines that central mail receptacles are to be installed in a subdivision in the extraterritorial jurisdiction that is being expanded using county roads with bar ditch drainage, the receptacle shall be installed prior to completion of any serviced structure. 
(Ord. No. 07-054, § I, 6-26-07)  
Secs. 26-109, 26-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - WATER AND SEWER INFRASTRUCTURE 
 
Sec. 26-111. - General provisions. 
(a)  The intent and purpose of this division is to provide equitable charges for water and sewer connections as a proportionate distribution of the cost of the water and sewer main extensions to serve property within the city. If the existing city utility facilities are not within or adjacent to a subdivision, the developer shall construct the necessary extension of water and sewer mains, force mains, mains, and lift stations, including all valves, manholes, and piping necessary to serve any future development of abutting property as specified in this chapter. The developer's engineer shall prepare a proposed plan of service for the subdivision and property along the extension which shall be reviewed by the plat review committee. These facilities shall be constructed in accordance with both the master plan and the IDDSM. 
(b)  It is the general policy of the city that: 
(1)  Water and sewer mains should be large enough to serve all the lots platted and, should the city determine oversizing is necessary, the city may participate in those lines greater than 8" for water and greater than 10" for sewer. 
(2)  All utilities shall be required to extend across the full width of the last lot platted on each street proposed within the subdivision, in such an alignment that it can be extended to the next property in accordance with the master sewer and water plans for the city, provided such plan(s) exist. Properties already served by water and sewer shall not be required to install additional facilities unless: 
(i)  The current lines are not of adequate capacity to serve the proposed development; in which case the applicant will be required to install adequate facilities. 
(ii)  As a result of replatting lots originally platted prior to August 24, 1963, the costs for the provision of water and sewer mains, force mains, and lift stations necessitated by the replat may be shared by the city and the applicant to a maximum participation by the city of twenty-five (25) percent of the applicant's total utility main project cost. 
(c)  Every lot of the plat shall have direct access to the water and sewer system. Utility service shall be from a water/sewer main located in an abutting right-of-way or through easements from the lot to a water/sewer main. 
(d)  Water and/or sewer service may not be extended outside the city limits. 
(e)  (1)  The terms of this division shall be cumulative of all other ordinances regulating subdivisions, and such other ordinances are not repealed by this division, except to the extent that such other provisions conflict with the terms of this chapter, in which event this chapter shall prevail. 
(2)  This division is intended to set the general policies, supplemented by technical and administrative procedures contained in the public works department's manuals as approved by the city council, and which is incorporated herein. The IDDSM shall address such items as determining capacity, design standards, service areas, and other administrative and technical details for implementing the policies of this division. The manual shall be available to interested parties in the same manner as all other public documents. 
(f)  In addition to any other remedy provided by law, the city and its officers shall have the right to enjoin any violation of this chapter by injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 95-38, § I, 4-25-95; Ord. No. 96-2, § II, 1-23-96; Ord. No. 14-009, § d, 02-11-14; Ord. No. 14-038, (a)(e,2), 05-13-14)  
Sec. 26-112. - Water. 
(a)  No water main shall be extended unless the diameter of any such extended main is a minimum of six (6) inches inside the subdivision. Larger mains may be required per the water master plan or IDDSM. 
(b)  All water infrastructure shall be designed, constructed, and tested in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), as amended, and the IDDSM. If a conflict arises between a provision of this ordinance, the IDDSM, or the rules and regulations of the TCEQ, the more restrictive provision shall control. 
(c)  Water system layout shall be looped whenever possible. Dead-end mains shall not exceed one thousand eight hundred (1,800) feet or include three (3) fire hydrants. Single feeds may be permitted at the discretion of the public works department; however, any such denial may be appealed to the planning and zoning commission. Single feeds should include provisions for looping in future development. 
(d)  The location of fire hydrant(s) shall comply with chapter 11 of the city code of ordinances. 
(e)  Long water service taps shall be installed while the subdivision is being developed. Short water service taps shall be installed when needed for development. Long water service taps locations shall be shown by branding a "W" on the curb. No water service taps smaller than six (6) inches in diameter shall be allowed on water mains larger than twelve (12) inches in diameter. 
(Ord. No. 95-38, § I, 4-25-95; Ord. No. 14-038, (a)(b), 05-13-14)  
Sec. 26-113. - Sewer. 
(a)  No sewer main shall be extended unless the diameter of any such extended main is a minimum of six (6) inches inside the subdivision. Larger mains may be required per the sewer master plan or the IDDSM. 
(b)  All sewer infrastructure shall be designed, constructed, and tested in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), as amended, and the IDDSM. If a conflict arises between a provision of this ordinance, the IDDSM, or the rules and regulations of the TCEQ, the more restrictive provision shall control. 
(c)  Sewer services for sewer mains located in roadways shall be installed while the subdivision is being developed. Sewer services with direct access to the sewer main without encroaching on a roadway may be installed when needed for development. Sewer tap locations shall be shown by branding an "S" on the curb. Sewer services six (6) inches and larger require a manhole where they intersect the sewer main. 
(d)  In locations where sanitary sewer service is not available, as determined by the public works department, an individual sewage disposal system of a type approved by the building and development service department may be installed in conformity with chapter 8 of the city code of ordinances, provided a percolation test is furnished by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 95-38, § I, 4-25-95; Ord. No. 96-2, § III, 1-23-96; Ord. No. 14-038, (a, b, d), 05-13-14)  
Sec. 26-114. - Costs of extensions. 
a.  Developer initiated. All costs of all water and sewer main extensions, force mains, and lift stations initiated by a developer in order to provide required service for their development area, shall be paid for by the developer. Such costs may include; but is not necessarily limited to, right-of-way acquisition, pipes, motors, pumps, engineering, construction costs, inspection fees, and all weather access. 
In accordance with city ordinances, the manual and section 26-85: 
(1)  the developer shall have the option to require pro rata cost participation from property owners who have access to the line extensions and/or lift stations; 
(2)  the city, at its option, may share construction costs for improvements and/or extensions with a developer when: 
(a)  the city requires oversized lines or lift station capacity; or 
(b)  participation is determined to be in the best interests of the city; and 
(c)  funds are available. 
In no event shall the reimbursements or cost sharing, from all sources, exceed the developer's actual costs of the main, force main, or lift station. 
b.  City initiated. All costs of all water and sewer main extensions, force mains, and lift stations initiated by the city in order to provide service shall be paid for by the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-2, § IV, 1-23-96; Ord. No. 14-009, § a, 02-11-14)  
Sec. 26-115. - Collection and reimbursement policy. 
a.  As supplemented by the manual, the reimbursement and payment policy of the city under this division shall be: 
(1)  A city/developer agreement shall be executed before any reimbursement may be made. The agreement shall state the estimated cost, terms of payment, and amount of reimbursement. It may be amended to reflect the final costs. The agreement shall be made prior to the city accepting the main or lift station. 
(2)  Unless otherwise specifically approved by the city council, the maximum term during which the city will collect and remit funds to the developer, from other users who connect to the developer's line or lift station, shall be ten (10) years from the date the main or lift station is finally inspected and accepted by the city. 
(3)  At the expiration of the ten (10) year reimbursement period, or such other time period as provided above, and in those instances where there is to be no reimbursement to a developer, and the pro rata designation of the line shall lapse and no reimbursements shall be due. 
(4)  Any customer not paying the pro rata charge prior to the time of installation of the extension, who later requests service, must pay the pro rata in full, plus a surcharge of fifteen (15) percent, plus the tap fee before service will be installed. The surcharge defrays the city's administrative, operational, and maintenance costs and will be excluded from computation of any refunds. 
(5)  On pro rata lines and lift stations the entire cost of extension, minus any participation by the city or other governmental entity, must eventually be provided by the property owner(s) served by the extension. 
(6)  The city reserves the right to negotiate or adjust the pro rata charge to any customer to avoid inequitable charges. 
(7)  Nothing in this subdivision or the manual shall be construed as the exclusive means for enforcing payment of pro rata cost against customers or property owners, but all provisions are cumulative to all other methods and means provided for by law, including assessments and liens. 
(Ord. No. 96-2, § IV, 1-23-96)  
Sec. 26-116. - Use of water and sewer tap fees and rate revenues. 
Tap fees and rate revenues shall be set in an amount sufficient to maintain and operate the system, with due regard for anticipated needs to improve, update, construct, and maintain the system. 
(Ord. No. 96-2, § IV, 1-23-96; Ord. No. 97-58, § I, 10-28-97)  
Sec. 26-117. - Master plan. 
a.  Not later than September 30, 1997, the city council shall adopt a master plan for water and sewer extensions and facilities. The master plan shall be used by the city as a guideline for both the design of new extensions and facilities, and for expenditures from the water and sewer extension fund. 
b.  Prior to September 30, 1997, the policies, procedures, requirements, and standards existing at the time this ordinance is originally enacted shall continue in full force and effect, save and except the manual, shall become effective upon adoption regardless of the status of the master plan. 
(Ord. No. 96-2, § IV, 1-23-96)  
Sec. 26-118. - Use of city condemnation authority. 
a.  Water and sewer mains, force mains, and lift stations shall be located in easements, secured and paid for by the developer, and assigned to the city before service is extended to the subdivision. For the city to consider to using condemnation authority to assist a developer in extension of the system, the applicant must show clear evidence that every practical attempt to secure the easement has failed and there is a public need and interest for condemnation. Specific criteria and procedures shall be as stated in the manual. 
b.  Upon compliance with all procedures by the developer, the city, at least 10 days prior to the hearing shall notify all property owners within the proposed easement and 200 feet there from. A hearing of facts by the city council is required. The determination of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 96-2, § IV, 1-23-96; Ord. No. 14-009, § d, 02-11-14)  
Secs. 26-119—26-125. - Reserved.  
Chapter 27 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Finance, § 2-76 et seq.; licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 15. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 27-1. - Penalty. 
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-8.  
Secs. 27-2—27-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Tax administration, § 83 et seq. 
 
Sec. 27-26. - Exemption for older persons. 
(a)  All persons living within the city who are sixty-five (65) years of age or older are hereby entitled to an exemption of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) from the assessed value of their residence homesteads as such homesteads are defined by state law, if they comply with requisites of this section. 
(b)  Such exemption includes those individuals who are married or unmarried and also includes those individuals living alone. 
(c)  Only those individuals who qualify according to (d) and (e) below shall be entitled to the exemption provided herein. 
(d)  In order to qualify for the exemption granted herein, all persons who will be sixty-five (65) years of age or older on January first of the year in which they seek the exemption provided in this section must register in the office of the tax assessor-collector between January first and April thirtieth of that year. 
(e)  All individuals who are eligible for the exemption provided herein must apply each year in which they want to take advantage of such exemption. 
(f)  The tax assessor-collector shall determine the eligibility of all individuals applying for the exemption provided by this section, and his determination shall be final. 
(g)  The first tax year in which any individual may qualify for the twenty-thousand-dollar exemption herein is the tax year beginning January 1, 1988. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 12, art. 1, § 3 [Ord. No. 74-48, § 1, 9-23-74; Ord. No. 81-40, § 1, 8-25-81; Ord. No. 86-65, § 1, 9-9-86; Ord. No. 86-79, § 1, 10-28-86]; Ord. No. 88-87, §§ I, II, 9-20-88) 
State Law reference— Authority to grant such an exemption, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.13(b).  
Sec. 27-27. - Tax limit for qualifying individuals. 
(a)  Pursuant to and consistent with the provisions of Tex. Const. Art. 8, § 1-b(h) and Tex. Tax Code § 11.261, adopted effective January 1, 2004, for a person who is disabled or is sixty five (65) years of age or older who receives a residence homestead exemption authorized by law, the total amount of ad valorem taxes imposed on that person's homestead by the city may not be increased while it remains the residence homestead of that person or that person's spouse who is disabled or sixty-five (65) years of age or older and receives a residence homestead exemption on the homestead. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall be administered in conformance with Tex. Const. art. 8, § 1-b(h) and Tex. Tax Code § 11.261. If any provision of this section is deemed to be inconsistent with state law, state law shall control. 
(c)  If an individual makes improvements to the individual's residence homestead, other than repairs and other than improvements required to comply with governmental requirements, the city may increase the amount of taxes on the homestead in the first year the value of the homestead is increased on the appraisal roll because of the enhancement of value by the improvements. The amount of the tax increase is determined by applying the current tax rate to the difference between the appraised value of the homestead with the improvements and the appraised value it would have had without the improvements. A limitation provided by this section then applies to the increased amount of city taxes on the residence homestead until more improvements, if any, are made. 
(d)  A limitation on city tax increases provided by this section expires on January 1 if: 
1.  none of the owners of the structure who qualify for the exemption provided by Texas Tax Code §11.13(c) for a disabled individual or an individual 65 years of age or older and who owned the structure when the limitation provided by this section first took effect is using the structure as a residence homestead; or 
2.  none of the owners of the structure qualifies for the exemption provided by Texas Tax Code § 11.13(c) for a disabled individual or an individual 65 years of age or older. 
(e)  If an individual who qualifies for a limitation on city tax increases under this section dies, the surviving spouse of the individual is entitled to the limitation on taxes imposed by the city on the residence homestead of the individual if: 
1.  the surviving spouse is disabled or is 55 years of age or older when the individual dies; and 
2.  the residence homestead of the individual 
a.  is the residence homestead of the surviving spouse on the date that the individual dies; and 
b.  remains the residence homestead of the surviving spouse. 
(Ord. No. 07-103, § 2, 12-11-07)  
Secs. 27-28—27-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BINGO[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Bingo Enabling Act, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 179d. 
 
Sec. 27-46. - Tax imposed. 
There shall be required a two (2) percent gross receipts tax imposed on the conduct of bingo games within the city. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 13, § 1) 
State Law reference— Tax authorized, Vernon's Ann. Civ. Stat. art. 179d, § 3.  
Sec. 27-47. - Adoption of state laws. 
The Bingo Enabling Act [Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 179d] is hereby adopted and incorporated in this article as though fully set out, for all purposes, so far as is applicable to a municipality. All provisions for administration, implementation and enforcement of the two (2) percent gross receipts tax found in the act are specifically adopted by reference as are any subsequent amendments adopted by the state legislature. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 13, § 2 [Ord. No. 86-43, § 1, 6-24-86])  
Secs. 27-48—27-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Allocation of hotel, motel tax revenue, § 2-132. 
State Law reference— Municipal hotel occupancy taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 27-71. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases are, for the purpose of this article, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, defined as follows: 
Consideration shall mean the cost of the room, sleeping space, bed or dormitory space or other facilities in such hotel and shall not include the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant not related to cleaning and readying such room or space for occupancy, and shall not include any tax assessed for occupancy thereof by any other governmental agency. 
Director of finance shall mean the director of finance for the city. 
Hotel shall mean a building in which members of the public obtain sleeping accommodations for consideration. The term includes a hotel, motel, tourist home, tourist house, tourist court, lodging house, inn or rooming house, but does not include a hospital, sanitarium or nursing home. 
Occupancy shall mean the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room, space or sleeping facility in a hotel for any purpose. 
Occupant shall mean anyone, who, for a consideration uses, possesses, or has a right to use or possess any room or rooms, or sleeping spaces or facility in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or agreement. 
Permanent resident shall mean any occupant who has or shall have the right to occupancy of any room or rooms or sleeping space or facility in a hotel for at least thirty (30) consecutive days during the current calendar year or preceding year. 
Person shall mean any individual, company, corporation, or association owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 12, art. 2, § 1 [Ord. No. 71-38, § 1, 8-9-71; Ord. No. 87-72, § 1, 10-13-87]; Ord. No. 92-28, § I, 6-9-92) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Tax Code §§ 156.001, 351.001.  
Sec. 27-72. - Levy of tax; rate; exception. 
(a)  There is hereby levied a tax upon the occupant of any room or space furnished by any hotel where such cost of occupancy is at the rate of two dollars ($2.00) or more per day, such tax to be equal to seven (7) percent of the consideration paid by the occupant of such room, space or facility to such hotel, exclusive of other occupancy taxes imposed by other governmental agencies. 
(b)  No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a permanent resident. 
(c)  No tax shall be imposed under this article upon diplomatic personnel who present a tax exemption card issued by the United States Department of State, federal or state employees traveling on business, or federal or state military personnel traveling on official military business. This exemption does not apply to institutions of higher learning or city officers and employees. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 12, art. 2, § 2 [Ord. No. 71-38, § 1, 8-9-71; Ord. No. 84-8, § 1, 2-28-84]; Ord. No. 88-26, § II, 4-12-88) 
State Law reference— Authority to impose hotel occupancy tax, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.002; maximum tax rate, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.003.  
Sec. 27-73. - Collection. 
Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax imposed in section 27-72 for the city. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 12, art. 2, § 3 [Ord. No. 71-38, § 1, 8-9-71])  
Sec. 27-74. - Reports. 
(a)  On or before the last day of the month following each calendar month, every person required in section 27-73 to collect the tax imposed in this article shall file a report with the director of finance showing the consideration paid for all room occupancies in the preceding month, the amount of the tax collected on such occupancies, and any other information as the director of finance may reasonably require. Such persons shall pay the amount of tax collected from occupants during the period of the report at the time of filing the report. 
(b)  Every person required in section 27-73 to collect the tax imposed in this article shall include, as part of their report to the city, a copy of the hotel's most recent quarterly tax report prepared for the state comptroller's office. 
(c)  Each monthly report shall contain the following certification: "I declare the information contained herein, including any exhibits attached hereto, is true and correct to the best of my knowledge." 
(Code 1963, Ch. 12, art. 2, § 4 [Ord. No. 71-38, § 1, 8-9-71; Ord. No. 87-72, § 1, 10-13-87]; Ord. No. 88-70, § 1, 7-12-88; Ord. No. 92-28, § I, 6-9-92)  
Sec. 27-75. - Rules and regulations. 
The director of finance shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are necessary to effectively collect the tax levied herein, and upon twenty-four (24) hours written notice, shall have access to books and records necessary to enable him to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this article and the amount of taxes due under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 12, art. 2, § 5 [Ord. No. 71-38, § 1, 8-9-71; Ord. No. 87-72, § 4, 10-13-87]; Ord. No. 92-28, § I, 6-9-92)  
Sec. 27-76. - Penalties. 
If any person shall fail to collect the tax imposed in this article, or shall fail to file a report as required herein, or shall fail to pay to the director of finance the tax as imposed herein when such report for payment is due, or shall file a false report, then such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction be punished as provided in section 1-8. In addition, such person who fails to remit the tax imposed by this article within the time required shall forfeit five (5) percent of the amount due as a penalty, and after the first thirty (30) days shall forfeit an additional five (5) percent of such tax. The penalty shall never be less than one dollar ($1.00). Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the rate of twelve (12) percent per annum beginning sixty (60) days from the date due on the tax imposed by this article. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 12, art. 2, § 6 [Ord. No. 71-38, § 1, 8-9-71; Ord. No. 87-72, § 5, 10-13-87]; Ord. No. 88-70, § III, 7-12-88; Ord. No. 92-28, § I, 6-9-92)  
Sec. 27-77. - Authorized agents. 
Every person required in section 27-73 to collect the tax imposed in this article shall furnish the city, in writing, the names of those individuals who shall serve as the authorized agent(s) of the hotel to file the monthly hotel occupancy tax reports. 
(Ord. No. 92-28, § I, 6-9-92)  
Sec. 27-78. - Collection procedures on purchase of hotel. 
(a)  If a person who is liable for the payment of a tax under this article is the owner of a hotel and sells the hotel, the successor to the seller or the seller's assignee shall withhold an amount of the purchase price sufficient to pay the amount due until the seller provides a receipt by a person designated by the director of finance to provide the receipt showing that the amount has been paid or a certificate showing that no tax is due. 
(b)  The purchaser of a hotel who fails to withhold an amount of the purchase price as required by this section is liable for the amount required to be withheld to the extent of the value of the purchase price. 
(c)  The purchaser of a hotel may request that the person designated by the director of finance to provide a receipt under subsection (a) issue a certificate stating that no tax is due or issued a statement of the amount required to be paid before a certificate may be issued. The person designated by the director of finance shall issue the certificate or statement no later than the sixtieth day after the date that the person receives the request. 
(d)  If the person designated by the director of finance to provide a receipt under subsection (a) fails to issue the certificate or statement within the period provided by subsection (c), the purchaser is released from the obligation to withhold the purchase price or pay the amount due. 
(Ord. No. 92-28, § I, 6-9-92)  
Secs. 27-79—27-95. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - TAX ON COIN-OPERATED MACHINES 
 
Sec. 27-96. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Coin-operated machine shall mean every machine or device of any kind or character which is operated by or with coins, or metal slugs, tokens or checks; "music coin-operated machines" and "skill or pleasure coin-operated machines" as those terms are hereinafter defined, shall be included in such terms. 
Music coin-operated machine shall mean every coin-operated machine of any kind or character, which dispenses or vends or which is used or operated for dispensing or vending music and which is operated by or with coins or metal slugs, tokens or checks. The following are expressly included within such term: Phonographs, pianos, graphophones, and all other coin-operated machines which dispense or vend music. 
Operator shall mean any person who exhibits, displays or permits to be exhibited or displayed, in a place of business other than his own, any coin-operated machine in the city. 
Owner shall mean any person owning any coin-operated machine in the city. 
Service coin-operated machines shall mean every pay toilet, pay telephone and all other machines or devices which dispense service only and not merchandise, music, skill or pleasure. 
Skill or pleasure coin-operated machines shall mean every coin-operated machine of any kind or character whatsoever, when such machine or machines dispense or are used or are capable of being used or operated for amusement or pleasure or when such machines are operated for the purpose of dispensing or affording skill or pleasure, or for any other purpose other than the dispensing or vending of "merchandise or music" or "service" exclusively, as those terms are defined in this article. The following are expressly included within this term: marble machines, marble table machines, marble shooting machines, miniature race track machines, miniature football machines, miniature golf machines, miniature bowling machines, and all other coin-operated machines which dispense or afford skill or pleasure. Every machine or device of any kind or character which dispenses or vends merchandise, commodities or confections or plays music in connection with or in addition to such games or dispensing of skill or pleasure shall be considered as skill or pleasure machines and taxed at the higher rate fixed for such machines. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 1, § 1 [Ord. No. 82-72, § 1, 12-14-82]) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 8801.  
Sec. 27-97. - Amount of tax. 
(a)  Every owner, save an owner holding an import license and holding coin-operated machines solely for resale, who owns, controls, possesses, exhibits, displays, or who permits to be exhibited or displayed in this state any coin-operated machine shall pay, and there is hereby levied on each coin-operated machine, as defined herein, except as are exempt herein, an annual occupation tax of seven dollars and fifty cents ($7.50). 
(b)  The city may provide a duplicate permit if a valid permit has been lost, stolen or destroyed. The fee for a duplicate permit is two dollars ($2.00). 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 1, § 2 [Ord. No. 82-72, § 2, 12-14-82]) 
State Law reference— Authority to levy above tax, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 8814.  
Sec. 27-98. - Exemptions. 
Gas meters, pay telephones, pay toilets, food vending machines, confection vending machines, beverage vending machines, merchandise vending machines, and cigarette vending machines which are now subject to an occupation or gross receipts tax, stamp vending machines, and "service coin-operated machines," as that term is defined, are expressly exempt from the tax levied in this article. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 1, § 3 [Ord. No. 82-72, § 3, 12-14-82]) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 8803.  
Sec. 27-99. - Attachment of permit to machine. 
The permit issued by the city to evidence the payment of the tax levied in this article shall be securely attached to the machine. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 1, § 4 [Ord. No. 82-72, § 4, 12-14-82])  
Sec. 27-100. - Expiration. 
The tax levied in this article shall be paid annually and the permit issued therefor shall expire on December thirty-first of each year. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 1, § 7 [Ord. No. 82-72, § 7, 12-14-82])  
Sec. 27-101. - Tax paid to assessor and collector. 
The occupation taxes levied by this article are to be paid to the city assessor and collector and by him accounted for and deposited to the credit of a city general fund. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 1, § 5 [Ord. No. 82-72, § 5, 12-14-82])  
Sec. 27-102. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person installing or permitting to be installed for operation, any such coin-operated machines or operating or permitting to be operated any such coin-operated machines, without first paying or causing to be paid the occupation tax levied by this article, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. Each person having an interest in the installation for operation or the operation of such coin-operated machines shall be separately subject to prosecution hereunder. 
(b)  Any person failing to conspicuously display or cause to be conspicuously displayed, a license receipt evidencing payment of the occupation tax herein prescribed on any such coin-operated machine installed for operation, or permitted to be installed for operation or operated or permitted to be operated by such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. Each person having an interest in the installation for operation or the operation of such coin-operated machines shall be separately subject to prosecution hereunder. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 1, § 6 [Ord. No. 82-72, § 6, 12-14-82])  
Secs. 27-103—27-125. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - MUNICIPAL SALES AND USE TAXES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal sales and use taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 27-126. - Telecommunications services tax. 
(a)  A tax is hereby authorized on all telecommunications services sold within the city. For purposes of this section, the sale of telecommunications services is consummated at the location of the telephone or other telecommunications device from which the call or other communication originates. If the point of origin cannot be determined, the sale is consummated at the address to which the call or other communication is billed. 
(b)  The rate of the tax imposed by this section shall be the same as the rate imposed by the city for all other local sales and use taxes as authorized by the legislature of the state. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 12, art. 3, § 1 [Ord. No. 87-29, § 1, 5-12-87]) 
State Law reference— Authority to impose sales and use tax on telecommunication services, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.210.  
Chapter 28 - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Ambulances, Ch. 4; junked motor vehicles, § 18-51 et seq.; railroads, Ch. 23; streets, sidewalks and miscellaneous public places, Ch. 25; vehicles for hire, Ch. 29. 
State Law reference— Traffic generally, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d; powers of local authorities, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 27. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 28-1. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall for the purpose of this chapter have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section. Whenever any words and phrases used in this chapter are not defined herein but are defined in the state laws regulating the operation of vehicles, any such definition therein shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used herein: 
Loading zone shall mean a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles doing the loading or unloading of passengers, or materials. 
Passenger loading zone shall mean a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles doing the loading or unloading of passengers. 
Traffic-control sign or device shall mean all signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of the city council for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 1, § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Definitions generally, Vernon's Ann. Civ. Stat. art. 6701d, §§ 1—20I.  
Sec. 28-2. - Penalty. 
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-8.  
Sec. 28-3. - Application of chapter. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the operation of vehicles upon highways except where a different place is specifically referred to in a given section. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 21.  
Sec. 28-4. - Application to workers, equipment. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles and other equipment while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a highway or street, but shall apply to such persons and vehicles when traveling to or from such work. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 1, § 6(e)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 24(a).  
Sec. 28-5. - Application to emergency vehicles. 
(a)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions herein stated. 
(b)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may: 
(1)  Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation. 
(3)  Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he does not endanger life or property. 
(4)  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions. 
(c)  The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when such vehicle is making use, at the discretion of the driver of the vehicle, in accordance with policies of the state or city, of audible or visual signals meeting the requirements of law, except that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red light visible from in front of the vehicle. The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle that is used for law enforcement purposes may operate without using the emergency warning devices required by this subsection only when the driver is responding to an emergency call or when he is in pursuit of a suspected violator of the law and he has probable cause to believe that: 
(1)  Knowledge of his presence will cause the suspect to destroy or lose evidence of a suspected felony. 
(2)  Knowledge of his presence will cause the suspect to cease a suspected continuing felony before the driver has acquired sufficient evidence to establish grounds for arrest; 
(3)  Knowledge of his presence will cause the suspect to evade apprehension or identification of the suspect or his vehicle; or 
(4)  Traffic conditions on a multilaned roadway are such that movements of motorists in response to the emergency warning devices may increase the potential for a collision or may unreasonably extend the duration of the pursuit. 
(d)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle that is used for law enforcement purposes may not operate without using the emergency warning devices as provided above unless he complies with regulations relating to the use of emergency warning devices adopted by the state or the city. 
(e)  The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 1, § 6(b)—(d)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 24(b)—(e).  
Sec. 28-6. - Application to public officers and employees. 
The provisions of this chapter applicable to drivers of vehicles upon the highways and streets shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the United States, this state or any county, city, town, district or any other political subdivision of this state, subject to such specific exceptions as are set for in this chapter with reference to authorized emergency vehicles. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 1, § 6(a)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 24(f).  
Sec. 28-7. - Application to pushcarts, animals, bicycles, animal-drawn vehicles. 
Every person propelling any pushcart, riding animals, riding a bicycle, or driving an animal-drawn vehicle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this chapter, except those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 1, § 7) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, §§ 25, 179.  
Sec. 28-8. - Adoption of state law. 
The provisions of Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d as now or hereafter amended are adopted by reference. No person shall violate any of such provisions.  
Secs. 28-9—28-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 28-31. - Traffic engineer; powers and duties. 
(a)  The traffic engineer of the city is charged with the responsibility of maintenance of all official traffic controls, devices and regulations and in addition thereto, the traffic engineer is hereby authorized: 
(1)  To determine and establish speed regulations, school zones, fire zones, no parking zones, regulatory devices, signs and signals, save and except traffic signal lights, and all other traffic-control devices as shall be deemed necessary for the public safety and welfare or to regulate, warn or guide traffic for the safe and expeditious flow thereof. 
(2)  To place and maintain traffic-control signs, signals (save and except traffic signal lights) and devices when and as required under the provisions contained in this chapter to make effective the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to make and enforce temporary or experimental devices to cover emergency or special conditions. No such temporary or experimental devices shall remain in effect more than ninety (90) days. The traffic engineer may test traffic-control devices under actual conditions of traffic. 
(c)  Whenever the traffic engineer determines there is a necessity for the erection, removal or change of any traffic-control device or regulation, such determination shall be based upon a traffic and engineering survey, conducted upon the following standards: 
(1)  The public welfare, including safety and traffic factors to ensure the safe and expeditious flow of traffic shall be considered. 
(2)  The development of the property surrounding the proposed area shall be analyzed. 
(3)  The requirements of vehicular traffic flow in the proposed area shall be determined. 
(4)  The amount of pedestrian and vehicular traffic in the proposed area shall be considered. 
(d)  Whenever the traffic engineer shall erect, remove or change any traffic-control device or regulation, he shall file written information of such action with the city secretary. 
(e)  The director of public works shall perform the duties of the traffic engineer until such time as the city council designates some other office as that of the traffic engineer. 
(f)  The traffic engineer when directed to do so by resolution, shall perform the necessary steps as provided by this section to see that the specific need regarding the control of traffic within the city, as expressed by the city council in the resolution, is met. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 1, § 2 [Ord. No. 69-51, §§ 1-4, 10-27-69; Ord. No. 70-3, §§ 1, 2, 2-23-70; Ord. No. 74-14, § 1, 4-22-74]) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate traffic by means of traffic-control devices, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 27(a)(2).  
Sec. 28-32. - Police to direct traffic. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, to enforce all street traffic laws of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city. 
(b)  Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 1, § 3 [Ord. No. 69-51, § 5, 10-27-69; Ord. No. 70-3, §§ 1, 2, 2-23-70]) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate traffic by means of police officers, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 27(a)(2); obedience to police, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 23.  
Sec. 28-33. - Emergency, other regulations. 
The city council is hereby empowered by resolution to make and enforce regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of this chapter and to make and enforce temporary regulations to cover emergency or special conditions. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 1, § 4)  
Sec. 28-34. - Turning restrictions authorized. 
The city engineer in cooperation with the police department may cause markers, buttons, or signs to be placed within or adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified by law be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 1, § 26(e)) 
State Law reference— Obedience to such buttons, etc., required, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 65(c).  
Secs. 28-35—28-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - VEHICLE TOWING; WRECKER ROTATION LIST[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 15. 
State Law reference— Vehicle Storage Facility Act, Vernon's Ann. Civ. Stat. art. 6687-9a; tow truck registration, Vernon's Ann. Civ. Stat. art. 6687-9b; removal of unauthorized vehicles from public property, Vernon's Ann. Civ. Stat. art. 6701g-2. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 28-56. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein: 
Heavy duty wrecker means a wrecker with a GVWR greater than twenty-six thousand (26,000) lbs., equipped with rear tandem axles, air brakes, a retractable boom, at least two (2) thirty thousand (30,000) lbs. winches, [and] capable of towing a loaded C.M.V. weighing eighty thousand (80,000) lbs. 
Hook-up shall mean the completed connection of chain hooks or the tie-down of wheels to a wheel lift, completing the connection of the tow truck to the vehicle to be towed, not to include the actual lifting of the vehicle to be towed. 
Light duty wrecker means a wrecker not less than one (1) ton gross vehicle weight in size with GVWR no greater than ten thousand (10,000) lbs., equipped with a winch and winch-line and boom with a lifting capacity of not less than eight thousand (8,000) lbs. single line. 
Medium duty wrecker means a wrecker with not less than eighteen thousand (18,000) lbs. GVWR, equipped with air brakes and a wheel lift with minimum eight thousand (8,000) lifting capacity as reflected on manufacturer's certificate. 
Tow service shall mean a person engaged in the business of a wrecker or towing service, whereby motor vehicles are towed or otherwise removed at the direction of officers of the city police department by the use of a wrecker or motor vehicle designed for that purpose. 
Towing company means any individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity or association that is engaged in the business of towing motor vehicles on a public road for compensation, or with the expectation of compensation, or who owns or operates a tow truck. This term includes an owner, employee or agent of the towing company. 
Tow truck operator means a person operating a tow truck. 
Vehicle storage facility (VSF) means a garage, parking lot, or any type of facility other than a governmental entity for storing or parking ten (10) or more vehicles. 
Wrecked motor vehicle shall mean a motor vehicle not capable of, or safe for, self-propulsion. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 10, § 1 [Ord. No. 78-71, § 1, 11-28-78; Ord. No. 80-17, § 1, 6-24-80]; Ord. No. 92-43, § I, 7-28-92; Ord. No. 20-009 , § I, 2-25-20)  
Sec. 28-57. - Exclusions. 
This division shall not apply to wrecker services which are not listed on the police rotation list. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 10, § 10 [Ord. No. 78-71, § 1, 11-28-78]; Ord. No. 92-43, § II, 7-28-92)  
Sec. 28-58. - Police rotation list. 
The chief of police is hereby authorized to establish rotation lists of tow service companies desiring to provide towing and storage services upon request of police officers. The tow service companies which desire to be placed upon and remain on a rotation list shall comply with the requirements of all applicable state laws and administrative rules regulating tow trucks and vehicle storage facilities, this article and all rules and regulations which may be issued by the chief of police regarding towing services requested by personnel of the police department. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 10, § 2 [Ord. No. 78-71, § 1, 11-28-78]; Ord. No. 92-43, § III, 7-28-92; Ord. No. 20-009 , § I, 2-25-20)  
Sec. 28-59. - Selection of tow services during police investigations. 
In all police-initiated towing of vehicles, the operator of the vehicle, if present and not incapacitated, shall have the right to select a tow service of his choice to perform the service. If the operator of the vehicle to be towed is not present or is incapacitated or has no preference as to any towing service, the police officer ordering the tow shall request that the towing service be performed by the tow service then first on the rotation list maintained in the police communications center. When emergency circumstances exist which require the immediate removal of a vehicle from the roadway, the police officer may request towing service from the tow service nearest to the scene of the emergency. A police officer may also request towing service from any company operating large cranes or other heavy equipment if same is necessary to remove traffic obstructions involving large trucks or heavy equipment. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 10, § 3 [Ord. No. 78-71, § 1, 11-28-78])  
Sec. 28-60. - Towing and impounding vehicles. 
(a)  The police department or any officer thereof may, at his discretion, order any vehicle parked in violation of any provision of this code or any state or federal law to be removed by a wrecker. The fees for the towing and impoundment of any vehicle ordered moved by the police department shall be paid by the owner of the vehicle. 
(b)  If a vehicle has been moved and placed in a storage facility without consent of the owner, the owner is entitled to a hearing to determine whether or not probable cause existed for removal and placement of the vehicle. A hearing under this article must be requested in writing within six (6) days of date of impoundment and shall be before a justice of the peace or magistrate in whose jurisdiction the storage facility is located. 
(c)  In the event an officer on scene directs a tow company to tow a vehicle to the Killeen Police Department or Killeen Police impound lot, the company shall be returned to the first place on the rotation list. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 10, § 14 [Ord. No. 78-71, § 1, 11-28-78]; Ord. No. 92-43, § IV, 7-28-92; Ord. No. 20-009 , § I, 2-25-20)  
Sec. 28-61. - Required equipment. 
Tow trucks operating under this article must conform to the following specifications: 
(1)  Be a factory wrecker with a minimum one-ton-rated capacity and dual rear wheels. 
(2)  Be equipped with hydraulics, a hydraulic wheel lift with a minimum three thousand (3,000) pound capacity, have all safety articles required by law, and proper equipment to recover and safely tow any vehicle they are called upon by the police department to tow. 
(3)  Be equipped with a winch that has a winch line and boom with a lifting capacity of not less than eight thousand (8,000) pounds single line capacity. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 10, § 15 [Ord. No. 80-17, § 4, 6-24-80]; Ord. No. 92-43, § V, 7-28-92; Ord. No. 98-31, § II, 5-12-98; Ord. No. 03-64, § I, 12-16-03; Ord. No. 11-006, § I, 1-25-11; Ord. No. 20-009 , § I, 2-25-20)  
Sec. 28-62. - Duties of police rotation list tow services. 
(a)  Tow services shall maintain towing equipment which is adequate to perform such towing service in a reasonably workmanlike manner and proper equipment to tow vehicles in such a manner as to minimize any damage to towed vehicles. 
(b)  No tow service shall arrive at the scene of a police investigation as a result of monitoring or intercepting police calls by radio or other device. 
(c)  Any tow service operating under this article must keep and maintain, for two (2) years from the date of towing, all records relating to the towing or storage of each vehicle as required by the Texas Vehicle Storage Facility Act (Occupations Code, Chapter 2203). 
(d)  Any motor vehicle towed must be stored in a yard with adequate security against intruders and must be lighted at night to facilitate visual inspection of vehicles released at night in accordance with requirements of the Texas Vehicle Storage Facility Act. 
(1)  Vehicle storage facilities must maintain a clear and unobstructed twenty-five-foot wide route of ingress and egress measured from the curb line of the street or highway to the actual storage area. This is for the safety of exiting vehicles, traffic on the roadway and vehicles in tow by wreckers, slider trucks, haulers or other trucks using the facility. 
(2)  If the route of ingress and egress is two hundred (200) or more feet long, then the police chief may authorize a twenty-foot wide route of ingress and egress, provided however, that an unobstructed turn around space must be established at the entrance of the actual storage area, sufficient to allow trucks with vehicles in tow to safely turn around, and leave the facility, without backing onto a public street while in tow. 
(3)  All entrance gates to the premises and into the actual storage area must be no less than twenty (20) feet wide to allow the safe movement of trucks with vehicles in tow. 
(4)  Existing storage lots holding a valid city permit as of August 1, 1995, have until the next annual permit renewal date following passage of this ordinance to comply with the minimum width requirements. Any storage lot applying for an initial permit on or after August 1, 1995, must comply with the width requirements at time of permit issuance. 
(5)  The surface of the vehicle storage area of the impound yard shall be either paved with asphalt, concrete, or seal coat over compacted base material. All ingress and egress approaches from the public street and parking area around the office shall be surfaced in accordance with chapter 31 of this code. 
(6)  The vehicle storage area of the yard must be screened by a barrier of: stone, brick, pierced brick or block, uniformly colored wood or other permanent material of equal character, density, and design at least six (6) feet in height (provided that any structure in excess of eight (8) feet in height shall be deemed a wall subject to the applicable provisions of the building code). A chain link fence that existed as of May 1, 1998, is deemed to be an adequate screen if wood, vinyl, or metal slats are attached to or woven into such fence. Entrance gates are not required to be screened, but may be chain link. 
(7)  An existing impound yard on the police rotation list as of May 1, 1998, shall have until May 31, 2000, in which to comply with subsections (5) and (6). 
(e)  The tow service will post a clearly visible, readable sign at the main entrance of the business in accordance with the requirements of the Texas Vehicle Storage Facility Act. 
(f)  The person operating any tow service shall make every reasonable effort to minimize damage to towed and stored vehicles. Where appropriate, such reasonable effort shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Use of a dolly or carriage for towing. 
(2)  Disconnection of the drive shaft. 
(3)  Release of brakes. 
(4)  Towing at a reasonable speed. 
(g)  No towed vehicle may be dismantled, have parts removed or tires deflated except as necessary for towing. 
(h)  The bill for towing and storage of any motor vehicle shall be itemized to reflect services performed, labor or other materials required and any storage or other charges. 
(i)  A complete inventory of the vehicles held in storage for the police department will be furnished to the abandoned vehicle clerk no later than the fifth day of each month. 
(j)  Tow companies shall notify consumer and recipients of service, all information required for the purpose of directing complaints to the state department of licensing and regulation, as required by the Texas Vehicle Storage Facility Act. 
(k)  Tow services shall maintain appropriate city permits, valid certificate of registration and tow license plate for all tow vehicles, and a valid license to operate their storage facility as required by the state department of licensing and regulation. 
(l)  The tow service shall remove all wreckage and debris from a collision scene, except for hazardous waste. 
(m)  If a tow company is in need of a substitution, regardless of status, for any specified time, the tow company shall contact the police department no less than two (2) weeks in advance of the need for a substitution. If an emergency should arise that would affect the tow company's ability to perform, the tow company shall contact the police department immediately. 
(n)  In the event the tow company changes location of a place of business, location of a VSF, or there is a change in the owners or ownership of a tow company or VSF, the tow company shall be responsible for providing written notice to the police department within forty-eight (48) hours of such event. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 10, § 9 [Ord. No. 78-71, § 1, 11-28-78; Ord. No. 80-17, § 3, 6-24-80; Ord. No. 84-55, §§ 1, 2, 7-24-84]; Ord. No. 92-43, § VI, 7-28-92; Ord. No. 92-56, § I, 8-11-92; Ord. No. 95-67, § I, II, 9-12-95; Ord. No. 98-31, § III, 5-12-98; Ord. No. 99-11, § I, 2-9-99;Ord. No. 00-53, § I, 6-27-00; Ord. No. 03-64, § I, 12-16-03; Ord. No. 13-094, §(b), 12-17-13; Ord. No. 20-009 , § I, 2-25-20)  
Sec. 28-63. - Fees. 
(a)  Class A tows (light duty). The following fees are hereby established as the maximum which may be charged for indicated service for police-initiated tows: 
Initial towing—Vehicles ten thousand (10,000) pounds or less .....$175.00
(A flat fee including flatbed or dollies) 
In addition to the initial towing fee, the following charges may also be added: 
Flatbed or dolly .....$0.00
(Included in initial towing fee) 
Storage .....$20.00 per day 
Winching .....$100.00 per hour charged in thirty (30) min. increments 
Wait time after thirty (30) minutes .....$20.00 per fifteen (15) min. increments 
Impound fee .....$20.00 as authorized by state law if the procedures mandated by law are followed and documented 
Mileage .....$3.00 per mile outside the city limits 
(b)  Class B tows (medium duty). The following fees are hereby established as the maximum which may be charged for indicated service for police-initiated tows: 
Initial towing—Vehicles in excess of ten thousand (10,000) pounds .....$400.00
(A flat fee including flatbed or dollies) 
In addition to the initial towing fee, the following charges may also be added: 
Flatbed or dolly .....$0.00
(Included in initial towing fee) 
Storage .....$20.00 per day under twenty-five (25) feet and $35.00 over twenty-five (25) feet 
Winching .....$100.00 per hour charged in thirty (30) min. increments 
Wait time after thirty (30) minutes .....$20.00 per fifteen (15) min. increments 
Impound fee .....$20.00 as authorized by state law if the procedures mandated by law are followed and documented 
Mileage .....$6.00 per mile outside the city limits 
(c)  Class C tows (heavy duty). The following fees are hereby established as the maximum which may be charged for indicated service for police-initiated tows: 
Initial towing—Vehicles in excess of twenty-six thousand (26,000) pounds .....$800.00
(A flat fee including flatbed or dollies) 
In addition to the initial towing fee, the following charges may also be added: 
Flatbed or dolly .....$0.00
(Included in initial towing fee) 
Storage .....$20.00 per day under twenty-five (25) feet and $35.00 over twenty-five (25) feet 
Winching .....$100.00 per hour charged in thirty (30) min. increments 
Wait time after thirty (30) minutes .....$20.00 per fifteen (15) min. increments 
Impound fee .....$20.00 as authorized by state law if the procedures mandated by law are followed and documented 
Mileage .....$7.00 per mile outside the city limits 
(d)  There shall be no charge when a tow request is made by the police department, but no hookup is made. The tow service shall be returned to first place on the police rotation list. 
(e)  Towing and storage charges shall be waived when requested by the police department in unusual circumstances, including but not limited to, instances in which a prisoner is released without charges being filed. 
(Ord. No. 20-009 , § I, 2-25-20)  
Sec. 28-64. - Drivers permit. 
(a)  A person may not perform police rotation list tows for the police department without a tow truck operator's permit. 
(b)  A tow truck operator permit must be worn while performing a police rotation list tow for the police department. 
(c)  Unless revoked, the drivers permit is valid for one (1) year for employment with any tow company on the police department police rotation list. 
(d)  A driver's permit may be revoked by the chief of police or designee at any time if the permittee no longer meets the qualifications to possess a permit. Such revocation shall be in writing. 
(e)  If the police department determines an applicant is qualified, a driver's permit shall be issued. If an applicant is denied, the police chief or designee shall provide a written denial to the applicant. 
(f)  An application for a driver's permit may be denied if: 
(1)  The person is not qualified under this article; or 
(2)  The person falsifies, materially alters or omits information in the application. 
(g)  To obtain a driver's permit, a person must file a completed written application with the police department on the prescribed form and pay the non-refundable fee provided in the adopted fee schedule. 
(h)  The police department shall conduct such investigation as it considers necessary to determine whether a person is qualified for a driver's permit. The police department shall review the applicant's criminal history. 
(i)  All applicants must go through a background check and must not have been convicted of: 
(1)  Any misdemeanor theft in the past five (5) years; 
(2)  Felony theft in the past ten (10) years; 
(3)  Any crime involving the taking, use, tampering with or conversion of a motor vehicle to include burglary or theft of a vehicle in the past fifteen (15) years; 
(4)  Misdemeanor DWI in the past five (5) years; 
(5)  Felony DWI in the past ten (10) years; 
(6)  Possession of a dangerous drug or controlled substance in the last five (5) years; 
(7)  Any felony assault in the past twenty (20) years; or 
(8)  Be a registered sex offender. 
(j)  An individual whose driver's permit is denied or revoked may appeal in writing to the city manager's office not later than the tenth day after receipt of the notice of denial or revocation. The city manager or designee shall provide a written response no later than thirty (30) days after receiving an appeal. The decision of the city manager or designee shall be final. 
(k)  An individual whose driver's permit is denied or revoked shall not perform a police rotation list tow for the police department during the pendency of an appeal. 
(Ord. No. 20-009 , § I, 2-25-20)  
Secs. 28-65—28-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 28-71. - Required; fee. 
No tow service shall engage in the business of towing vehicles at the direction of a city police officer without first obtaining a police rotation list privilege permit from the city. The annual permit fee shall be as provided in the adopted fee schedule. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 10, § 4 [Ord. No. 78-71, § 1, 11-28-78]; Ord. No. 92-43, § VII, 7-28-92; Ord. No. 03-64, § I, 12-16-03; Ord. No. 19-047 , § XII, 9-17-19)  
Sec. 28-72. - Application. 
Application for a police rotation list privilege permit shall be notarized and shall be made on forms prepared and made available by the police department. The application shall contain the following information: 
(a)  The name, home address and business address of each owner, part owner or partner, silent or active. 
(b)  The business address, telephone number, night telephone number, and the location of and telephone number of any storage area. 
(c)  A description of the size and capacity of all tow trucks used by the tow service. 
(d)  A description of the storage area for towed vehicles. 
(e)  A copy or certificate of a standard garage keeper's legal liability insurance policy with a collision limit of not less than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), subject to a maximum deductible of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and facility comprehensive coverage for fire, theft and explosion in an amount of not less than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00). 
(f)  A copy of certificate of a garage or automobile liability policy insuring the tow service owner and all his employees for liability for death, bodily injury or property damage to third parties in the amount of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for any one (1) person and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for one (1) incident and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for property damage. In addition, a minimum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) of on-hook cargo insurance must be maintained. 
(g)  Proof of current state sales tax permit. 
(h)  The application shall be signed by each owner, part owner or partner, active or silent. 
(i)  Documentation showing proposed storage area is in a proper zoning by the city and/or a special use permit has been issued. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 10, § 5 [Ord. No. 78-71, § 1, 11-28-78]; Ord. No. 92-43, § VIII, 7-28-92; Ord. No. 03-64, § I, 12-16-03; Ord. No. 20-009 , § I, 2-25-20)  
Sec. 28-73. - Insurance required. 
The insurance enumerated in section 28-72 shall be required for all tow services. The policy showing such coverage to be in effect shall be filed with the application for a permit and shall be kept at the police department. On or before the expiration date of the current policy, the tow service shall file a new policy with the police department. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 10, § 6 [Ord. No. 78-71, § 1, 11-28-78; Ord. No. 80-17, § 5, 6-24-80]; Ord. No. 20-009 , § I, 2-25-20)  
Sec. 28-74. - Investigation by chief of police. 
Within five (5) business days after receipt of each application, the chief of police or designee shall cause an investigation to be made of the applicant and of his operation. Such investigation shall be made for the purpose of verifying the information in the application and to assure compliance with the provisions of this article. The investigation shall include the following items: 
(a)  That all applicants, owners and partners are fit and proper persons, through a background check, to conduct or work in the proposed business and have never been convicted of any misdemeanor theft in the past five (5) years, felony theft in the past ten (10) years, any crime involving the taking, use, tampering with or conversion of a motor vehicle to include burglary or theft of a vehicle in the past fifteen (15) years, or any felony assault in the past twenty (20) years or be registered as a sex offender. 
(b)  That the tow service will use only tow trucks equipped with adequate emergency lights and equipment for safe towing and preventing damage to towed vehicles. 
(c)  That the tow service will provide twenty-four-hour-a-day, seven-day-a-week, on-call service. 
(d)  That the tow service will arrive at the location of the vehicle to be towed within thirty (30) minutes after receiving a request for towing and tow the vehicle called upon to tow. 
(e)  That the tow service will provide and use a storage area for towed vehicles that is enclosed by a chain link fence or equally secure fence or enclosure which shall be illuminated at night. 
(f)  That the requirements of all governing laws, rules established by state department of licensing and regulation, city ordinances, and rules and regulations by the chief of police be met. 
(g)  That the tow service office and the storage yard is located in the city limits or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city. 
(h)  The applicant must provide the registration for all vehicles and a sales tax certificate to show who is the owner of the truck and business. No person shall be allowed to have more than one (1) listing on the wrecker list, whether in his own name or any other assumed name. However, no towing service shall be disqualified under this provision if the tow truck is leased from another person but the lessee tow service provides the tow truck driver and otherwise has control and management of the tow service. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 10, § 7 [Ord. No. 78-71, § 1, 11-28-78; Ord. No. 80-17, § 2, 6-24-80]; Ord. No. 88-71, § 1, 7-12-88; Ord. No. 92-43, § IX, 7-28-92; Ord. No. 98-31, § I, 5-12-98; Ord. No. 03-64, § I, 12-16-03; Ord. No. 20-009 , § I, 2-25-20)  
Sec. 28-75. - Issuance. 
The police department shall issue a permit and add a tow service to the rotation list when: 
(a)  The police investigation confirms the requirements of section 28-74. 
(b)  The insurance policies as required by this article have been produced. 
(c)  The permit fee has been paid. 
(d)  City requirements for zoning and/or special use permits are met. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 10, § 8 [Ord. No. 78-71, § 1, 11-28-78]; Ord. No. 92-43, § X, 7-28-92; Ord. No. 20-009 , § I, 2-25-20)  
Sec. 28-76. - Suspension authorized. 
(a)  The chief of police or designee shall suspend a police rotation list privilege permit if he determines that a general or major violation has occurred. 
(b)  General violation under these rules shall mean, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The permit holder illegally solicited tow or repair services at a police investigation. 
(2)  The permit holder has exceeded the fee schedule. 
(3)  The tow company has missed more than three (3) rotation calls in a thirty-day period. 
(4)  The tow company sent an unpermitted driver to perform a police rotation list tow. 
(5)  The tow company sent an unpermitted truck to perform a police rotation list tow. 
(c)  Major violation under these rules shall mean, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  A permit holder gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the police department during the application process. 
(2)  A permit holder fails to maintain insurance on the vehicles or vehicle storage facility. 
(3)  A permit holder does not have a current vehicle storage facility license or tow truck registration certificate through TDLR. 
(4)  A permit holder is suspended through TDLR. 
(d)  The penalty for a general violation shall be a suspension from the police rotation list for a period of thirty (30) calendar days for the first violation and sixty (60) days for the second violation in a twelve-month period. The chief of police or designee shall have the discretion upon the third such violation by a tow company in a twelve-month period to set the suspension period, up to and including indefinite suspension from the police rotation list. 
(e)  The penalty for a major violation shall be a suspension from the police rotation list for a period of not less than sixty (60) calendar days for the first violation and not less than ninety (90) days for the second violation in a twelve-month period. The chief of police or designee shall have the discretion upon the third such violation by a tow company in a twelve-month period to set the suspension period, up to and including indefinite suspension from the police rotation list. 
(f)  Three (3) or more general violations in a six-month period will be considered a major violation. 
(g)  A tow service that responds to a scene and is unable to tow the vehicle called for due to circumstances beyond the normal control of the tow truck operator (i.e., vehicle size mandates heavy-duty wrecker) will not have the call counted against the company and will return to the top of the police rotation list. 
(h)  If the permit holder, tow truck or driver, has violated any of the regulations of this article, any of the laws of the state or rules of the state regulating vehicle storage facilities or tow truck owners, or any of the rules and regulations as established by the police department or the city council, the chief of police or designee shall determine if a general or major violation has occurred and if so take the appropriate action. 
(i)  If a permit holder fails to maintain insurance for any reason, the permit shall immediately be suspended, and the permit holder will not be placed back on the rotation list until approved by the chief of police or designee upon proof that the insurance is reinstated has been provided. 
(Ord. No. 88-71, § II(3-10-11), 7-12-88; Ord. No. 03-64, § I, 12-16-03; Ord. No. 20-009 , § I, 2-25-20)  
Sec. 28-77. - Procedure on suspension. 
(a)  Notice. If the chief of police or designee suspends a permit issued under this division, he shall send to the permit holder, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the suspension, the reason therefor, and the right to appeal. 
(b)  Period of suspension. The period of suspension shall be: 
(1)  For the first violation, not more than thirty (30) days. 
(2)  For the second violation, not more than ninety (90) days. 
(3)  For the third or subsequent violation, such period of suspension as the chief of police or designee may determine, including permanent suspension which shall constitute revocation. 
(Ord. No. 88-71, § III(3-10-12), 7-12-88; Ord. No. 03-64, § I, 12-16-03; Ord. No. 20-009 , § I, 2-25-20)  
Sec. 28-78. - Renewal. 
The police rotation list privilege permit shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of issuance. Each application for renewal shall contain adequate assurances that the applicant continue to comply with all standards, rules and regulations prescribed by this article and all other standards, rules and regulations issued hereunder. Such renewals shall be on a form furnished by the police department and shall contain the names of any new owners, part owners or partners and the names of any new employees. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 3, art. 10, § 13 [Ord. No. 78-71, § 1, 11-28-78]; Ord. No. 20-009 , § I, 2-25-20)  
Sec. 28-79. - Appeal. 
An applicant or permit holder may appeal denial or suspension of a permit, such appeal to be in writing, filed with the city manager's office, and clearly setting out the basis of such appeal. The appeal may include relevant facts and legal argument regarding the denial or suspension. Appeals shall be considered by the city manager or designee. Upon considering all relevant evidence, the city manager or designee shall issue a written decision within thirty (30) days and may order issuance of a permit, lift the suspension, affirm the suspension, or suspend for a period of time consistent with the provisions of [subsection] 28-77(b), which period may be different than that period designated in the letter from the chief of police or designee. The decision of the city manager or designee shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 20-009 , § I, 2-25-20)  
Secs. 28-80—28-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - GENERAL RULES OF VEHICLE OPERATION 
 
Sec. 28-101. - Stop when traffic obstructed. 
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 1, § 47)  
Sec. 28-102. - Limitations on turning around. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction unless such movement can be made in safety and without backing or otherwise interfering with other traffic. A complete turn shall not be made on any street within the limits of Rancier and Highway 190 on the north and south respectively and 10 th and 2 nd Streets on the east and west respectively, all inclusive. 
(b)  A complete turn shall not be made at any intersection of any two (2) streets or upon any street or alley in the city where the city council may determine that it is unsafe to make a complete turn and shall have caused to be posted at such place in the street or alley a sign showing that a complete turn is prohibited. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 1, § 31) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate turning movements, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 27(a)(8); turning movements, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 65 et seq.  
Sec. 28-103. - One-way streets. 
(a)  Whitlow Avenue. Whitlow Avenue shall be a one-way street from east to west beginning with the west line of Garth Avenue and running in a northwesterly direction to the north line of Williamson Avenue. 
(b)  Valley Road. Valley Road, on the east side of the drainage ditch, from Rancier Avenue to the intersection of Garth Drive shall be a one-way street, the same being one-way going north from Rancier Avenue. 
(c)  Williamson Avenue. Williamson Avenue shall be a one-way street from west to east, beginning with the east line of Hillcrest Drive and running in an easterly direction to the west line of Garth Drive. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 1, § 12 [Ord. No. 69-21, § 1, 4-14-69]; Ord. No. 97-49, § 1, 8-26-97) 
State Law reference— Authority to designate one-way streets, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 27(a)(4); one-way streets, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 59.  
Sec. 28-104. - Digging out prohibited. 
Any person who shall start a motor vehicle from a stopped position or accelerate a motor vehicle, whether originally stopped or moving, in such fashion as to cause the driving wheels to spin, or to cause the driving wheels to spin and create a loud noise calculated to disturb the residents living in the vicinity or other motorists and/or pedestrians in the vicinity, whether motorists and/or pedestrians are actually present or not, or to cause the rear portion of the motor vehicle to sway or swing from side to side, shall, upon conviction, be held guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 1, § 27.1(b) [Ord. No. 70-64, §§ 1, 2, 11-23-70])  
Sec. 28-105. - Commercial routes. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, as defined in section 28-132, having a manufacturer's rated carrying or towing capacity of two (2) tons or greater to drive such vehicle on any street in the city which is not designated A+ Major Arterial, A Major Arterial, B+ Minor Arterial, or B Minor Arterial on the currently adopted thoroughfare plan of the city. 
(b)  The above prohibition shall extend to all vehicular traffic which is traveling through, around or in the city, except that this prohibition shall not be made to deny the legitimate pickup or delivery of merchandise, goods and passengers to or from locations within the city. A vehicle making such pickups and/or deliveries shall traverse the designated vehicle route and take the most direct routing from the designated commercial route to the point of pickup and/or delivery. A bill of lading, routing sheet or other such documentation portraying the specific address from which the merchandise, goods and passengers are to be picked up or the address to which the delivery is to be made is prima facie proof of legitimacy. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 2, § 1; Ord. No. 94-25, § I, 4-12-94)  
Secs. 28-106—28-125. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate stopping, standing and parking, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 27(a)(1); stopping, standing and parking generally, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 93 et seq.; administrative adjudication of parking offenses, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d-24. 
 
Sec. 28-126. - Parking in violation of ordinances. 
No person shall allow, suffer or permit any vehicle registered in his name to stand or be parked in any street in the city in violation of any of the provisions of this code or ordinances of this city regulating the standing or parking of vehicles. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 4, § 3)  
Sec. 28-127. - Angle parking. 
(a)  It shall be lawful to park vehicles at an angle not greater than forty-five (45) degrees to the line of traffic at such places in the city as the city council shall by resolution determine that angle parking shall be permitted and shall cause the same to be marked or signed; and in all places where sidewalks have been set back and provisions made for parking vehicles across or inside the usual curb line on any street in the city. In leaving such angle parking space cars shall not be backed into the traffic lane any further than necessary to get straightened out and faced in the proper direction for traffic between such space and center of the street. 
(b)  It is hereby expressly made acceptable for the public to angle park on the north side of Church Street between Second and Fourth Streets in the city without the necessity of the owner of the property on which such angle parking spaces are to be located, having to provide a maneuvering area as is currently required elsewhere in this code. Such spaces shall be constructed only after the approval of the plans by the city engineer. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to angle park on Avenue B, along the north margin of Avenue B, from the west margin of Second Street westerly to the east margin of the concrete bridge on such avenue. All motor vehicles parked on such area shall be parked parallel to the curb of such street. 
(d)  Automobiles or vehicles shall be permitted to angle park only in those areas in which angle parking can be accomplished without interfering with the free movement of traffic. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 4, §§ 2, 5, 8) 
State Law reference— Authority to permit angle parking, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 96(c).  
Sec. 28-128. - Disabled parking. 
(a)  On private property. A person who owns or controls private property used for parking may designate a parking space or area specifically for the disabled by identifying and reserving parking spaces for the disabled in accordance with the requirements referred to in (b) below. 
(b)  Designation. Identification and designation of parking spaces or areas for the disabled shall conform to the rules promulgated by the state purchasing and general services commission under authority of the State Purchasing and General Services Act [Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 601b]. A copy of such rules is on file and available for examination in the office of the city engineer. 
(c)  Offenses. A person commits an offense if the person: 
(1)  Is neither temporarily or permanently disabled nor transporting a temporarily or permanently disabled person and parks a vehicle with disabled person identification in a parking space designated specifically for the disabled. 
(2)  Parks a vehicle not displaying disabled person identification in a parking space designated specifically for the disabled. 
(3)  Parks a vehicle so that the vehicle blocks an access or curb ramp or any other architectural improvement designed to aid the disabled. 
(4)  Lends a disabled person identification card issued to him to a person who uses the identification card in violation of the law. 
(d)  Penalty. An offense under this section is a misdemeanor. 
(e)  Presumption. In a prosecution of an offense under this section, it is presumed that the registered owner of the motor vehicle that is the subject of the prosecution is the person who parked the vehicle at the time and place the offense occurred. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 4, § 15; Ord. No. 90-24, § I, 3-13-90) 
State Law reference— Disabled parking, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6675a-5e.1.  
Sec. 28-129. - Parking for peddling. 
(a)  Parking on the streets of the city for the purpose of peddling creates a hazardous congestion and is a public nuisance. 
(b)  No person whomsoever shall be allowed to peddle anything from a wagon, automobile, cart, or other vehicle upon the streets of the city, where parking such wagon, automobile, cart or other vehicle is for a period of more than thirty (30) minutes in one (1) place. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 4, §§ 10, 11)  
Sec. 28-130. - Parking in downtown alleys. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle within any alley in the downtown district of the city in such a manner or under such conditions as to block the alley or leave an insufficient width of the roadway available for the free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle within an alley in the downtown business district except for the purpose of actually loading or unloading such vehicle, and such vehicle shall not be parked for more than ten (10) minutes; however, if the loading and unloading is done in an expeditious manner it may remain for more than ten (10) minutes. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, the term "alley" shall mean "a narrow lane between buildings which runs through the middle of the block and gives access to the rear buildings." 
(d)  For the purposes of this section, the term "downtown district" shall mean all property lying within the following boundaries: Beginning at a point on the south line of Rancier Drive at the northeast corner of the intersection of Rancier Drive and North 2 nd Street and continuing along the south line of Rancier Drive in an easterly direction to the intersection of Rancier Drive and North 10 th Street; then south along the west line of 10 th Street to the A.T. & S.F. railroad right-of-way; then continuing in an easterly direction along the north line of the A.T. & S.F. railroad right-of-way to North 2 nd Street; then north along the east boundary of 2 nd Street to the point of beginning. 
(e)  The city police shall tow away any vehicles left in an alley in the downtown business district which is neither loading nor unloading. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 4, § 13 [Ord. No. 69-8, §§ 1-5, 2-24-69])  
Sec. 28-131. - Maximum time when not otherwise regulated; fines, towing. 
(a)  Except on Sundays and holidays known as Christmas Day, Thanksgiving Day, July Fourth, Armistice Day, and Labor Day, and except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., inclusively, for any person to permit a motor vehicle, registered in his name as owner or under his control, to remain parked or stopped continuously at any one (1) parking space, place, or portion thereof on any of the, or any part of the, public streets, roads, or highways within the city, where such parking or stopping is not otherwise prohibited or regulated by statutes of the state or ordinances of the city, for a period of time in excess of two (2) hours. 
(b)  In the event any person charged with or alleged to have violated any provision of this section shall pay a fine, within twenty-four (24) hours of and after the time and date of issuance of citation for violation of this section, such fine shall not exceed two dollars ($2.00). If no fine for a charged or alleged violation of this section has been actually paid within twenty-four (24) hours of the time and date of issuance of the citation for such violation of this section, the person so charged with or alleged to have violated this section shall pay a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00), if such fine be actually paid prior to, and without, trial of such charged or alleged violation of this section. If any person charged with or alleged to have violated any provision of this section shall not have actually paid the fine provided by this section for such violation prior to the commencement of trial of such charged or alleged violation of this section, and such person is thereafter convicted of violating such provision of this section, as charged or alleged, such person shall be fined not less than two dollars ($2.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) upon conviction thereof, or upon change of plea of defendant from a plea of not guilty to a plea of guilty made after commencement of trial. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to permit a motor vehicle, the title to which is registered in his name, or, which is under his control, to remain parked or stopped continuously at any one (1) parking space, place or portion thereof, on any public streets, roads or highways, or any part thereof, within the city for a period of time more than forty-eight (48) hours. 
(d)  Any motor vehicle parked or stopped continuously at, or in, any one (1) parking space, place, or portion, thereof, for a period in excess of forty-eight (48) hours, on any public streets, roads, or highways, within the city shall be removed, or towed away, from such space, place, or portion thereof, by the chief of police, or his duly authorized subordinate officers, to a place or location where such vehicle shall not be upon, or obstructing, any public streets, roads or highways within the city. 
(e)  Any person charged with or alleged to have parked or stopped a motor vehicle in any space, place, or part thereof, upon any public streets, roads, or highways within the city for a continuous period of more than forty-eight (48) hours, shall be charged with, and for, and shall pay, as towing fees and moving expenses for the removal of any such motor vehicle, a sum of money, in currency of the United States, not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00), in addition to any fine, or fines, lawfully determined and ordered, under the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city. 
(f)  In any prosecution charging or alleging a violation of any provision of this section, proof that the particular motor vehicle, described in the complaint, was parked or stopped in violation of any provision of this section, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of such parking or stopping, as charged or alleged, the registered owner of such motor vehicle, or, was in fact entitled to the control of such motor vehicle, shall be and constitute, in evidence, a prima facie presumption that such registered owner of, or person entitled to control of, such motor vehicle, was the person who in fact parked, placed, or stopped such motor vehicle at the point and place where, and for the time during which, such charged or alleged violation occurred. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 4, § 14 [Ord. No. 72-58, §§ 1-7, 9-25-72]; Ord. No. 06-110, § I, 9-26-06)  
Sec. 28-132. - Parking in residential areas. 
(a)  For the purposes of this article, the following have the meanings provided herein. The word "vehicle" means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excluding light trucks used for personal family or household purposes, not modified for commercial use. The term "travel trailer" shall mean a vehicular, portable home designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses; such homes shall be classified as a travel trailer whether or not its wheels, rollers, skids or other rolling equipment have been removed, and whether or not any addition thereto has been built on the ground; and shall also include pickup campers, converted buses, self-powered motor homes, tent trailers, tents and analogous temporary portable housing and accessory buildings. The term "light truck" shall mean a vehicle with a manufacturer's rated carrying capacity not to exceed two thousand (2,000) pounds, and is intended to include those trucks commonly known as pickup trucks, panel delivery trucks, and carryall trucks. The term "trailer" does not include a boat trailer carrying a boat, but would include an empty boat trailer. The term "boat" shall mean a boat trailer carrying a boat. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle having a capacity of more than one (1) ton including, but not limited to, truck tractors, within six hundred (600) feet of a property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle having a capacity of more than one (1) ton on private property in any district zoned R-1, R-1A, RM-1, RT-1, R-2, R-3, R-3F, R-3A, or R-MP, excluding travel trailers and light trucks used for personal family or household purposes, not modified for commercial use, except as provided in this article. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park a trailer of any capacity on a street adjacent to property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park more than one (1) trailer on private property visible from any public right of way in any district zoned R-1, R-1A, RM-1, RT-1, R-2, R-3, R-3F, R-3A, or R-MP. Any trailer parked in accordance with this section shall be sixteen (16) feet or less and shall in no way encroach upon any public street or public right-of-way, including a sidewalk. For purposes of this article, the length of a trailer does not include the tongue. 
(f)  The provisions of this section shall not deny or make an offense for the parking of any vehicle or trailer while involved in the legitimate delivery or pickup of merchandise, goods, services or passengers to and from locations necessary for commercial purposes. A bill of lading, routing sheet, work order or other such documentation portraying the specific address to be serviced shall be sufficient evidence to exempt such vehicles. This subsection does not authorize the parking of a vehicle or trailer overnight. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 2, §§ 2—4 [Ord. No. 82-20, 5-15-82]; Ord. No. 94-24, § I, 4-12-94; Ord. No. 06-37, § I, 3-28-06; Ord. No. 06-110, § I, 9-26-06; Ord. No. 10-003, § VII, 2-9-10; Ord. No. 18-005 , § 1, 4-10-18; Ord. No. 18-049 , § I, 12-18-18)  
Sec. 28-133. - Parking prohibited on U.S. 190. 
Parking of any automobile or vehicle shall be prohibited on U.S. Highway 190 or on Veterans Memorial Boulevard. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 4, § 7; Ord. No. 06-37, § I, 3-28-06)  
Sec. 28-134. - Parking of boats and travel trailers. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person who owns or controls a boat or travel trailer defined in 28-132 to park or leave standing said boat or travel trailer on any public street or parked on private property in a manner so as to encroach upon any public street or public right-of-way, including a sidewalk. 
(b)  The provisions of paragraph (a) shall not apply if: 
(1)  The owner or operator of the boat or travel trailer is in the actual course and scope of loading or unloading goods or equipment; or 
(2)  The boat or travel trailer is otherwise legally parked or left standing for twenty-four (24) hours or less due to a mechanical defect which makes it unsafe to move. 
(Ord. No. 06-37, § I, 3-28-06; Ord. No. 06-110, § I, 9-26-06)  
Sec. 28-135. - Parking on all-weather surface required. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on anything other than an all-weather surface. An all-weather surface shall consist of Portland cement concrete or an impervious bituminous surface over a compacted base or other surface approved by the building official. The parking surface for property zoned or used for commercial and multifamily use must be capable of retaining paint or striping material. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Property zoned or used as residential where there is no driveway; 
(2)  Property zoned or used as residential where no on-street parking is allowed on the street or streets adjacent to the residence; 
(3)  Vehicles parked during parades or other sanctioned events; 
(4)  Vehicles screened from public view by the methods stated in sections 31-20 or 31-280 (screening devices), or in section 8-512 (landscaped screening devices); 
(5)  Property zoned or used as residential where any boat, trailer, or travel trailer is parked on concrete blocks, pavers or brick laid in a manner sufficient to meet the standards of off-street parking requirements of chapter 31. The blocks, pavers or brick must be a minimum of three (3) inches thick. Blocks, pavers, or brick only under the wheels or in a path for the wheels is not sufficient; or 
(6)  Property zoned or used for commercial purposes with parking areas that were not all-weather surfaces prior to September 24, 2002, and that have remained unchanged since that date. Any subsequent expansion of a parking area that existed prior to September 24, 2002, shall conform to the requirements of subsection (a) above. The exception provided by this section shall no longer apply if the property is sold. 
(c)  Any person who owns or controls any lot, parcel of land, or premise within the city limits having on it a vehicle in violation of this section shall be required to remove such vehicle within ten (10) days from the date of the written notice from the code enforcement director if the property is used as residential or within sixty (60) days from the date of written notification from the code enforcement director if the property is used as commercial. If another vehicle is parked on the same property in violation of this section within twelve (12) months after the times provided above, and the city has not been informed in writing by the owner of an ownership change, a citation for violation of this section may be issued to the owner or person in control of the lot, parcel of land or premises without providing additional notice. 
(Ord. No. 06-37, § I, 3-28-06; Ord. No. 06-110, § I, 9-26-06)  
Sec. 28-136. - Exceptions in certain districts and economic hardship. 
(a)  The provisions of sections 28-132, 28-134 and 28-135 shall not apply to property in any district zoned A or A-R1. If property in a district zoned A or A-R1 is re-zoned to a less restrictive zoning district, sections 28-132, 28-134 and 28-135 shall not apply to such property for a period of three (3) years from the date the zoning is approved. 
(b)  A property owner who claims compliance with sections 28-132, 28-134 or 28-135 will cause an economic hardship may submit a request for variance to the city manager. The city manager shall issue a final decision in writing within ten (10) calendar days. Any variance granted shall set forth the specific terms of the variance. 
(Ord. No. 06-37, § I, 3-28-06)  
Sec. 28-137. - Parking at Killeen-Fort Hood Regional Airport. 
A.  The airport director may establish areas in which the stopping, standing or parking of a motor vehicle is prohibited or restricted. 
B.  A person may not park a motor vehicle in a public area of the Killeen-Fort Hood Regional Airport except: 
1.  At a place and in a manner expressly authorized by the airport director; 
2.  As directed by a police officer or an airport official; or 
3.  In compliance with official posted signs or markings. 
C.  A person may not stop, stand or park a motor vehicle in a passenger loading zone except to quickly load or unload passengers and baggage. A motor vehicle may not be left unattended while loading or unloading passengers and/or baggage. 
D.  An airport official may tow a motor vehicle parked on airport property in violation of this chapter at the owner or operator's expense. 
E.  The city hereby adopts the exemption provided to certain veterans and military award recipients by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 681.008(b), and provides that: 
1.  When being operated by or for the transportation of a person to whom this section applies, a vehicle on which license plates described in this section are displayed is exempt from the payment of a fee imposed for parking in a lot at the Killeen-Fort Hood Regional Airport. 
2.  The person claiming the exemption must provide proof of picture identification and either vehicle registration or insurance to confirm that the vehicle is eligible for exemption from the parking fee. 
(Ord. No. 09-055, § I, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 15-030 , § I, 6-9-15)  
Sec. 28-138. - Stopping prohibited at Willow Springs Elementary School. 
Stopping of any automobile or vehicle shall be prohibited on either the north or south TxDOT right-of-way in front of Willow Springs Elementary. 
A.  A person may not stop a motor vehicle in either the north or south the TxDOT right-of-way in front of Willow Springs Elementary for any reason, including to load or drop off students. 
B.  A person may not stop a motor vehicle to load or drop off students on unimproved surfaces in front of Willow Springs Elementary along both eastbound and westbound lanes of Stan Schlueter Loop. 
(Ord. No. 12-009, § I, 5-29-12)  
Secs. 28-139—28-155. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - PEDESTRIANS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Pedestrians, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 76 et seq. 
 
Sec. 28-156. - Obedience to signals. 
Pedestrians shall strictly comply with the directions of all traffic-control signals in the city. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 1, § 39(b))  
Sec. 28-157. - Use of crosswalks in fire limits. 
It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to cross any street or roadway in the fire limits of the city except in a designated crosswalk. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 1, § 39(b)) 
State Law reference— Authority to so provide, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 76(b).  
Sec. 28-158. - Blind and incapacitated pedestrians. 
(a)  No person may carry a white cane on a public street or highway unless the person is totally or partially blind or otherwise incapacitated. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection or crosswalk where a pedestrian guided by a support dog or carrying a white cane is crossing or attempting to cross shall take necessary precautions to avoid injuring or endangering the pedestrian. The driver shall bring the vehicle to a full stop if injury or danger can be avoided only by that action. 
(c)  The failure of a totally or partially blind or otherwise incapacitated person to carry a white cane or be guided or aided by a support dog does not deprive the person of the rights and privileges conferred by law on pedestrians crossing streets or highways and does not constitute evidence of contributory negligence. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 1, § 63) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Human Resources Code § 121.007.  
Secs. 28-159—28-180. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - BICYCLES AND TOY VEHICLES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate bicycles, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 27(a)(7); bicycles and play vehicles, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 178 et seq. 
 
Sec. 28-181. - Violations. 
(a)  It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this article. 
(b)  The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 6, § 1(a), (b) [Ord. No. 67-21, § 3, 9-25-67]) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 178.  
Sec. 28-182. - Application of article. 
The provisions of this article applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any highway or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles subject to those exceptions stated herein. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 6, § 1(c) [Ord. No. 67-21, § 3, 9-25-67])  
Sec. 28-183. - Operation generally. 
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the traffic ordinances of this city applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to special regulations in this article, and except as to those provisions of law and ordinances which by their nature can have no application. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 6, § 3(a) [Ord. No. 67-21, § 3, 9-25-67])  
Sec. 28-184. - Obedience required. 
Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic-control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 6, § 3(b) [Ord. No. 67-21, § 3, 9-25-67])  
Sec. 28-185. - Obedience to signs. 
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts from the bicycle to make any such turn, in which event such person shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 6, § 3(c) [Ord. No. 67-21, § 3, 9-25-67])  
Sec. 28-186. - Speed. 
No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 6, § 3(i) [Ord. No. 67-21, § 3, 9-25-67])  
Sec. 28-187. - Yield right-of-way. 
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on such sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such roadway. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 6, § 3(j) [Ord. No. 67-21, § 3, 9-25-67])  
Sec. 28-188. - Parking. 
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 6, § 3(l) [Ord. No. 67-21, § 3, 9-25-67])  
Sec. 28-189. - Riding on sidewalks. 
(a)  No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district. This section shall not apply to a bicycle being operated by a law enforcement officer in the course of official duty. 
(b)  Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 6, § 3 [Ord. No. 67-21, § 3, 9-25-67]; Ord. No. 94-32, § I, 5-10-94)  
Sec. 28-190. - Uses of coasters, roller skates, skateboards, or similar devices restricted. 
(a)  No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, skateboard, toy vehicle, or similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk and when so crossing such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street as authorized by ordinance of the city. 
(b)  No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, skateboard, toy vehicle, or similar device shall enter, go, travel, or skate in, on, or along the sides, walls, linings, or aprons of any storm sewer, storm drain or ditch channel. 
(c)  No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, skateboard, toy vehicle or similar device shall go, travel or skate on or along a sidewalk within a business district. 
(d)  Whenever any person is riding such a coasting or skating device upon a sidewalk in any district other than a business district, such person shall yield right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for the parent or legal guardian of a child under ten (10) years of age to intentionally or knowingly allow that child to violate any provision of this section. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 1, § 8; Ord. No. 89-54, § 1, 7-11-89)  
Secs. 28-191—28-210. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - OFF-ROAD VEHICLES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— All-terrain vehicles, Vernon's Ann. Civ. Stat. art. 6701c-5. 
 
Sec. 28-211. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "off-road vehicles ordinance" and may be cited as such. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 10, art. 6, § 1(a) [Ord. No. 86-49, § 1(1), 7-22-86])  
Sec. 28-212. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
All-terrain vehicle shall mean a motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider, designed to propel itself with three (3) or four (4) tires in contact with the ground, designed by the manufacturer for off-highway use by the operator only, and not designed by the manufacturer for farming or lawn care. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701c-5, § 1. 
Child shall mean a person who has not reached the age of majority under the laws of the state. 
Off-road vehicle shall mean any bicycle or all-terrain vehicle. 
Owner shall mean the person who holds title to or who has possession of and right to control property, whether real or personal. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 10, art. 6, § 2 [Ord. No. 86-49, § 1(2), 7-22-86]) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 28-213. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to provide just, equitable and practicable protection of the safety, health and general welfare of the operators of off-road vehicles, spectators of such operations and events and the property owners and surrounding property owners. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 10, art. 6, § 1(b) [Ord. No. 86-49, § 1(1), 7-22-86])  
Sec. 28-214. - Scope. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all operations of off-road vehicles, which are hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Such operations are prohibited and shall be regulated and prosecuted as set out for the protection of the safety, health and general welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 10, art. 6, § 1(c) [Ord. No. 86-49, § 1(1), 7-22-86])  
Sec. 28-215. - Parental responsibility. 
Any parent, guardian or person having the care and custody of a child, who knowingly permits any child to violate this article, shall be deemed to have committed a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 10, art. 6, § 7(b) [Ord. No. 86-49, § 1(7), 7-22-86])  
Sec. 28-216. - Operation prohibited—Circumstances. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an off-road vehicle or to allow the operation of an off-road vehicle owned by them, within the corporate limits of the city, under the following circumstances: 
(1)  On private property of another without the express written consent to do so by the owner or occupant of such property; or 
(2)  On public school grounds, park property, playgrounds, recreational areas, golf courses or property belonging to, owned by or in the possession of with right to control of, any governmental entity, without the express written consent to do so by the proper public authority. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 10, art. 6, § 3 [Ord. No. 86-49, § 1(31), 7-22-86])  
Sec. 28-217. - Same—Exceptions. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall be construed so as to prohibit the city, other governmental authority, or any national, state or local association organized solely to promote, sponsor and sanction competitive, recreational, training and educational events involving any of the vehicles in this article, from holding a sanctioned event in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Any such event to be held within the corporate limits of the city shall be approved by the city manager. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 10, art. 6, § 4 [Ord. No. 86-49, § 1(4), 7-22-86]; Ord. No. 00-3, § I, 1-11-00)  
Sec. 28-218. - Application granting, denial, appeal. 
A.  An application to sponsor any event under the authority of this article shall be submitted to the city secretary who shall prescribe the form. Among the information required shall be a statement as to the arrangements provided for the safety of participants and spectators and adequate parking. Such application shall be filed not less than 21 days prior to the date the event set-up is to begin. 
B.  Upon receipt of an application, the city secretary shall immediately acquire comments from affected city departments concerning the proposed activity (e.g., fire, police, streets, etc.). The secretary shall forward the application and department comments to the city manager within 5 days. 
C.  The following standards shall be considered by the city manager in evaluating an application: whether the conduct of the proposed event or its location will: 
1.  substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic; 
2.  adversely affect the safety and health of those situated adjacent to the location of the event; 
3.  require such a substantial number of police, ambulance, animal control, or other city personnel to adequately service the event, that necessary services must be substantially curtailed in other areas of the city; 
4.  pose a high degree of probability or likelihood to cause or tend to cause injury or damage to persons or property or to provoke disorderly conduct; 
5.  be so close to a school, church, hospital, or other place at which a specific lawful activity normally requires for its accomplishment quiet and orderly deliberation or consideration or freedom from loud noises or crowds of persons or traffic; 
6.  be issued to a person or party who has within the preceding 12 months obtained a permit for the same or substantially same activity at that location or inequitably prevent another from obtaining a permit; or a permit for another show, carnival, circus, rodeo, etc. has previously been lawfully issued to another scheduled for the same date(s) sought by applicant. 
D.  The city manager shall, within seven (7) days after receipt of an application, approve, modify and approve, or deny it. If modified or denied, the reasons shall be clearly stated in writing by the city manager. 
E.  For violation of the City of Killeen Code of Ordinances, applicable state laws, or requirements of this permit, the city manager may revoke a permit previously issued under this chapter, by written order stating the reasons for the action. 
F.  In the event the city manager modifies an application, denies an application, or revokes a permit, the affected party may appeal the manager's decision to the city council by filing a written letter with the city manager within 2 business days after receiving notice of the city manager's decision. The appeal letter must specifically state each and all points of contention with the city manager's determination. The city manager shall immediately cause the appeal to be placed on the next regular meeting agenda of the city council for discussion and action. At that meeting, the city council shall consider the standards contained in this chapter, the city manager's reasons for modifying, denying, or revoking a permit, the points raised in the letter of appeal, and relevant surrounding facts. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 10, art. 6, § 5 [Ord. No. 86-49, § 1(5), 7-22-86]; Ord. No. 00-3, § II, 1-11-00)  
Sec. 28-219. - Same—Area requirements. 
In order to provide for adequate area for any approved event under this article, for the protection of participants, spectators and adjacent property owners, the following area requirements shall be provided: 
(1)  For bicycle events (non-motor-driven), not less than five (5) acres total area, including parking. 
(2)  For all other events, not less than twenty-five (25) acres total area, including parking. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 10, art. 6, § 6 [Ord. No. 86-49, § 1(6), 7-22-86])  
Secs. 28-220—28-240. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - MISCELLANEOUS RULES 
 
Sec. 28-241. - Visibility at intersections. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
(1)  Parkway area shall mean that area between the curb line or grade line of any public street and the abutting private property line. 
(2)  Visibility triangle shall mean a triangle sight area, at all intersections, which shall include that portion of public right-of-way and any corner lot within the adjacent curb lines and a diagonal line intersecting such curb lines at points thirty-five (35) feet back from their intersection (such curb lines being extended if necessary to determine the intersection point). 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to set out, maintain or permit or cause to be set out or maintained any tree, shrub, plant, sign or other view obstruction having a height greater than two (2) feet as measured from the top of the curb of the adjacent streets within the visibility triangle. The restriction shall not apply to permanent structures authorized by the zoning ordinance or to traffic-control signs and signals, street signs or utility poles placed within such area by authority of the city council. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to set out, maintain or permit or cause to be set out or maintained any tree, shrub or plant within any parkway area, other than within the visibility triangle, which exceeds two (2) feet in height above curb level. This prohibition shall not apply to trees within the parkway area which are trimmed at all times so that no branches are less than six (6) feet above curb level and which are planted no less than twenty-five (25) feet apart; provided, however, such trees shall not interfere with the free passage of vehicles on the street or pedestrians on the public right-of-way or obscure the view of motor vehicle operators or any traffic-control device or street sign or otherwise create a traffic hazard. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the building official to cause a written notice to be served upon the owner of any property upon which any of the above violations exist, or upon any owner or occupant of any property which abuts any parkway area upon which any of the above violations exist to correct such violations within ten (10) days after service of such notice. Such notice shall be given personally or by letter addressed to such owner at his post office address, or, if the owner's address is not known and personal service not possible, by publication at least twice within ten (10) consecutive days. If such violation is not corrected within a ten-day period, the building official is hereby authorized and directed to cause a tree, plant, structure or obstruction constituting such violation to be trimmed, pruned, or removed to eliminate such prohibited condition, with the cost of such trimming, pruning or removal to be assessed against the property owner or abutting property owner, as the case may be, the minimum fee for such service to be ten dollars ($10.00). 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 8, §§ 1—4 [Ord. No. 74-57, § 2, 11-25-74])  
Sec. 28-242. - Clinging to moving vehicles. 
Any person riding upon any motorcycle shall not attach the same to any moving vehicle upon any roadway. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 1, § 61)  
Sec. 28-243. - Displaying advertising. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to operate any vehicle on any street within the city for the primary purpose of displaying advertising. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 1, § 65)  
Sec. 28-244. - Processions. 
(a)  No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this section. This provision shall not apply at intersection where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals or police officers. 
(b)  Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe. 
(c)  A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying insignia or by such other method as may be determined and designated by the traffic division. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 13, art. 1, §§ 55—57) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate processions or assemblages on highways, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 27(a)(3).  
Sec. 28-245. - Speed limits on certain roads. 
The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon all streets within this city except as this section, as authorized by state law, hereby declares and determines upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that certain speed regulations shall be applicable upon specified streets or in certain areas, in which event it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed so declared in this section when signs are in place giving notice thereof. The maximum speed limit shall be set forth upon those streets or portions thereof as follows: 
(a)  The reasonable and safe prima facie maximum speed limit shall be 20 miles per hour along the following streets: 
20 MPH 
Street 	Begin 	End 
Lake Inks Avenue 	Rancier Ave. (FM 439) 	Branch Drive 
Lake Inks Circle 	Branch Drive 	End 
Branch Drive 	Rancier Ave. (FM 439) 	Lake Road 
Brushy Creek Drive 	Montague County Drive 	Briar Patch Lane 
Briar Patch Lane 	Brushy Creek Drive 	Bunny Trail 
Lakeshore Drive 	Entire Roadway 	Entire Roadway 
Lakeview Loop 	Entire Roadway 	Entire Roadway 
 
(b)  The reasonable and safe prima facie maximum speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour along the following streets: 
35 MPH 
Street 	Begin 	End 
Bunny Trail 	Clear Creek Road (SH 201) 	Stan Schlueter Loop 
(FM 3470) 
Elms Road 	Fort Hood Street (SH 195) 	Clear Creek Road (SH 201) 
Stagecoach Road 	City Limits 	East Trimmier Road 
Florence Road 	Elms Raod 	Jasper Drive 
Rosewood Drive 	Central Texas Expressway 	End 
Turkey Trot Road 	Stagecoach Road 	Trimmier Road 
West Central Texas Expressway 	400' west of Athens 	475' west of Dubroc 
East Central Texas Expressway 	Western City Limits 	475' west of Gateway 
Boulevard 
Clear Creek Road (SH 201) 	Northern City Limits 	500' south of Watercrest 
 
(c)  The reasonable and safe prima facie maximum speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour along the following streets: 
40 MPH 
Street 	Begin 	End 
Cunningham Road 	Stagecoach Road 	Stan Schlueter Loop (FM 3470) 
Elms Road 	Stan Schlueter Loop (FM 3470) 	Fort Hood Street (SH 195) 
Robinett Road 	Stan Schlueter Loop (FM 3470) 	Edgefield Street 
Stagecoach Road 	East Trimmier Road 	Fort Hood Street (SH 195) 
Trimmier Road 	Kelly Lane 	Bacon Ranch Road 
WS Young Drive 	Stagecoach Road 	350' north of Lowes 
Boulevard 
Old 440 Road 	450' North of Ginger Road 	Stan Schlueter Loop (FM 3470) 
38th Street 	Veterans Memorial Boulevard 	Rancier Avenue (FM 439) 
Stan Schlueter Loop (FM 3470) 	FM 2410 	1,100' east of Elms Road 
Veterans Memorial Boulevard 	Western City Limits 	350' west of WS Young Drive 
Fort Hood Street (SH 195) 	East Central Texas Expressway 	225' south of Stephen Street 
Featherline Road 	Chaparral Road 	Stagecoach Road 
 
(d)  The reasonable and safe prima facie maximum speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour along the following streets: 
45 MPH 
Street 	Begin 	End 
Roy Reynolds Drive 	Veterans Memorial Boulevard (Bus. US 190) 	Rancier Avenue (FM 439) 
Trimmier Road 	Chaparral Road 	Kelly Lane 
Twin Creek Drive 	Veterans Memorial Boulevard (Bus. US 190) 	Rancier Avenue (FM 439) 
Watercrest Road 	Clear Creek Road (SH 201) 	Willow Springs Road 
Onion Road 	Stagecoach Road 	Stan Schlueter Loop (FM 3470) 
Stan Schlueter Loop (FM 3470) 	600' west of Old Florence Road 	300' west of Saddle Ridge Drive 
Fort Hood Street (SH 195) 	225' south of Stephen Street 	150' south of Industrial 
Boulevard 
East Central Texas Expressway 	475' west of Gateway Boulevard 	Eastern City Limits 
Veterans Memorial Boulevard 	350' west of WS Young Drive 	200' east of Rio Boulevard 
West Central Texas Expressway 	Eastern City Limits 	400' west of Athens Street 
West Central Texas Expressway 	475' west of Dubroc 	Western City Limits 
East Trimmier Road 	Stagecoach Road 	City Limits 
 
(e)  The reasonable and safe prima facie maximum speed limit shall be 50 miles per hour along the following streets: 
50 MPH 
Street 	Begin 	End 
Fort Hood Street (SH 195) 	150' south of Industrial Boulevard 	350' north of Leifester 
Circle 
Veterans Memorial Boulevard 	200' east of Rio Boulevard 	Eastern City Limits 
Clear Creek Road (SH 201) 	500' south of Watercrest 	600' south of Stan Schlueter Loop 
 
(f)  The reasonable and safe prima facie maximum speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour along the following streets: 
55 MPH 
Street 	Begin 	End 
Stan Schlueter Loop (FM 3470) 	1,100' east of Elms Road 	600' west of Old Florence Road 
Stan Schlueter Loop (FM 3470) 	300' west of Saddle Ridge Drive 	Clear Creek Road (SH 201) 
Fort Hood Street (SH 195) 	350' north of Leifester 
Circle 	600' south of Stan Schlueter Loop (FM 3470) 
Clear Creek Road (SH 201) 	600' South of Stan Schlueter Loop 	100' south of Prewitt Ranch Road 
 
(g)  The reasonable and safe prima facie maximum speed limit shall be 60 miles per hour along the following streets: 
60 MPH 
Street 	Begin 	End 
IH-14/US 190 	Killeen/Harker Heights City Limits 	Western City Limits 
Fort Hood Street (SH 195) 	600' south of Stan Schlueter Loop (FM 3470) 	2000' south of Clear Creek Road (SH 201) 
Clear Creek Road (SH 201) 	100' South of Prewitt Ranch Road 	SH 195 
 
(h)  The reasonable and safe prima facie maximum speed limit shall be 70 miles per hour along the following streets: 
70 MPH 
Street 	Begin 	End 
Fort Hood Street (SH 195) 	2000' south of Clear Creek Road (SH 201) 	City Limits 
 
( Ord. No. 19-006 , § I, 2-26-19; Ord. No. 19-034 , § I, 7-23-19) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-006 , § I, adopted Feb. 26, 2019 repealed the former § 28-245, and enacted a new § 28-245 as set out herein. The former § 28-245 pertained to maximum speed on U.S. 190 and derived from Ord. No. 95-81, § I, adopted Nov. 28, 1995; and Ord. No. 01-19, § I, adopted May 8, 2001.  
Secs. 28-246—28-250. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-006 , § I, adopted Feb. 26, 2019, repealed §§ 28-246—28-250, which pertained to: maximum speed on F.M. 3470; maximum speed on a portion of S.H. 195; maximum speed on a portion of F.M. 439; maximum speed U.S. Hwy. 190 frontage roads; and maximum speed on a portion of S.H. 201. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 28-251. - School zones, maximum speed limits. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he operates or drives a vehicle in a school traffic zone in the following designated areas or on the following designated streets at a speed greater than the speed designated by this section for that area or street or portion thereof, and any speed in excess of the limit provided in this section shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable nor prudent and is unlawful. On the basis of recommendations of the traffic engineer, determined on the basis of engineering and traffic studies, the city council shall designate school speed zones with appropriate pavement markings or signs, which street markings, warnings, or signs shall be placed at the school speed zones by the traffic engineer. The speed limit designated for school speed zones shall be effective only during official school days and at times when appropriate flashing warnings and/or signs advising motorists of the speed limit are placed in conspicuous places. 
(b)  In accordance with the recommendations of the traffic engineer, the following designated locations and areas are declared to be school speed zones and the maximum speed limit for all motor vehicles operated within such areas and locations and on such streets on school days, when either a flashing warning signal is in operation or when appropriate signs are in place and conspicuous shall be as follows: 
Street Corridor 	Speed Limit 	School Speed Zone —Beginning 	School Speed Zone —Ending 	School 
38 th Street 	20 	200 feet west of Westcliff Road 	Haven Drive 	Brookhaven and Rancier Middle 
Adrian Barnes Drive 	20 	Elms Road 	Weiss Drive 	C. E. Ellison High 
Alamacitos Creek Drive 	20 	Bunny Trail 	200 feet East of Bunny Trail 	Haynes Elementary 
Alexander Street 	20 	200 feet north of F. M. 439 	200 feet south of F. M. 439 	East Ward Elementary 
Alta Vista Drive 	20 	200 feet south of Wheeler Avenue 	U.S. 190 Eastbound Frontage Road 	Pershing Park Elementary 
Ambrose Drive 	20 	200 feet west of Robinett Road 	Robinett Road 	Live Oak Middle 
Arkansas Avenue 	20 	160 feet west of South W. S. Young 	South W. S. Young 	Manor Middle 
Aspen Drive 	20 	230 feet east of Hunters Ridge Trail 	Shawn Drive 	Timber Ridge Elementary 
Atkinson Avenue 	20 	300 feet west of School Property Line 	334 feet west of North 38 th Street 	Career and Tech Center 
Atkinson Drive 	20 	North 38 th Street 	150 feet west of North 42 nd Street 	Killeen High 
Bacon Ranch Road 	20 	127 feet east of Trimmier Road 	104 feet east of Covey Lane (East) 	Grace Lutheran School 
Barbara Lane 	20 	Janis Drive 	200 feet east of Pamela Drive 	Sugarloaf Elementary 
Basset Court 	20 	200 feet west of Herndon Drive 	300 feet east of Gowan Drive 	Ira Cross Jr. Elementary 
Biels Loop 	20 	North intersection of Biels Loop and West Trimmier Road 	South intersection of Biels Loop and West Trimmier Road 	Charles E. Patterson Middle School 
Bigpine Drive 	20 	300 feet south of Eastwood Drive 	Westwood Drive 	Maxdale Elementary 
Bonnie Drive 	20 	200 feet south of Wheeler Avenue 	U.S. 190 Eastbound Frontage Road 	Pershing Park Elementary 
Breeze Drive 	20 	200 feet south of Bull Run Drive 	Thunder Creek Drive 	Live Oak Middle 
Bull Run Drive 	20 	200 feet west of Robinett Road 	200 feet east of Breeze Drive 	Live Oak Middle 
Bundrant Drive 	20 	300 feet north of Saint Francis Drive 	Rancier Avenue 	St. Joseph Catholic School 
Bunny Trail 	20 	200 feet north of Alamacitos Creek Dr. 	300 feet south of Canadian River Loop 	Haynes Elementary 
Catalina Drive 	20 	Breeze Drive 	200 feet east of Breeze Drive 	Live Oak Middle 
Canadian River Loop 	20 	Bunny Trail 	200 feet east of Bunny Trail 	Haynes Elementary 
Chantz Drive 	20 	300 feet north of Mallard Lane 	200 feet south of Fawn Drive 	Cedar Valley Elementary 
Chantz Drive 	20 	200 feet north of Kit Carson Trail 	300 feet south of Golden Drive 	Liberty Hill Middle 
Clear Creek Road 
(SH 201) 	35 	317 feet north of Desert Willow Drive 	670 feet south of Elms Road 	Shoemaker High School 
Colorado Drive 	20 	20 feet south Shawn Drive 	Yellow Pine Court 	Timber Ridge Elementary 
Commerce Drive 	20 	Rail Road Tracks 	322 feet west of North 38 th Street 	Career and Tech Center 
Creek Land Road 	35 	200 feet north of Katy Creek Lane 	150 feet south of Katy Creek Lane 	Dr. J. Fowler Elementary 
Daisy Drive 	20 	200 feet north of Marigold Drive 	200 feet south of Marigold Drive 	Bellaire Elementary 
Dartmouth Drive 	20 	300 feet south of Granex Drive 	Granex Drive 	Trimmier Elementary 
Dean Road 	20 	200 feet west of Hillcrest Drive 	200 feet east of Garth Drive 	West Ward Elementary 
Dubrock Drive 	20 	300 feet south of Florence Road 	Florence Road 	Nolan Middle 
Eastwood Drive 	20 	300 feet west of Bigpine Drive 	Southhill Drive 	Maxdale Elementary 
Edgefield Street 	20 	212 feet west of Tallwood Drive 	200 feet east of Tallwood Drive 	Palo Alto Middle 
Elms Road 	20 	300 feet west of Roundrock Drive 	200 feet east of Tallwood Drive 	Palo Alto Middle 
Elms Road 	25 	185 feet west of Windfield Drive 	Clear Creek Road (SH 201) 	Shoemaker High School 
Elms Road 	25 	300 feet west of Adrian Barnes Drive 	112 feet west of Christie Drive 	C. E. Ellison High 
Eppinette Drive 	20 	Schorn Drive 	Oster Drive 	Saegert Elementary 
Estelle Avenue 	20 	200 feet north of Carrollton Avenue 	200 feet south of Grandon Drive 	Clifton Park Elementary 
Excel Drive 	20 	Courage Avenue 	300 feet east of Success Drive 	Trimmier Elementary 
F. M. 439 	20 	200 feet west of Alexander Street 	210 feet east of Patton Road 	East Ward Elementary 
Fawn Drive 	20 	280 feet west of Chantz Drive 	200 feet east of Mesa Drive 	Cedar Valley Elementary 
Florence Road 	20 	430 feet south of Marigold Drive 	Jasper Drive 	Bellaire Elementary 
Florence Road 	20 	155 feet north of Jasper Drive 	300 feet north of Lydia Drive 	Nolan Middle 
Foster Lane 	20 	200 feet south of Michael Drive 	200 feet north of Vahrenkamp Drive 	Iduma Elementary 
Garth Drive 	20 	200 feet south of Dean Road 	Central Drive 	Fairway Middle 
Golden Drive 	20 	Chantz Drive 	300 feet east of Leadville Drive 	Liberty Hill Middle 
Gowan Drive 	20 	150 feet north of Iredell Drive 	200 feet north of Basset Court 	Ira Cross Jr. Elementary 
Gowen Drive 	20 	Zephyr Road 	150 feet north of Peaks Drive 	Gateway High/Middle 
Grandon Drive 	20 	200 feet east of Estelle Avenue 	Trimmier Road 	Clifton Park Elementary 
Granex Drive 	20 	Courage Avenue 	300 feet east of Success Drive 	Trimmier Elementary 
Haven Drive 	20 	88 feet south of Blackburn Drive 	Hilliard Avenue 	Brookhaven and Rancier Middle 
Herndon Drive 	20 	150 feet north of Iredell Drive 	200 feet north of Basset Court 	Ira Cross Jr. Elementary 
Hillcrest Drive 	20 	200 feet south of Dean Road 	Williamson Avenue 	West Ward Elementary 
Hilliard Avenue 	20 	Haven Drive 	207 feet east of Remington Drive 	Brookhaven and Rancier Middle 
Hunters Ridge Trail 	20 	Colorado Drive 	300 feet south of school property 	Timber Ridge Elementary 
Illinois Avenue 	20 	22 feet east of Ohio Street 	217 feet of West Goode Drive 	Manor Middle 
Jackson Street 	20 	200 feet north of F. M. 439 	F. M. 439 	East Ward Elementary 
Janis Drive 	20 	200 feet south of Barbara Lane 	200 feet north of Kimberly Lane 	Sugarloaf Elementary 
Jasper Drive 	20 	300 feet west of Daisy Drive 	300 feet east of 2 nd Street 	Bellaire Elementary 
Katy Creek Lane 	20 	170 feet west of Creek Land Road 	End of Katy Creek Lane 	Dr. J. Fowler Elementary 
Kimberly Lane 	20 	Janis Drive 	200 feet east of Pamela Drive 	Sugarloaf Elementary 
Kit Carson Trail 	20 	282 feet south of Chantz Drive 	300 feet east of Leadville Drive 	Liberty Hill Middle 
Lake Road 	20 	300 feet west of North 42 nd Street 	400 feet east of Pudd Lane 	Killeen Adventist Jr. 
Lake Road 	20 	200 feet south of Ruiz Drive 	200 feet north of Ruiz Drive 	Peebles Elementary 
Leadville Drive 	20 	300 feet south of Golden Drive 	Kit Carson 	Liberty Hill Middle 
Lily Drive 	20 	200 feet south of Marigold Drive 	Marigold Drive 	Bellaire Elementary 
Lisa Lane 	20 	Atkinson Drive 	300 feet north of Atkinson Drive 	Killeen High 
Littlepine Drive 	20 	300 feet west of Bigpine Drive 	Bigpine Drive 	Maxdale Elementary 
Louise Lane 	20 	190 feet north of Katy Creek Lane 	Katy Creek Lane 	Dr. J. Fowler Elementary 
Marigold Drive 	20 	200 feet west of Daisy Drive 	Florence Road 	Bellaire Elementary 
Michael Drive 	20 	200 feet west of Foster Lane 	Pennington Avenue 	Iduma Elementary 
Mikulec Drive 	20 	Horne Drive 	Oster Drive 	Saegert Elementary 
Napier Drive 	20 	Schorn Drive 	Oster Drive 	Saegert Elementary 
Nyla Drive 	20 	200 feet north of Katy Creek Lane 	Katy Creek Lane 	Dr. J. Fowler Elementary 
Oster Drive 	20 	Napier Drive 	Mikulec Drive 	Saegert Elementary 
North 38 th Street 	25 	1508 feet south of Atkinson Drive 	187 feet north of Atkinson Drive 	Killeen High 
North W. S. Young 	20 	300 feet south of Poage Avenue 	300 feet north of Peebles Drive 	Peebles Elementary 
Patton Road 	20 	52 feet south of F. M. 439 	Stone Avenue 	East Ward Elementary 
Pennington Avenue 	20 	200 feet south of Michael Drive 	300 feet north of school property line 	Iduma Elementary 
Poage Avenue 	20 	200 feet west of North W. S. Young 	300 feet east of Peebles Drive 	Peebles Elementary 
Rambling Range Drive 	20 	200 feet west of Robinett Road 	Robinett Road 	Live Oak Middle 
Rancier Avenue 	25 	300 feet west of School Property Line 	200 feet east of Bundrant Drive 	St. Joseph Catholic School 
Rancier Avenue 	35 	240 feet west of Westcliff Road 	240 feet east of Westcliff Road 	Haybranch Elementary 
Roadrunner Drive 	20 	Westwood Drive 	300 feet north of Westwood Drive 	Maxdale Elementary 
Robinett Road 	20 	200 feet south of Bull Run Drive 	200 feet north of Thunder Creek Drive 	Live Oak Middle 
Ronstan Drive 	20 	197 feet west of Janis Drive 	Janis Drive 	Sugarloaf Elementary 
Ronstan Drive 	20 	Pamela Drive 	200 Feet east of Pamela Drive 	Sugarloaf Elementary 
Ruger Drive 	20 	300 feet south of Hilliard Drive 	Hilliard Drive 	Brookhaven and Rancier Middle 
South 2 nd Street 	20 	200 feet south of Jasper Drive 	300 feet north of Lydia Drive 	Nolan Middle 
South W. S. Young 	20 	300 feet south of Illinois Avenue 	Richard Drive 	Manor Middle 
Southhill Drive 	20 	300 feet south of Eastwood Drive 	Westwood Drive 	Maxdale Elementary 
Southport Drive 	20 	Success Drive 	200 feet east of Success Drive 	Trimmier Elementary 
Stagecoach Road 	30 	Rosewood Drive 	200 feet west of Chantz Drive 	Liberty Hill Middle School 
Stagecoach Road 	25 	200 feet east of West Trimmier Road 	1750 feet west of West Trimmier Road 	Pathways Academy, Career & Tech Education, Charles Patterson Middle School 
Starfish Drive 	20 	Breeze Drive 	200 feet east of Breeze Drive 	Live Oak Middle 
Stone Avenue 	20 	128 feet west of Goodnight Drive 	200 feet east of Patton Road 	East Ward Elementary 
Success Drive 	20 	Granex Drive 	Excel Drive 	Trimmier Elementary 
Tallwood Drive 	20 	200 feet south of Elms Road 	175 feet north of Anna Lee Drive 	Palo Alto Middle 
Thunder Creek Drive 	20 	200 feet west of Robinett Road 	200 feet east of Breeze Drive 	Live Oak Middle 
Trimmier Road 	20 	200 feet north of Jasper Drive 	137 feet south of Grandon Drive 	Clifton Park Elementary 
Trimmier Road 	25 	233 feet north of Elms Road 	300 feet north of Weiss Drive 	C. E. Ellison High 
U.S. 190 Eastbound Frontage Road 	20 	312 feet west of Alta Vista Drive 	256 feet east of Bonnie Drive 	Pershing Park Elementary 
U.S. 190 Eastbound Frontage Road 	20 	500 feet north of Jasper Drive 	97 feet south of Florence Road 	Bellaire Elementary 
U.S. 190 Westbound Frontage Road 	20 	430 feet south of Jasper Drive 	371 feet north of Dubrock Drive 	Nolan Middle 
Vahrenkamp Drive 	20 	200 feet west of Foster Lane 	Pennington Avenue 	Iduma Elementary 
Weiss Drive 	20 	300 feet west of Adrian Barnes Drive 	Trimmier Road 	C. E. Ellison High 
West Stan Schlueter Loop 	30 	129 feet west of Delores Drive 	128 feet east of Kaulean Drive 	Reeces Creek Elementary 
West Stan Schlueter Loop 	35 	24 feet east of Wade Drive 	18 feet west of Hitchrock Drive 	Willow Springs Elementary 
West Trimmier Road 	25 	2090 feet south of Stagecoach Road 	375 feet north of Stagecoach Road 	Pathways Academy, Career & Tech Education, Charles Patterson Middle School 
Westcliff Road 	20 	Rancier Avenue 	339 feet north of Dan Drive 	Haybranch Elementary 
Wheeler Avenue 	20 	300 feet west of Alta Vista Drive 	200 feet east of Bonnie Drive 	Pershing Park Elementary 
White Rock Drive 	20 	80 feet south of Fawn Dr. 	300 feet south of school property line 	Timber Ridge Elementary 
Whitlow Drive 	20 	Williamson Avenue 	Garth Drive 	Fairway Middle 
Williamson Avenue 	20 	300 feet west of Walton Walker Drive 	Garth Drive 	West Ward Elementary 
Zephyr Road 	20 	76 feet west of Hammond Drive 	300 feet east of Gowen Drive 	Gateway High/Middle 
 
(Ord. No. 05-15, § I, 2-22-05; Ord. No. 05-126, § I, 12-20-05; Ord. No. 06-94, § I, 8-22-06; Ord. No. 12-010, § I, 5-29-12; Ord. No. 12-030, § I, 6-26-12; Ord. No. 15-007 , § I, 1-27-15; Ord. No. 15-059 , § I, 10-20-15)  
Sec. 28-252. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision or section of art. IX, Miscellaneous Rules shall be deemed guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined a sum of not less than one dollar ($1.00), nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. 05-15, § I, 2-22-05; Ord. No. 06-94, § I, 8-22-06)  
Sec. 28-253. - Culpable mental state not required. 
An offense under chapter 28, Traffic, shall not require a culpable mental state. It is the intent of this chapter to impose strict liability for any violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-15, § I, 2-22-05; Ord. No. 06-94, § I, 8-22-06)  
Secs. 28-254—28-261. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-006 , § I, adopted Feb. 26, 2019, repealed §§ 28-254—28-261, which pertained to: maximum speed on Business 190 (Veterans Memorial Boulevard); construction speed limit on SH 195 (Fort Hood Street); construction speed limit on U.S. Highway 190 (Central Texas Expressway; CSJ: 0231-03-107; U.S. Highway 190 Widening Project; generally spanning from Fort Hood Main Gate to W.S Young Drive); construction speed limit on U.S. highway 190 (Central Texas Expressway; CSJ: 0231-03-129; U.S. Highway 190, FM 2410, Rosewood Drive Project); construction speed limit on U.S. Highway 190 Frontage Roads (Central Texas Expressway; CSJ: 0231-03-129; U.S. 190, FM 2410, Rosewood Drive Project); construction speed limit on Farm-to-Market (FM) 2410 (CSJ: 0231-03-129; U.S. 190, FM 2410, Rosewood Drive Project); construction speed limit on U.S. Highway 190 Eastbound and Westbound Frontage Roads (Central Texas Expressway; CSJ: 0231-03-107 and CSJ: 0231-03-103; U.S. Highway 190 Widening Project; generally spanning from Fort Hood Main Gate to W.S Young Drive; U.S. Highway 190 Widening Project: WS Young to FM 2410); Construction speed limit on U.S. Highway 190 Eastbound and Westbound (Central Texas Expressway; CSJ: 0231-03-103; U.S. Highway 190 Widening Project: WS Young to FM 2410. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Secs. 28-262—28-270. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - PHOTOGRAPHIC TRAFFIC SIGNAL ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 28-271. - Definitions. 
In this article: 
Department shall mean the Police Department of the City of Killeen, Texas. 
Intersection shall mean the place or area where two (2) or more streets intersect. 
Owner shall mean the owner, individual, or business of a motor vehicle as shown on the motor vehicle registration records of the Texas Department of Transportation or the analogous department or agency of another state or country. 
Photographic traffic signal enforcement system or system shall mean a system that: 
(a)  Consists of a camera system and vehicle sensor installed to exclusively work in conjunction with an electrically operated traffic-control signal; and 
(b)  Is capable of producing at least two (2) recorded images that depict the license plate attached to the front or the rear of a motor vehicle that is not operated in compliance with the instructions of the traffic-control signal. 
Photographic traffic signal enforcement system location shall mean the approach to an intersection toward which a photographic traffic monitoring system is directed and in operation. 
Recorded image shall mean photographic or digital images recorded by a traffic monitoring system that depicts the front or the rear of a motor vehicle. 
Responsible party shall mean a person or entity other than the owner of the motor vehicle operating the motor vehicle in violation of this article who is responsible for the civil penalties assessed as identified by the owner as provided for by subsection 28-274(k) of this article. 
Traffic control signal shall mean a traffic control device that displays alternating red, yellow and green lights that direct traffic when to stop at or proceed through an intersection. 
(Ord. No. 07-070, § I, 8-14-07)  
Sec. 28-272. - Imposition of civil penalty for violations. 
(a)  The city council finds and determines that a vehicle that proceeds into an intersection when the traffic control signal for that vehicle's direction of travel is emitting a steady red signal: jeopardizes the health, safety and general welfare of the public by endangering motor vehicle operators and pedestrians alike; decreases the efficiency of traffic control and traffic flow efforts; and, increases the number of serious accidents to which public safety agencies must respond at the expense of municipal taxpayers. 
(b)  The owner of a motor vehicle or a responsible party operating a motor vehicle is liable for a civil penalty of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) if the motor vehicle proceeds into an intersection at a photographic traffic signal enforcement system location when the traffic control signal for that motor vehicle's direction of travel is emitting a steady red signal. 
(c)  An owner or responsible party who fails to timely pay the civil penalty shall be subject to a late payment penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. No. 07-070, § I, 8-14-07)  
Sec. 28-273. - Enforcement; procedures. 
(a)  The department is responsible for the enforcement and administration of this article. The department may contract with an outside party to install, operate, inspect and maintain the system. 
(b)  In order to impose a civil penalty under this article, the department shall mail a notice of violation to the owner or responsible party liable for the civil penalty not later than the thirtieth (30 th ) day after the date the violation is alleged to have occurred to: 
(1)  The owner's address as shown on the registration records of the Texas Department of Transportation; 
(2)  If the vehicle is registered in another state or country, the owner's address as shown on the motor vehicle registration records of the department or agency of the other state or country analogous to the Texas Department of Transportation; or 
(3)  In the situation where a responsible party is liable for a violation of this article, as attested to by the owner of the motor vehicle, to the address provided by the owner and/or an address derived from any public database not later than thirty (30) days after a presumption of liability is established pursuant to subsection 28-274(k). 
(c)  A notice of violation issued under this article shall contain all notice items required under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 707, as amended. 
(d)  A notice of violation under this article is presumed to have been received on the fifth (5 th ) day after the date the notice of violation is mailed. 
(e)  The department may mail a warning notice to the owner or responsible party instead of issuing a notice of violation. 
(f)  The department may pursue all legal methods available to collect outstanding balances owed. 
(Ord. No. 07-070, § I, 8-14-07; Ord. No. 14-081 , § 1, 11-18-14)  
Sec. 28-274. - Administrative adjudication hearing. 
(a)  An owner or responsible party who receives a notice of violation is entitled to an administrative adjudication hearing to contest the imposition of the civil penalty by requesting from the department, in writing, a hearing within thirty (30) days after the date the notice of violation was received. 
(b)  Failure to pay a civil penalty or to contest liability within the time period provided in subsection (a) above, is an admission of liability for the full amount of the civil penalty assessed in the notice of violation, and is a waiver of the right to an appeal under section 28-276 below. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a timely request, the department shall notify the owner or responsible party of the date, time and location of the administrative adjudication hearing which shall be within forty-five (45) days of the receipt of the timely request for the hearing, but not earlier than the 30 th day after the date the notice of violation was mailed. 
(d)  Notwithstanding anything in this article to the contrary, an owner or responsible party who fails to pay the amount of a civil penalty or to contest liability in a timely manner is entitled to an administrative adjudication hearing on the violation if: 
(1)  The person files an affidavit with the hearing officer stating the date on which the person received the notice of violation that was mailed to the person; and 
(2)  Within the same time period required by subsection (a) above, for a hearing to be timely requested but measured from the date the mailed notice was received as stated in the affidavit filed under subsection (d)(1), the person requests an administrative adjudication hearing in writing. 
(e)  The administrative adjudication hearing shall be held before a hearing officer who shall be appointed by the City Council of Killeen and has the authority to administer oaths and issue orders compelling the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents. 
(f)  In an administrative adjudication hearing, the issues must be proven by a preponderance of the evidence. The reliability of the photographic traffic signal enforcement system used to produce the recorded images of the motor vehicle involved in the violation may be attested to in an administrative adjudication hearing by affidavit of an officer or employee of the city or the entity with which the city contracts to install or operate the system and who is responsible for inspecting and maintaining the system. 
(g)  An affidavit of an officer or employee of the city that alleges a violation based on an inspection of the applicable recorded image is admissible in the hearing and in an appeal under this article, and is prima facie evidence of the facts contained in the affidavit. 
(h)  It is presumed that the owner of the motor vehicle committed the violation alleged in the notice of violation mailed to the person if the motor vehicle depicted in a recorded image taken by the system belongs to the owner as determined by the department under section 28-273 of this article. 
(i)  It shall be an affirmative defense to the imposition of civil liability under this article and no civil penalty shall be imposed if the person named on the notice of violation proves by a preponderance of the evidence, that: 
(1)  The traffic control signal was not in a proper position and sufficiently visible to an ordinarily observant person; 
(2)  The operator of the motor vehicle was acting in compliance with the lawful order or direction of a police officer; 
(3)  The operator of the motor vehicle violated the instructions of the traffic control signal so as to yield the right-of-way to an immediately approaching authorized emergency vehicle; 
(4)  The motor vehicle was being operated as an authorized emergency vehicle under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 546, and that the operator was acting in compliance with that chapter; 
(5)  The motor vehicle was a stolen vehicle and being operated by a person other than the owner of the vehicle without the effective consent of the owner and evidence acceptable to the hearing officer shows that the theft of the motor vehicle had been timely reported to the appropriate law enforcement agency; 
(6)  The license plate depicted in the recorded image of the violation was a stolen plate and being displayed on a motor vehicle other than the motor vehicle for which the plate had been issued and evidence acceptable to the hearing officer shows that the theft of the license plate had been timely reported to the appropriate law enforcement agency; 
(7)  The presence of ice, snow, unusual amounts of rain or other unusually hazardous road conditions existed that would make compliance with this article more dangerous under the circumstances than non-compliance; 
(8)  The person named on the notice of violation was not the owner of the motor vehicle at the time of the violation and evidence acceptable to the hearing officer is presented showing that legal transfer of ownership had occurred prior to the time of violation; 
(9)  The person named on the notice of violation was not operating the motor vehicle at the time of the violation and successfully rebuts the presumption created by subsection (h) above through satisfying the process listed in subsections (j) and (k) below; or 
(10)  The municipal sign indicating the operation of a photographic traffic signal enforcement system, as required by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 544.012(c), does not comply with that section. 
(j)  If, at the time of the violation alleged in the notice of violation, the motor vehicle depicted in a recorded image taken by the system was owned by a person in the business of selling, renting, or leasing motor vehicles or by a person who was not the person named in the notice of violation, the presumption established by subsection (h) or this section is rebutted on the presentation of evidence establishing that the vehicle, at the time of the violation, was: 
(1)  Being test driven by another person who is the responsible party; 
(2)  Being rented or leased by the vehicle's owner to another person who is the responsible party; or 
(3)  Owned by a person who was not the person named in the notice of violation who is the responsible party. 
(k)  Notwithstanding section 28-274 the presentation of evidence under subsection (j) must be made by affidavit, through testimony at the administrative adjudication hearing under section 28-274 or by a written declaration under penalty of perjury. The affidavit or written declaration may be submitted by mail as provided for in the notice of violation not later than the thirtieth (30 th ) day after the date the notice of violation is received. Affidavits, written declarations or testimony shall include: 
(1)  The name and address of the responsible party who was operating the motor vehicle depicted in the recorded image; and 
(2)  A statement of the period during which that responsible party was operating the vehicle. 
(l)  If the person named in the notice of violation provides the required information under subsection (k), it is presumed that the responsible party sworn to be operating the motor vehicle at the time of the violation committed the violation alleged in the original notice of violation and the local authority may send a notice of violation to the responsible party not later than thirty (30) days from receipt of the affidavit, written declaration or testimony provided. 
(m)  An owner or responsible party who is found liable after an administrative adjudication hearing or who requests an administrative adjudication hearing and thereafter fails to appear at the time and place of the hearing is liable for administrative hearing costs in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) in addition to the amount of the civil penalty assessed for the violation. 
(n)  An owner or responsible party who is found liable for a civil penalty after an administrative adjudication hearing shall pay the civil penalty and costs within thirty-one (31) days of the date on which the administrative adjudication hearing officer entered the finding of civil liability. 
(Ord. No. 07-070, § I, 8-14-07)  
Sec. 28-275. - Order. 
(a)  The hearing officer at the conclusion of an administrative adjudication hearing under this article shall issue a written, signed and dated order stating: 
(1)  The person charged with the violation is liable for the civil and/or administrative penalty; and 
(2)  The amount of any civil penalty, late penalty, and administrative adjudication hearing cost assessed against the person; or 
(3)  A finding of no liability for which no penalty may be imposed. 
(b)  The orders issued under subsection (a) shall be filed with the office of the hearing officer. The hearing officer shall keep the orders in a separate index and file. The orders may be recorded using microfilm, microfiche, or data processing techniques. 
(Ord. No. 07-070, § I, 8-14-07)  
Sec. 28-276. - Appeal. 
(a)  An owner or responsible party who is found liable after an administrative adjudication hearing may appeal that finding of civil liability to the municipal court by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk of the municipal court. 
(b)  The notice of appeal must be filed not later than the thirty-first (31 st ) day after the date on which the administrative adjudication hearing officer entered an order under section 28-275 with a finding of civil liability. 
(c)  An appeal stays enforcement and collection of the civil penalty imposed against the owner or responsible party. The owner or responsible party shall file a notarized statement of personal financial obligation together with payment of the costs required by law, if any, for the court to perfect the owner's or responsible party's appeal and the stay of enforcement and collection. A notarized statement of personal financial obligation shall substantially conform to the following statement: 
I, [enter your full name], in the event that my appeal of the hearing officer's order dated [enter date of order] relating to civil citation number [enter citation number] is unsuccessful and I am thereby found liable for such civil penalty, do hereby swear that I will accept personal financial obligation for the payment of the civil penalty and do promise to pay unto the City of Killeen, within thirty-one (31) days from the date the appeal is decided, any amounts then owed for the civil penalty together with a $50.00 appellate filing fee. 
Name: [your full printed name] 
Signature: [your signature] 
Date: [date signed] 
Notary's signature and Seal 
(d)  The municipal prosecutor will be the representative for the city. 
(e)  The court clerk shall schedule a hearing and notify the owner or responsible party of the date, time and location of the appellate hearing. 
(f)  An appeal shall be determined by the municipal court by a non-jury trial de novo only. 
(g)  The affidavits submitted under subsection 28-274(f) shall be admitted by the municipal judge in the trial de novo, and the issues must be proven by a preponderance of the evidence. 
(h)  A person found liable by the municipal court shall pay an appellate filing fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) in addition to the civil penalty and any other fees due the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-070, § I, 8-14-07)  
Sec. 28-277. - Effect of liability; exclusion of civil remedy. 
(a)  The imposition of a civil penalty under this article is not a criminal conviction and may not be considered a conviction for any purpose. 
(b)  A civil penalty may not be imposed under this article on the owner or responsible party if the operator of the vehicle was arrested or was issued a citation and notice to appear by a peace officer for the same violation of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 544.007(d), as recorded by the photographic traffic signal enforcement system. 
(c)  An owner or responsible party who fails to pay the civil penalty or to timely contest liability for the penalty is considered to admit liability for the full amount of the civil penalty stated in the notice of violation. 
(d)  If the owner is delinquent in the payment of a civil penalty imposed under this article, the county assessor-collector or the Texas Department of Transportation may refuse to register a motor vehicle alleged to have been involved in the violation. 
(e)  The implementation of the system under this article does not preclude application or enforcement of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 544.007(d) in the manner provided by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 543; or prohibit a peace officer from arresting a violator of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 544.007(d), as provided by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 543, if the peace officer personally witnesses the violation, or from issuing the violator a citation and notice to appear as provided by that chapter. 
(f)  The city attorney is authorized to file suit to enforce collection of a civil penalty or administrative penalty imposed under this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-070, § I, 8-14-07)  
Sec. 28-278. - Traffic safety fund. 
The penalties and fees collected from the imposition of civil liability under this article shall be deposited in the traffic safety fund account established by the city council. Funds from the traffic safety fund may be expended only for the costs of the system provided for under this article, public traffic safety programs, pedestrian safety programs, public safety programs, traffic enforcement and intersection improvements or as provided or required by state law. 
(Ord. No. 07-070, § I, 8-14-07)  
Chapter 29 - TRANSPORTATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-056, § 1, adopted Nov. 14, 2017, repealed the former ch. 29, arts. I—III, and enacted a new ch. 29 as set out herein. The former ch. 29 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 00-90, § I, adopted Dec. 12, 2000; Ord. No. 03-20, §§ I—XX, adopted Apr. 22, 2003; Ord. No. 05-64, § I, adopted Sept. 6, 2005; Ord. No. 05-119, §§ I, II, adopted Dec. 13, 2005; Ord. No. 06-115, § I, adopted Oct. 17, 2006; Ord. No. 07-089, §§ I, II, adopted Sept. 25, 2007; Ord. No. 07-113, § I, adopted Dec. 18, 2007; Ord. No. 08-068, § I, adopted Aug. 26, 2008. 
Cross reference— Smoking, § 13-41 et seq.; licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 15; traffic, Ch. 28. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Regulation of taxicabs, §§ 27(13), 123. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate taxicabs, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 215.004, 215.029. 
 
Sec. 29-1. - Purpose and applicability of chapter. 
It is the city's policy to promote adequate and efficient ground transportation service in the city. To this end, this chapter provides for the regulation of ground transportation services to be carried out in a manner that protects the public health and safety, promotes the public convenience and necessity, and respects the concept of free enterprise. 
( Ord. No. 17-056 , § 1, 11-14-17)  
Sec. 29-2. - Definitions. 
Ground transportation service means providing chauffeured vehicle for hire for the transportation of passengers within the city, including but not limited to taxicabs, limousines, shuttles, and shuttles. 
Holder means a person who is authorized to operate a ground transportation service, and includes the agents and employees of a holder. 
Operating authority means the written authority granted by the city council to provide a ground transportation service. 
Taxicab means a chauffeured motor vehicle equipped with a taximeter with a rated passenger capacity of eight (8) or less used to transport persons, and which typically operates on irregular routes, on irregular schedules, and on a call and demand basis. 
Taximeter means a device used in a taxicab to compute a fare. 
Transportation network company means a corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, or other entity that, for compensation, enables a passenger to prearrange with a driver, exclusively through the entity's digital network, a digitally prearranged ride, and that is permitted to operate by the Texas Department of License and Regulation. 
( Ord. No. 17-056 , § 1, 11-14-17)  
Sec. 29-3. - Penalties. 
(a)  An offense under this chapter is a class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(b)  Prosecution of an offense under this chapter does not preclude other enforcement remedies under this chapter, and the enforcement of other remedies under this chapter does not prevent prosecution for a violation of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 17-056 , § 1, 11-14-17)  
Sec. 29-4. - Exceptions. 
This chapter does not apply to: 
(1)  A vehicle owned, operated, or subcontracted by the federal government, the state, or a political subdivision when providing service exclusively to the governmental entity. 
(2)  A courtesy vehicle that routinely provides transportation to and from the principal place of business of a courtesy vehicle provider and a public transportation terminal or is operated by a corporation that qualifies for exemption from taxation under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. 
(3)  An ambulance or other vehicle providing nonemergency medical transports. 
(4)  Ground transportation services originating outside of the city. 
(5)  Transportation provided by a transportation network company permitted by the Texas Department of License and Regulation. 
( Ord. No. 17-056 , § 1, 11-14-17)  
Secs. 29-5—29-10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OPERATING AUTHORITY 
 
Sec. 29-11. - Operating authority required. 
A person may not operate a ground transportation service within in the City of Killeen for the pickup of passengers inside the City of Killeen without first having obtained an operating authority from the city issued under the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 17-056 , § 1, 11-14-17)  
Sec. 29-12. - Permit application. 
(a)  To obtain an operating authority for a ground transportation service, a person must make written application to the city council on a form prescribed by the city manager or his designee. The application must be sworn or affirmed. 
(b)  A person may apply for multiple operating authorities on a single application form, provided that the application describes each service applied for and complies with this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 17-056 , § 1, 11-14-17)  
Sec. 29-13. - Permit terms and conditions. 
(a)  An operating authority issued under this article is valid for five (5) years. 
(b)  To amend an operating authority, a holder must submit a written request to the city secretary describing in detail the proposed amendment. Any amendment must be approved by the city council, except for increasing or reducing the number of vehicles or substituting vehicles. 
(c)  A holder of an operating authority may not transfer or assign an operating authority. 
( Ord. No. 17-056 , § 1, 11-14-17)  
Sec. 29-14. - Window permits. 
(a)  Upon city council approval of an operating authority, the city secretary shall provide a vehicle permit to the holder for each vehicle approved in the operating authority and that meets the requirements of section 29-15. Before a vehicle is placed in service, the holder must affix the permit to the vehicle on the passenger side of the windshield in the lower left corner inside the glass. 
(b)  Vehicle permits expire December 31 of each year. A renewal application along with the required fee shall be submitted to the city secretary to renew a vehicle permit. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if he: 
(1)  Operates a vehicle with an expired permit; or 
(2)  Attaches a permit to a vehicle not authorized to operate. 
( Ord. No. 17-056 , § 1, 11-14-17)  
Sec. 29-15. - Vehicle requirements. 
Before a vehicle permit may be issued to a ground transportation service vehicle, the holder must present written proof to the city secretary showing that each vehicle has a current State of Texas registration and inspection and pay the fee required in section 29-31. 
( Ord. No. 17-056 , § 1, 11-14-17)  
Sec. 29-16. - Insurance. 
(a) It shall be unlawful to operate a ground transportation service in the city unless the holder maintains in force during the authorized period of its operating authority the amount and character of insurance coverage for all vehicles used in such service as follows: 
(1)  Bodily injury of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) per person and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per accident; 
(2)  Property damage of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per accident; 
(3)  All vehicles are to be properly insured six (6) months in advance; 
(4)  Carried with an insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Texas; and 
(5)  The city is named as an additional insured. 
(b)  Each policy must contain a cancellation provision or coverage change endorsement that provides thirty (30) days' notice to the city before the policy is canceled or materially changed to reduce or restrict the coverage. The notice must be mailed to the city secretary. 
(c)  Instead of obtaining the insurance policy required by subsection (a) of this section, a holder may furnish proof of compliance with V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 601, subch. E. 
( Ord. No. 17-056 , § 1, 11-14-17)  
Secs. 29-17—29-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DRIVER'S PERMITS 
 
Sec. 29-21. - Driver's permits required; exception. 
(a)  A person may not drive a ground transportation service vehicle for trips originating in the city unless that person has a driver's permit issued by the city. 
(b)  A holder may not employ or contract with a driver or otherwise allow a person to drive a ground transportation service vehicle owned, controlled or operated by the holder unless the person has a valid driver's permit issued under this article, except as provided in (c). 
(c)  A driver of a ground transportation service vehicle with an occupancy capacity of sixteen (16) persons or greater, including the driver, is exempt from the permit requirement of this section if the individual possesses a valid class "B" or "C" commercial driver's license with a passenger endorsement issued to the driver by the State of Texas. 
( Ord. No. 17-056 , § 1, 11-14-17)  
Sec. 29-22. - Driver qualifications. 
To qualify for a driver's permit, a person must: 
(1)  Be at least eighteen (18) years old; 
(2)  Possess a valid driver's license; 
(3)  Have a valid contract with or currently be employed by a holder; 
(4)  Provide authorization to work in the United States if the person is not a citizen; 
(5)  Not have been convicted in a three-year period preceding the application date of: 
a.  More than three (3) moving violations; or 
b.  Fleeing or attempting to elude a police officer, reckless driving, driving without a valid driver's license or driving with an invalid driver's license; 
(6)  Not have been convicted in the preceding seven-year period of driving while intoxicated, use of a motor vehicle to commit a felony, any felony involving property damage, fraud, theft, an act of violence, or an act of terrorism; and 
(7)  Not be registered as a sex offender.  
Sec. 29-23. - Application and investigation. 
(a)  To obtain a driver's permit, a person must file a completed written application with the police department on the prescribed form and pay the fee required by this chapter. 
(b)  The police department shall conduct such investigation as it considers necessary to determine whether a person is qualified for a driver's permit. The police department shall review criminal history information using the criteria established by the V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 53. 
( Ord. No. 17-056 , § 1, 11-14-17)  
Sec. 29-24. - Issuance and denial. 
(a)  If the police department determines an applicant is qualified, a driver's permit shall be issued. 
(b)  An application for a driver's permit may be denied if: 
(1)  The person is not qualified under this article; or 
(2)  The person falsifies, materially alters or omits information in the application. 
( Ord. No. 17-056 , § 1, 11-14-17)  
Sec. 29-25. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  A driver's permit may be suspended by the police chief or designee for up to sixty (60) days if the holder rescinds sponsorship of a driver in writing to the police department. 
(b)  A driver's permit may be revoked by the chief of police or designee at any time if the permittee no longer meets the qualifications to possess a permit. 
( Ord. No. 17-056 , § 1, 11-14-17)  
Sec. 29-26. - Appeal. 
(a)  An individual whose driver's permit is suspended or revoked may appeal the revocation or suspension to the city manager or his designee not later than the tenth day after receipt of the notice of suspension. The city manager or designee shall provide a written response no later than thirty (30) days after receiving an appeal. 
(b)  An individual whose driver's permit is suspended or revoked shall not drive a ground transportation service vehicle during the pendency of an appeal. 
( Ord. No. 17-056 , § 1, 11-14-17)  
Sec. 29-27. - Permit term. 
A driver's permit is valid for a twelve-month period from the date of issuance, unless the permit is revoked or suspended before the period expires. 
( Ord. No. 17-056 , § 1, 11-14-17)  
Secs. 29-28—29-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FARES AND FEES 
 
Sec. 29-31. - Rates of fare. 
(a)  The following fares shall be the maximum rate charged by taxicabs operating in the city of Killeen: 
(1)  For the first one-tenth mile ("drop charge") .....$ 2.50 
(2)  For each additional one-tenth mile ("per mile") .....0.285 
(3)  For waiting time, per hour ("wait time") .....25.00 
(4)  For each additional passenger over one (1), per person ("extras") .....1.00 
(5)  For each trip, per trip ("minimum fare") .....5.00 
(6)  Meter .....Time On 
(b)  A fuel surcharge as provided in this section may be added to a taxicab fare per trip and any surcharge shall be based on the retail price of regular grade unleaded gasoline. The gasoline price shall be determined by the Oil Price Information Service, as reported by the American Automobile Association ( www.fiielgaugereport.com ) for the Austin, Texas market. The fuel surcharge, including any increase or decrease in the surcharge, may go into effect any time the price is in a range as indicated below for a period of seven (7) consecutive days. Holders shall notify the city manager in writing within one (1) day of implementing, increasing, decreasing or eliminating a fuel surcharge. Each taxicab shall display a sign clearly visible from the passenger area that indicates that a fuel surcharge is being charged and the amount of the fuel surcharge. 
Amount of Surcharge 	Gas Price Per Gallon 
$0.50 	$4.00—$4.50 
$1.00 	$4.51—$5.00 
$1.50 	$5.01—$5.50 
$2.00 	$5.51—$6.00 
 
(c)  No charge shall be made by the driver of any taxicab for waiting time of five (5) minutes or less. Hourly and daily rates for extraordinary services shall be mutually agreed upon by the driver and passenger in advance upon terms satisfactory to them. 
( Ord. No. 17-056 , § 1, 11-14-17)  
Sec. 29-32. - Rate card. 
A holder shall post a clearly visible rate card containing a schedule of rates established by the city council. 
( Ord. No. 17-056 , § 1, 11-14-17)  
Sec. 29-33. - Fees. 
(a)  The schedule of fees is as provided in the adopted fee schedule. 
(b)  A holder of multiple operating authorities shall pay to the city only one (1) operating authority permit fee for each vehicle. 
(c)  Renewal fees are due and payable on or before December 31 of each year. 
(d)  The holder shall pay the all required fees before placing any vehicle into service. 
(e)  If an operating authority is amended to increase the number of ground transportation service vehicles, the annual operating authority permit fee for each additional vehicle shall be prorated from the month the vehicle permit is approved. 
(f)  Fees paid to the city under this chapter are non-refundable. 
( Ord. No. 17-056 , § 1, 11-14-17; Ord. No. 19-047 , § XIII, 9-17-19)  
Sec. 29-34. - Taximeter required. 
(a)  A person may not drive or allow another person to drive a taxicab unless the taxicab is equipped with an operational taximeter. 
(b)  Except as provided by subsection (c) of this section, a person may not use a device other than a taximeter for measuring distance or time or to determine the fare to be charged. 
(c)  Taximeter rates of fare do not apply to a trip to a destination outside the corporate city limits or a trip under a contract with a governmental agency, a nonprofit organization, or as otherwise reasonably necessary to provide a public service. 
( Ord. No. 17-056 , § 1, 11-14-17)  
Secs. 29-35—29-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OPERATIONS 
 
Sec. 29-41. - Limitations on solicitations. 
(a)  A driver may not solicit business for a taxicab except from the driver compartment of the vehicle or the curb immediately adjacent to the vehicle. 
(b)  A driver may not solicit business in a loud or annoying tone of voice, or obstruct the movement of any person. A driver may not solicit business at the terminal of another common carrier or at points of loading and unloading along any established route of another common carrier. 
(c)  When a taxicab is at the airport or bus depot within the city, the driver may not leave the vehicle and enter the depot, the sidewalk, or private property of an airline or bus company to solicit the transportation of arriving passengers. The meeting, loading and unloading of passengers, loading and unloading of luggage and the assisting of passengers with luggage is permissible at the airport. 
( Ord. No. 17-056 , § 1, 11-14-17)  
Sec. 29-42. - Municipal airport service. 
(a)  An applicant for authority to provide a ground transportation service vehicle that includes service to or from the municipal airport must obtain authority to operate at the airport. The city secretary shall consult with the executive director of aviation or designee before granting authority. A separate decal shall be issued for airport operation and shall be placed next to the city decal. 
(b)  An operating authority issued under this chapter does not authorize a person to operate at the airport. 
(c)  The executive director of aviation may adopt rules regarding the traffic flow of vehicles at the airport. 
( Ord. No. 17-056 , § 1, 11-14-17)  
Sec. 29-43. - Continued operations. 
A ground transportation service operating under a valid franchise or operating authority granted before the effective date of this ordinance [from which this chapter derives] may continue to operate under that franchise or operating authority. The ground transportation service shall continue to pay all fees and remain in compliance with the franchise or operating authority previously granted. Upon expiration, the ground transportation service shall apply for an operating authority under this chapter to continue operating in the city. 
( Ord. No. 17-056 , § 1, 11-14-17)  
Chapter 30 - WATER, SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Powers relative to water and sewer systems, §§ 16, 123. 
Cross reference— Building and construction regulations, Ch. 8; health and human services, Ch. 13; solid waste, Ch. 24. 
State Law reference— Municipal utility systems, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 402.001. 
 
ARTICLE I. - WATER CONSERVATION AND DROUGHT CONTINGENCY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-014 , § 1, adopted April 23, 2019, repealed the former art. I, §§ 30-1—30-23, and enacted a new art. I, as set out herein. The former art. I pertained to water conservation and derived from Ord. No. 98-46, § I, adopted June 30, 1998; Ord. No. 06-64, § I, adopted June 13, 2006. 
 
Sec. 30-1. - Declaration of policy, purpose, and intent. 
In order to conserve the available water supply and protect the integrity of water supply facilities, with particular regard for domestic water use, sanitation, and fire protection, and to protect and preserve public health, welfare, and safety and minimize the adverse impacts of water supply shortage or other water supply emergency conditions, the City of Killeen hereby adopts the following regulations and restrictions on the delivery and consumption of water. 
Water uses regulated or prohibited under this water conservation and drought contingency plan (the plan) are considered to be non-essential and continuation of such uses during times of water shortage or other emergency water supply condition are deemed to constitute a waste of water which subjects the offender(s) to penalties as defined herein. 
The city shall review this plan at least every five (5) years and shall update as appropriate based on new or updated information. 
(Ord. No. 19-014 , § 1, 4-23-19)  
Sec. 30-2. - Public education. 
The city will periodically provide the public with information about the plan, including information about the conditions under which each stage of the plan is to be initiated or terminated and the drought response measures to be implemented in each stage. This information will be provided by means of electronic notifications, public notices, press releases and utility bill inserts. 
(Ord. No. 19-014 , § 1, 4-23-19)  
Sec. 30-3. - Coordination with regional water planning groups. 
The service area of the city is located within the Brazos Region G Water Planning Area and the city has provided a copy of this plan to Brazos Region G Water Planning Group. 
(Ord. No. 19-014 , § 1, 4-23-19)  
Sec. 30-4. - Authorization. 
The city manager or his/her designee is hereby authorized and directed to implement the applicable provisions of this plan upon determination that such implementation is necessary to protect public health, safety, and welfare. The city manager or his/her designee shall have the authority to initiate or terminate drought or other water supply emergency response measures as described in this plan. 
(Ord. No. 19-014 , § 1, 4-23-19)  
Sec. 30-5. - Application. 
The provisions of this plan shall apply to all persons, customers, and property utilizing water provided by the city. The terms "person" and "customer" as used in the plan include individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, and all other legal entities. 
(Ord. No. 19-014 , § 1, 4-23-19)  
Sec. 30-6. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this plan, the following definitions shall apply: 
Aesthetic water use: water use for ornamental or decorative purposes such as fountains, reflecting pools, and water gardens. 
BCWCID No. 1: Bell County Water Control and Improvement District No. 1. 
Commercial and institutional water use: water use which is integral to the operations of commercial and non-profit establishments and governmental entities such as retail establishments, hotels and motels, restaurants, and office buildings. 
Conservation: those practices, techniques, and technologies that reduce the consumption of water, reduce the loss or waste of water, improve the efficiency in the use of water or increase the recycling and reuse of water so that a supply is conserved and made available for future or alternative uses. 
Customer: any person, company, or organization using water supplied by the city. 
Domestic water use: water use for personal needs or for household or sanitary purposes such as drinking, bathing, heating, cooking, sanitation, or for cleaning a residence, business, industry, or institution. 
Even number address: street addresses, box numbers, or rural postal route numbers ending in zero (0), two (2), four (4), six (6), or eight (8) and locations without addresses. 
Industrial water use: the use of water in processes designed to convert materials of lower value into forms having greater usability and value. 
Landscape irrigation use: water used for the irrigation and maintenance of landscaped areas, whether publicly or privately owned, including residential and commercial lawns, gardens, parks, and rights-of-way and medians. 
Non-essential water use: water uses that are not essential nor required for the protection of public, health, safety, and welfare, including: 
(1)  Irrigation of landscape areas, including parks, and athletic fields, except otherwise provided under this plan; 
(2)  Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle; 
(3)  Use of water to wash down any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts, or other hard-surfaced areas; 
(4)  Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate fire protection; 
(5)  Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street; 
(6)  Use of water to fill, refill, or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools or Jacuzzi-type pools; 
(7)  Use of water in a fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes except where necessary to support aquatic life; 
(8)  Failure to repair a controllable leak(s) within a reasonable period after having been given notice directing the repair of such leak(s); and 
(9)  Use of water from hydrants for construction purposes or any other purposes other than firefighting. 
Odd numbered address: street addresses, box numbers, or rural postal route numbers ending in one (1), three (3), five (5), seven (7), or nine (9). 
(Ord. No. 19-014 , § 1, 4-23-19)  
Sec. 30-7. - Criteria for initiation and termination of drought response stages. 
The city manager or his/her designee shall monitor water supply and/or demand conditions on a regular basis and shall determine when conditions warrant initiation or termination of each stage of the plan, that is, when the specified "triggers" are reached. 
Public notification of the initiation or termination of drought response stages shall be by means of public notice in the Killeen Daily Herald and on the city's website, as well as public service announcements of local radio and TV stations. Additional notification may be made through social media outlets, mailings, door hangers, telephone or other appropriate means. 
The triggering criteria described below are based on water supply, water production and distribution system limitations, drought conditions dictated by the Brazos River Authority, and emergency conditions (e.g. supply source contamination and system outage due to the failure or damage of major water system components). Analysis of the city's water supply availability under recent drought of record conditions indicate the most common trigger for initiating the plan is water supply. The city has ample water supply under contract; however, the city has experienced requests by water [suppliers] to conserve due to low water levels in Lake Belton. 
(Ord. No. 19-014 , § 1, 4-23-19)  
Sec. 30-8. - Stage 1—Mild water shortage conditions. 
(a)  Triggers and requirements for initiation. Customers shall be requested to voluntarily conserve water and adhere to the prescribed restrictions on certain water uses for stage 1 when one (1) of the following criteria is met: 
(1)  Brazos River Authority enters into stage 1 drought watch. 
a.  According to their current drought contingency plan, stage 1 for Lake Belton is based on a drawdown of 6.8 feet. 
b.  A stage 1 trigger for BRA is also when the Palmer Hydrologic Drought Index (PHDI) is equal to or less than negative two (-2). 
(2)  When total daily water demand equals or exceeds and maintains eighty (80) percent or 25.6 million gallons for three (3) consecutive days (based on the current supply capacity of existing system from BCWCID No. 1 of 32.0 MGD). 
(3)  Total treated water in the elevated storage does not refill to eighty (80) percent of capacity overnight. 
(b)  Goal. Achieve a voluntary reduction in total water use and/or daily water demand. 
(c)  Best management practices for supply management. Discontinue unnecessary flushing of water mains and flow testing of fire hydrants. Discontinue washing of city-owned vehicles. Follow the water use restrictions of stage 2. 
(d)  Voluntary water use restrictions for reducing demand. 
(1)  Water customers are requested to voluntarily limit the irrigation of landscaped areas to Sundays and Thursdays for customers with a street address ending in an even number (zero (0), two (2), four (4), six (6) or eight (8)), and Saturdays and Wednesdays for water customers with a street address ending in an odd number (one (1), three (3), five (5), seven (7) or nine (9)). 
(2)  Water customers are requested to voluntarily limit the irrigation of landscaped areas only between the hours of midnight to 10:00 a.m. or 8:00 p.m. to midnight on designated watering days. 
(3)  Water customers are requested to practice water conservation and to minimize or discontinue water use for non-essential purposes. 
(e)  Requirements for termination. Stage 1 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of seven (7) consecutive days, or when the city manager or designee declares termination. 
(Ord. No. 19-014 , § 1, 4-23-19)  
Sec. 30-9. - Stage 2—Moderate water shortage conditions. 
(a)  Triggers and requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and restrictions on certain non-essential water uses for stage 2 when one (1) of the following criteria is met: 
(1)  Brazos River Authority enters into stage 2 drought warning. 
a.  According to their current drought contingency plan, stage 2 for Lake Belton is based on a drawdown of 16.1 feet. 
(2)  When total daily water demand equals or exceeds and maintains eighty-five (85) percent or 27.2 million gallons for three (3) consecutive days (based on the current supply capacity of BCWCID No. 1 OF 32.0 MGD). 
(3)  Total treated water in the elevated storage does not refill to seventy (70) percent of capacity overnight. 
(b)  Goal. Achieve a ten (10) percent reduction in total water use and/or daily water demand. 
(c)  Best management practices for supply management. Discontinue flushing of water mains and flow testing of fire hydrants. Discontinue washing of city-owned vehicles. Discontinue irrigation of all city facilities. Follow the water use restrictions of stage 3. 
(d)  Water use restrictions for demand reduction. Under threat of penalty for violation, the following water use restrictions shall apply to all persons: 
(1)  Hose-end sprinkler systems or automatic irrigation of landscaped areas shall be limited to Sundays and Thursdays for customers with a street address ending in an even number (zero (0), two (2), four (4), six (6) or eight (8)), and Saturdays and Wednesdays for water customers with a street address ending in an odd number (one (1), three (3), five (5), seven (7) or nine (9)). These types of irrigation are further limited to the irrigation of landscaped areas only between the hours of midnight to 10:00 a.m. or 8:00 p.m. to midnight on designated watering days. 
(2)  Irrigation of landscaped areas is permitted at any time if it is by means of hand-held hose, a faucet filled bucket or watering can of five (5) gallons are less, or drip irrigation system. 
(3)  Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle is prohibited except on designated watering days between the hours of midnight to 10:00 a.m. or 8:00 p.m. to midnight on designated watering days. Such washing, when allowed, shall be done with a hand-held bucket or a hand-held hose equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle for quick rinses. Vehicle washing may be done at any time on the immediate premises of a commercial car wash or commercial service station. Further, such washing may be exempted from these regulations, if the health, safety, and welfare of the public is contingent upon frequent vehicle cleansing, such as garbage trucks and vehicles used to transport food and perishables. 
(4)  Use of water to fill, refill, or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools, wading pools, or Jacuzzi-type pools is prohibited except on designated watering days between the hours of midnight to 10:00 a.m. or 8:00 p.m. to midnight. 
(5)  Operation of any ornamental fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes is prohibited except where necessary to support aquatic life or where such fountains or ponds are equipped with a recirculation system. 
(6)  Use of water from hydrants shall be limited to fire fighting and related activities, or other activities necessary to maintain public health, safety, and welfare, except that use of water from designated fire hydrants for construction purposes may be allowed under special permit from the City of Killeen. 
(7)  All restaurants are prohibited from serving water to its patrons except when requested by the patron. 
(8)  Use of water for the irrigation of golf course greens, tees, and fairways is prohibited except on designated watering days between the hours of midnight to 10:00 a.m. or 8:00 p.m. to midnight. However, if the golf course uses a water source other than potable water, the facility shall not be subject to these regulations. 
(9)  The following uses of water are defined as non-essential and are prohibited: 
a.  Wash down of any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts, or other hard-surfaced areas. 
b.  Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate fire protection; 
c.  Use of water for dust control; 
d.  Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street; 
e.  Failure to repair a controllable leak(s) within a reasonable period after having been given notice by the city directing the repair of such leak(s). 
(e)  Requirements for termination. Stage 2 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of seven (7) consecutive days, or when the city manager or designee declares termination. Upon termination of stage 2, stage 1 becomes operative unless otherwise determined by the city manager or designee. 
(Ord. No. 19-014 , § 1, 4-23-19)  
Sec. 30-10. - Stage 3—Severe water shortage conditions. 
(a)  Triggers and requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and restrictions on certain non-essential water uses for stage 3 when one (1) of the following criteria is met. 
(1)  Brazos River Authority enters into stage 3 drought emergency. 
a.  According to their current drought contingency plan, stage 3 for Lake Belton is based on a drawdown of 28.2 feet. 
(2)  When total daily water demand equals or exceeds and maintains ninety (90) percent or 28.8 million gallons for three (3) consecutive days (based on the current supply capacity of BCWCID No. 1 of 32.0 MGD). 
(3)  Total treated water in the elevated storage does not refill to sixty (60) percent of capacity overnight. 
(b)  Goal. Achieve a twenty (20) percent reduction in total water use and/or daily water demand. 
(c)  Best management practices for supply management. Discontinue flushing of water mains and flow testing of fire hydrants. Discontinue washing of city-owned vehicles. Discontinue irrigation of all city facilities. Follow the water use restrictions of stage 4. 
(d)  Water use restrictions for demand reduction. All requirements of stage 2 shall remain in effect during stage 3 except: 
(1)  Irrigation of landscaped areas shall be limited to designated watering days between the hours of midnight to 7:00 a.m. or 9:00 p.m. to midnight and shall be by means of hand-held hoses, hand-held buckets, drip irrigation, or permanently installed automatic sprinkler system only. The use of hose-end sprinklers is prohibited at all times. 
(2)  The use of water for construction purposes from designated fire hydrants is prohibited, even where previously allowed. 
(e)  Requirements for termination. Stage 3 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of seven (7) consecutive days. Upon termination of stage 3, stage 2 becomes operative unless otherwise determined by the city manager or designee. 
(Ord. No. 19-014 , § 1, 4-23-19)  
Sec. 30-11. - Stage 4—Critical water shortage conditions. 
(a)  Triggers and requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and restrictions on certain non-essential water uses for stage 4 when one (1) of the following criteria is met: 
(1)  Brazos River Authority enters into stage 4 pro-rata curtailment. 
a.  According to their current drought contingency plan, stage 4 for Lake Belton is based on a drawdown of 44.6 feet. 
(2)  When daily water demand total equals or exceeds and maintains one hundred (100) percent or 32.0 million gallons for three (3) consecutive days (based on the current supply capacity of BCWCID No. 1 of 32.0 MGD). 
(3)  Total treated water in elevated storage does not refill to fifty (50) percent of capacity overnight; 
(4)  City manager declares a critical water shortage. 
(b)  Goal. Achieve a thirty (30) percent reduction in total water use and/or daily water demand. 
(c)  Best management practices for supply management. Discontinue flushing of water mains and flow testing of fire hydrants. Discontinue washing of city-owned vehicles. Discontinue irrigation of all city facilities. Follow the water use restrictions of stage 5. 
(d)  Water use restrictions for demand reduction. All requirements of stage 2 and 3 shall remain in effect during stage 4 except: 
(1)  Irrigation of landscaped areas shall be limited to designated watering days between the hours of midnight to 6:00 a.m. or 10:00 p.m. to midnight and shall be by means of hand-held hoses, hand-held buckets, or drip irrigation only. The use of hose-end sprinklers or permanently installed automatic sprinkler systems are prohibited at all times. 
(2)  Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle not occurring on the premises of a commercial car wash or commercial service stations, and not in the immediate interest of public health, safety, and welfare, is prohibited. Further, such vehicle washing at commercial car washes and commercial service stations shall occur only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. and between 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(3)  The filling, refilling, or adding of water to swimming pools, wading pools, and Jacuzzi-type pools is prohibited. 
(4)  Operation of any ornamental fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes is prohibited except where necessary to support aquatic life or when such fountains or ponds are equipped with a recirculation system. 
(5)  No applications for new, additional, expanded, or increased-in-size water service connections, meters, service lines, pipeline extensions, mains, or water service facilities of any kind shall be allowed or approved, and time limits for approval or installation of such applications are hereby suspended for such time as this drought response stage or a higher numbered stage shall be in effect. 
(e)  Requirements for termination. Stage 4 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of seven (7) consecutive days or when the city manager or designee declares termination. Upon termination of stage 4, stage 3 becomes operative unless otherwise determined by the city manager or designee. 
(Ord. No. 19-014 , § 1, 4-23-19)  
Sec. 30-12. - Stage 5—Emergency water shortage conditions. 
(a)  Triggers and requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and restrictions for stage 5 of this plan when the city manager or designee determines that a water supply emergency exists based on: 
(1)  Major water line breaks, or pump or system failures occur, which cause unprecedented loss of capability to provide water service; or 
(2)  Natural or man-made contamination of the water supply source(s). 
(b)  Goal. Achieve a forty (40) percent reduction in total water use and/or daily water demand. 
(c)  Best management practices for supply management. Discontinue flushing of water mains and flow testing of fire hydrants. Discontinue washing of city-owned vehicles. Discontinue irrigation of all city facilities. Follow the water use restrictions of stage 5. 
(d)  Water use restrictions for demand reduction. All requirements of stage 2, 3, and 4 shall remain in effect during stage 5 except: 
(1)  Irrigation of landscaped areas is absolutely prohibited. 
(2)  Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle is absolutely prohibited. 
(3)  All outside water uses are prohibited, except for fighting fires and for animals. 
(e)  Requirements for termination. Stage 5 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of seven (7) consecutive days or when the city manager or designee declares termination. Upon termination of stage 5, stage 4 becomes operative unless otherwise determined by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 19-014 , § 1, 4-23-19)  
Sec. 30-13. - Drought response stages. 
The city manager or his/her designee, shall monitor water supply and/or demand conditions on a daily basis and, in accordance with the triggering criteria set forth in this plan, shall determine that a mild, moderate, severe, critical, or emergency water shortage condition exists and shall implement the following notification procedures: 
Notification of the public: 
The city manager or his/ her designee shall notify the public as needed or necessary by means of: 
• Press releases 
• Social media 
• Publication in a newspaper of general circulation 
• Direct mail to each customer 
• Reverse 911 system 
• Signs posted in public places 
Key entities and positions to notify: 
The city manager or his/ her designee shall notify directly, or cause to be notified directly, the following individuals and entities: 
• Mayor/city council 
• Police and fire chiefs 
• County emergency management coordinator 
• County judge and commissioners 
• TCEQ (required when mandatory restrictions are imposed) 
• Major water users 
• Building official 
• Critical water users, i.e. hospitals and schools 
• Public works and parks employees 
(Ord. No. 19-014 , § 1, 4-23-19)  
Sec. 30-14. - Water conservation plan. 
(a)  Goals. The city has ample water for present and near future needs. The city's budget is structured to meet operational and debt service needs. The city has a water rate structure which is designed to meet the budgetary needs and debt service requirements of the city. The City of Killeen recognizes the state's goals of water conservation and generally supports those goals. Therefore, the following goals are stated for the city relative to water conservation: 
(1)  The city will encourage the conservation of water through the media, mail-outs and other avenues. Conservation messages will be conveyed at the times of the year when water use is expected to increase. 
(2)  The city will work toward reducing unaccounted for (unmetered) water. 
(3)  The city has a goal not to exceed one hundred ten (110) gallons per capita per day (GPCD) over the next five (5) and ten (10) years. The achievement of this goal takes into consideration that: 
a.  Customers will respond to conservation messages. 
b.  Population growth will occur to compensate for revenue losses. 
c.  Unaccounted for water can be reduced up to five (5) percent. 
The following are the city's historic and five-year and ten-year goals for demand reduction through water conservation. 
	Historic 5 Year
Average 	5-Year Goal for Year 2024 	10-Year Goal for Year 2029 
Total GPCD 	104 	110 	110 
Residential GPCD 	67 	70 	70 
Water Loss (GPCD) 	18 	17 	16 
Water Loss Percentage 	17.31% 	15.45% 	14.55% 
 
(GPCD = gallons per day per capita) 
(b)  Metering. The City of Killeen obtains one hundred (100) percent of its treated water supply through an agreement with Bell County WCID No. 1. As part of this agreement, Bell County WCID No. 1 provides the city with a monthly statement measuring the amount of water diverted for the city's use. The city's current contract with Bell County WCID No. 1 provides for 32.0 MGD through raw water rights of thirty-nine thousand nine hundred sixty-four (39,964) acre-feet per year from Belton Lake. 
(1)  The City of Killeen meters one hundred (100) percent of the connections in the distribution system. Meters range in size from five-eighths (?) inch by three-fourths (¾) inch to six (6) inches. The city is in the process of testing all of their large, commercial (three-inch—six-inch) meters. Based on this testing, meters that fall outside a plus or minus five (5) percent will be replaced. Aged residential meters are periodically replaced on an as needed basis to assure the continued reliability of meter performance. 
(2)  Annually, the city transfers funds into a meter replacement fund to replace meters that test below a certain percentage or have faults. 
(c)  Plumbing code. The City of Killeen operates under the International Plumbing Code, which has been formally adopted in chapter 8, article IV of this Code. The city routinely inspects new construction, remodeling and additions through building permits. Under the permitting and inspection program, all plumbing fixtures are assured to meet state and federal laws pertaining to water conservation devices. 
(d)  Water rates. The city's water and sewer rates are codified in article IV of this chapter and are amended as required to supply the necessary system revenues. The city uses a non-promotional water rate structure which is cost-based and acts to discourage excessive water use. 
As outlined in section 30-12, Stage 5—Emergency Water Shortage Conditions, Water Rationing, if activated, water rates increase significantly if customers exceed specified amounts. 
(e)  Distribution system, leak detection and repairs. As required by 30 Texas Administrative Code § 288.2(a)(2)(B), the record management system utilized by the City of Killeen divides water sales into the following customer classifications: residential, commercial, apartments, mobile home parks, industrial, fireplug, outside city commercial, and outside city residential. It is the policy and practice of the city's water utility to investigate customer complaints of low pressure and possible leaks. Additionally, as required by 30 Texas Administrative Code §288.2(a)(2)(A), city staff visually inspects suspected leaks and prioritizes and completes the timely repair to any leaks detected. The city's record management system tracks water pumped, water delivered, water sales, and water losses to track water transmission, distribution, and delivery to its customers. This information is used to evaluate the integrity of the system from source to end user to control and minimize unaccounted for uses of water. The City of Killeen also currently employs the following measures in an effort to resolve water loss discrepancies that occasionally occur in the transmission, delivery, and distribution system: 
(1)  Pro-active leak detection and leak repair to reduce unaccounted for water loss. 
(2)  Continuing public education programs to increase plan awareness. 
(3)  Coordination among all Bell County WCID No. 1 customers to ensure each customer takes water in a manner that ensures a dependable supply and an efficient operation. 
(4)  Using treated wastewater reuse for golf course irrigation and exploring other options for treated wastewater reuse and recycling to reduce potable water demand. 
(f)  Water conservation utility profile. The City of Killeen supplies water to its customers within the corporate limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city through its public water system (PWS 0140006; RN 101391308). The city holds a certificate of convenience and necessity (CCN #10041) encompassing approximately fifty-six (56) square miles. In furtherance of the city's policy of water conservation the following has been provided for in the city's plan: 
(1)  The city has conducted and completed an evaluation of our water and wastewater systems and customer use characteristics in an effort to identify water conservation opportunities and potential targets and goals. The evaluation, entitled "Utility Profile for Retail Water Supplier," is available upon request and is summarized as follows: 
a.  The source of drinking water for the City of Killeen is Lake Belton. 
b.  The city purchases treated water from a wholesaler, Bell County WCID No. 1, for distribution to approximately sixty-four thousand seven hundred (64,700) retail customers. 
c.  The city maintains over six hundred seventy-six (676) linear miles of public water distribution mains and six hundred (600) linear miles of wastewater collection mains. 
d.  The city's current water demand averages 15.1 million gallons per day (MGD) or approximately one hundred five (105) gallons per capita per day (GPCD). 
e.  In the previous five (5) years, the city's maximum daily potable water demand was 25.8 MGD. 
f.  Bell County WCID No. 1 treats the city's sewer which averages 10.2 MGD. 
(2)  Water customers (residential, commercial, public/institutional and industrial) located within the City of Killeen's CCN coverage area have historically used one hundred five (105) to one hundred fifteen (115) GPCD. The city has established five-year and ten-year goals not to exceed one hundred ten (110) GPCD based on this historically low GPCD which is largely due to Killeen's proximity to the Fort Hood Military Base. Enlisted members of the armed forces make up a significant portion of the city's water system customers. The historical low GPCD is influenced by the transient nature of the enlisted members and the large number of rental properties utilized in the city's service area. In establishing the five-year and ten-year goals, the city also considered state and regional goals, local climate, demographics, and data from the city's utility profile. 
(Ord. No. 19-014 , § 1, 4-23-19)  
Sec. 30-15. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly or intentionally allow the use of water from the city for residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, governmental, or any other purpose in a manner contrary to any provision of this plan, or in an amount in excess of that permitted by the drought response stage in effect at the time pursuant to action taken by city manager or his/her designee, in accordance with provisions of this plan. 
(b)  Any person who violates this plan is guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished under section 1-8 of this Code. A fine not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) may be imposed for violation of provisions that govern fire safety or public health and sanitation. Each day that one or more of the provisions in this plan is violated shall constitute a separate offense. If a person is convicted of three (3) or more distinct violations of this plan, the city manager or designee shall, upon due notice to the customer, be authorized to discontinue water service to the premises where such violations occur. Services discontinued under such circumstances shall be restored only upon payment of a re-connection charge, as established in the city's current fee and rate schedule, and any other costs incurred by the city in discontinuing service. In addition, suitable assurance must be given to the city manager or designee that the same action shall not be repeated while the plan is in effect. Compliance with this plan may also be sought through injunctive relief in the district court. 
(c)  Any person, including a person classified as a water customer of the city, in apparent control of the property where a violation occurs or originates shall be presumed to be the violator, and proof that the violation occurred on the person's property shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the person in apparent control of the property committed the violation, but any such person shall have the right to show that he/she did not commit the violation. Parents shall be presumed to be responsible for violations of their minor children and proof that a violation, committed by a child, occurred on property within the parents' control shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the parent committed the violation, but it is an affirmative defense if any such parent proves that he/she had previously directed the child not to use the water as it was used in violation of this plan and that the parent could not have reasonably known of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 19-014 , § 1, 4-23-19)  
Sec. 30-16. - Variances. 
The city manager or his/her designee, may, in writing, grant temporary variance for existing water uses otherwise prohibited under this plan if it is determined that failure to grant such variance would cause an emergency condition adversely affecting the health, sanitation, or fire protection for the public or the person requesting such variance and if one (1) or more of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Compliance with this plan cannot be technically accomplished during the duration of the water supply shortage or other condition for which the plan is in effect. 
(2)  Alternative methods can be implemented which will achieve the same level of reduction in water use. 
Persons requesting a variance from the provisions of this article shall file a petition for variance with the city manager or designee within five (5) days after the plan or a particular drought response stage has been invoked. All petitions for variances shall be reviewed by the city manager, or his/her designee, and shall include the following: 
(1)  Name and address of the petitioner(s). 
(2)  Purpose of water use. 
(3)  Specific provision(s) of the plan from which the petitioner is requesting relief. 
(4)  Detailed statement as to how the specific provision of the plan adversely affects the petitioner or what damage or harm will occur to the petitioner or others if petitioner complies with this ordinance. 
(5)  Description of the relief requested. 
(6)  Period of time for which the variance is sought. 
(7)  Alternative water use restrictions or other measures the petitioner is taking or proposes to take to meet the intent of this plan and the compliance date. 
(8)  Other pertinent information. 
(Ord. No. 19-014 , § 1, 4-23-19)  
Secs. 30-17—30-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 30-26. - Penalty. 
Unless stated otherwise, violations of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-8.  
Sec. 30-27. - Application for service. 
All applicants for service attachments to the mains for the purpose of conducting water into any premises must be made in writing by the party desiring such attachment; such application must be made in writing to the superintendent of the waterworks, and if premises are occupied by rentee or lessee, application must be accompanied by consent of owner. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 14, art. 1, § 1)  
Sec. 30-28. - Use of water restricted. 
All applications for water service must state fully and truly the purpose for which the water is required, and no water shall be used except for the purpose or purposes stated in the application, and no applicant shall permit others to use water for any purpose except those stated. In case of misrepresentation or diversion to other use, the supply shall be cut off, unless applicant pays a higher rate as provided in this article. If the water is cut off, applicant shall pay a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) when water is again turned on, in addition to the rate applicable to the purpose for which the water is being used. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 14, art. 1, § 2 [Ord. No. 81-37, § 1, 8-11-81])  
Sec. 30-29. - Stopcocks and gates. 
Consumer shall cause to be placed at his own expense, in his attachment not more than twelve (12) inches from the curb, a stopcock and stop box, and no water will be supplied unless this is done. Such stops and boxes shall be kept in repair by the consumer, and shall be flush with the sidewalk. Every service pipe must also be furnished with stop and waste cock inside the premises and below the action of frost, so that water can be cut off and drained from the pipes. The manipulation of stopcocks shall in all cases be done only by an employee of waterworks. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 14, art. 1, § 5)  
Sec. 30-30. - Access to water distribution system. 
Any employee of the city water department shall have access at all reasonable hours to any part of the water distribution system wherever located. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 14, art. 1, § 6; Ord. No. 82-60, § 1, 10-12-82)  
Sec. 30-31. - Right to shut off water. 
The waterworks reserves the right to cut off water in the mains without notice, for any purpose, at any time. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 14, art. 1, § 7)  
Sec. 30-32. - Consumer must prevent waste. 
Consumers are required to keep their sprinklers, hydrants, faucets, valves, hoses and all other water apparatus in good condition, and all waterways closed when not in use. Water will not be furnished where there are defective or leaky water closets, faucets or other fixtures, except at advanced rates. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 14, art. 1, § 8)  
Sec. 30-33. - Several consumers to one connection. 
In all cases where water is to be supplied to several parties through one (1) stopcock, the waterworks shall contract with only one (1) of the parties, and this party shall be responsible for violation of rules by others on his line. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 14, art. 1, § 9)  
Sec. 30-34. - Water for special use. 
No continual flow of water shall be allowed except by special permission. When water is discharged into tanks they must be tight and supply pipes furnished with good cocks. Steam boilers taking water from service pipes and depending on the pressure will do so at the risk of the owner. Steam plants and other commercial enterprises will be furnished water through meters only. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 14, art. 1, § 10)  
Sec. 30-35. - Plumbing done by bonded plumber. 
All plumbing must be done by a bonded plumber of the city, and water will not be furnished to customers whose pipes are laid by other plumbers. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 14, art. 1, § 11)  
Sec. 30-36. - Destruction, injury to, or interference with water distribution system. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally destroy, injure, interfere with, or tamper with, in any manner, or attempt to destroy, injure, interfere with or tamper with in any manner, any reservoir, tank, main, fountain, fireplug, hydrant, stopcock, valve, pipe connection, meter, meter box or other apparatus pertaining to the water distribution system of the city. Any person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each additional day in violation of this ordinance constitutes a separate offense. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 14, art. 1, § 12 [Ord. No. 82-60, § 1, 10-12-82]; Ord. No. 06-81, § I, 7-11-06)  
Sec. 30-37. - Taking water unlawfully. 
Anyone who takes or uses any water from the city waterworks for any purpose without having previously contracted for the taking or use of such water is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined five hundred dollars ($500.00). Anyone who takes or uses water from the waterworks for any purpose after having been cut off because of a violation of rules, without the permission of the water and sewer department, shall be subject to the above penalty. Each additional day in violation of this ordinance constitutes a separate offense. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 14, art. 1, § 13; Ord. No. 06-81, § I, 7-11-06)  
Sec. 30-38. - Care of hydrants by police. 
It shall be the duty of every officer to look after all fire hydrants, leakage of water pipes, and faulty connections and report the same to the water commission. It shall be their duty to see that consumers are using water as agreed upon in their applications. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 14, art. 1, § 14)  
Sec. 30-39. - Connections larger than one inch. 
All customers having connections with mains larger than one (1) inch shall at their own expense furnish and keep in repair a gate or globe valve next to the main, which shall be under the exclusive control of the city waterworks. No water will be supplied until this section is complied with, and water will be cut off if valve gets out of repair, and will not be cut on until customer has repaired same and paid all expenses of disconnection and reconnection. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 14, art. 1, § 15)  
Secs. 30-40—30-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate sewers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 214.012, 214.013; on-site sewage disposal systems, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 366.001 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 30-61—30-69. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PURPOSES, POLICY, AND PROHIBITED DISCHARGES 
 
Sec. 30-70. - Purposes and policy. 
(a)  Divisions 2, 3, 4 and 5 of this article set forth uniform requirements for users of the City of Killeen's wastewater system and enable the city to comply with applicable local, state and federal laws and regulations. 
(b)  The purposes of divisions 2, 3, 4 and 5 of this article and the policy of the city are to: 
(1)  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system, including interference with its use or disposal of the resulting sludge; 
(2)  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
(3)  Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludge from the wastewater system; 
(4)  Provide for equitable distribution of the cost of operating and maintaining the wastewater system; and 
(5)  Protect the general health, safety and welfare of the public and wastewater system personnel. 
(c)  Divisions 2, 3, 4 and 5 of this article provide for the regulation of users' discharges into the city's wastewater system by providing: general and specific prohibitions; the issuance of permits to certain nonresidential users and the enforcement of general and specific requirements for all users; the assessment of fees and surcharges; monitoring and enforcement regulations; and requiring user reporting. 
(d)  All discharges into the wastewater system shall conform to the requirements of divisions 2, 3, 4 and 5 of this article. If there is a conflict between divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article and any other provision of this Code or state or federal law, the most restrictive provision shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 10-009, § II, 3-30-10; Ord. No. 19-009 , § I, 3-26-19) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-009 , § I, adopted, Mar. 26, 2019, renumbered former § 30-71 as § 30-70.  
Sec. 30-71. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
Act of God is an unanticipated grave natural disaster or other natural phenomenon of an exceptional, inevitable, or irresistible character, the effects of which could not have been prevented or avoided by the exercise of due care or the utilization of best management practices (BMPs). 
Animal waste means and includes the following waste regardless of whether the waste has been exposed to pathogens: carcasses of animals; body parts of animals; blood and blood products, serum, plasma, and other blood components from animals; or bedding of animals. 
Approval authority means the Executive Director of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) or its designee. 
Authorized representative of an industrial user means: 
(1)  If the industrial user is a corporation: 
(A)  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function or any other person who performs similar policy-making or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
(B)  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or operation facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for individual wastewater discharge permit and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporation procedures; 
(2)  If the industrial user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, a general partner or proprietor, respectively; 
(3)  If the industrial user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility, the highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility or designee; or 
(4)  The individuals described in paragraphs (1) through (3) above may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company and the written authorization is submitted to the director. 
Automotive oil means any lubricating oils or greases intended for use in an internal combustion engine, crankcase, transmission, gear box, or differential for an automobile, bus, lawnmower, tractor, trailer, motorcycle, boat, truck or other machines with these components (airplanes, water craft, four-wheelers, etc.). The term includes oil or grease that is not labeled specifically for that use but is suitable for that use according to generally accepted industry specifications, including those of synthetic composition. 
Bell County Water Control and Improvement District #1 (BCWCID#1) wastewater system means pipelines, facilities, devices, and structures used for transporting, receiving, processing, and treating wastewater, industrial waste, and sludge owned and operated by BCWCID#1. 
Best management practices (BMPs) Best management practices include schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance or monitoring procedures, structural controls, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of water in the state in accordance with divisions 2, 3, 4 and 5 of this article and the specific and general prohibitions at 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b). 
Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized for the biochemical oxidation of organic material in five (5) days at twenty degrees Celsius (20° C) under standard laboratory procedures, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l), as determined by the standard methods. 
Blood and blood products mean human blood, serum, plasma and other blood components. 
Building sewer means the collection of privately-owned components, pipes and/or conveyances that convey a user's discharges to the wastewater system or other place of disposal, regardless of whether such collection, or portions of such collection, is/are located inside or outside of a building or person's property. 
Bypass means the intentional diversion of waste or wastewater from any portion of a user's pretreatment facility. 
Categorical standards mean the national categorical pretreatment standards established by the EPA in Title 40 of the CFR. 
Categorical users mean industrial users subject to national categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR, chapter I, subchapter N. 
Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD) means the measure of the oxygen-consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in the water or wastewater expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l) as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test, but not differentiating between stable and unstable organic matter and thus not necessarily correlating with BOD as determined by standard methods. 
Clog means to impede, hinder, obstruct or stop the flow of the wastewater in the wastewater system. 
Compliance schedule means a milestone document of corrective actions developed and issued to assist an industry in regaining compliance through operation and maintenance and/or construction while providing the director with progressive reporting which may be used, in addition to or in lieu of other remedies provided in division 5 of this article, as a progressive enforcement action for noncompliance. 
Composite sample means the sample resulting from the combination of individual samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either flow or time. 
Control point means a manhole, control port or other approved access to a building sewer at some point before the building sewer discharge mixes with other discharges in the wastewater system. 
Cooling water means the water discharged from any system of condensation, such as air conditioning, cooling and refrigeration systems. 
Day means a calendar day, unless otherwise specified. 
Dilution means the addition of any material, either liquid or non-liquid, or any other method, to attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the national categorical standards or the provisions of divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article. 
Direct discharge means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly into the waters of the state under a permit issued by the TCEQ or EPA. 
Director means the executive director of public works or his/her duly authorized representative or designee. 
Discharge means to deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow seeping, or otherwise releasing or disposing of any wastewater, waste, or any other substance into the wastewater system, or to allow, permit, or suffer any of these acts or omissions to occur, without regard to intent. 
Existing source means any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act. 
Fats, oils and greases (FOG) means organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules, or N-Hexane extractable material not absorbed in Silica gel, all of which are sometimes referred to herein as "grease" or "greases." These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures specified in the standard methods. 
Food service establishment means a commercial, institutional or industrial establishment identified in this definition that prepares, serves, processes, manufactures or conducts any other food service-type activity involving food or beverage products of any kind that generate industrial wastewater. Food service establishments are limited to restaurants of all types, food courts, food packagers, grocery and convenience stores, bakeries, lounges, bars, schools, food manufactures, food processors, hospitals, hotels, motels, and nursing homes. 
Garbage means solid waste consisting of putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage facilities, handling and sale of produce and other food products. 
Generator means any person who owns or operates a grease trap or grit trap, or whose act or process produces a grease or grit trap waste. 
Grab sample means an individual sample collected without regard to flow over a period of time not exceeding fifteen (15) minutes. 
Grease trap or grease interceptor means a device designed to use differences in specific gravities to separate and retain light density liquids, waterborne fats, oils, and greases prior to the wastewater entering the wastewater system. These devices also serve to collect settleable solids, generated by and from food preparation activities, prior to the wastewater exiting the trap and entering the wastewater system. Under common usage, a grease trap is distinguished from a grease interceptor on the basis of size and location. A grease trap is typically smaller than a grease interceptor and a grease trap is typically located inside an establishment rather than outside, as is the case with a grease interceptor. However, as both grease traps and grease interceptors both serve the same purpose and the determination of whether one or the other will be required can only be determined based on a particular user's projected or actual use, for purposes of this article, both terms will be used interchangeably. 
Grease trap waste means the material collected in and from a grease trap or interceptor utilized in a commercial, institutional, or industrial food service or processing establishment, including the solids resulting from de-watering process. 
Grit trap or grit interceptor means a receptacle, structure, or mechanical device used by a generator to intercept, collect, separate, and restrict the passage of petroleum-based oil and grease waste, and inorganic or other solids or semi-solids from wastewater prior to discharge to the wastewater system. 
Grit trap waste means petroleum-based oil and grease waste, and inorganic or other solids and semi-solids collected by and removed from a grit trap. 
Hazardous metal means and includes each of the following metals in its elemental state and any of its compounds expressed as that metal: arsenic, cadmium, chromium, copper, cyanide, lead, mercury, molybdenum, nickel, selenium, silver and zinc. 
Indirect discharge means the discharge of waste, wastewater or any other substances into the wastewater system, other than normal domestic wastewater, including, without limitation, the discharge or the introduction of pollutants from any source regulated under Sections 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act (33 USC 1317) into the wastewater system. 
Industrial user means a source of an indirect discharge. 
Industrial wastewater means waste or wastewater resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade or business from the development of any natural resource; any mixture of this waste or wastewater with potable water or normal domestic wastewater; or any waste or wastewater that is distinct from normal domestic wastewater. 
Infiltration water means the stormwater, groundwater or surface water that is present in, or leaks into, the wastewater system. 
Interference means a discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources inhibits, disrupts, or damages the wastewater system, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal and, therefore, is a cause of a violation of divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article, the BCWCID#1 TPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation), or a discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources prevents sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): section 405 of the Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
Local limit means specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the city upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b) and the prohibitions of divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article. 
Microbiological waste means cultures and stocks of infectious agents and associated biologicals, cultures of specimens from medical, pathological, pharmaceutical, research, clinical, commercial, and industrial laboratories, discarded live and attenuated vaccines, disposable culture dishes or disposable devices used to transfer, inoculate and mix cultures. 
Milligrams per liter (mg/l) means the same as parts per million and is a weight-to-volume ratio. The milligram-per-liter value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. 
National Categorical Pretreatment or pretreatment standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1347) which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
New source means: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act, which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
(A)  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
(B)  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
(C)  The production of wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of paragraphs (1)(B) or (1)(C) above, but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
(A)  Begun or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction program: 
(i)  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; 
(ii)  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
(B)  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of a facility or equipment that is intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts that can be terminated or modified without substantial loss and contracts for feasibility, engineering and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection. 
Non-contact cooling water means water used for cooling that does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product or finished product. 
Non-point source means any source of water pollution that is not a point source as defined in this division. 
Nonresidential user means a user other than a residential user. 
Non-sewer waters means natural outlets, watercourses, ditches, lakes, receiving waters, undergroundwater, septic tanks, or other bodies of surface water or groundwater which are not part of, or otherwise connected to, the wastewater system of the city. 
Normal domestic wastewater means wastewater, excluding industrial wastewater, discharged by a user into the wastewater system that does not contain any pollutant exceeding any limit established under divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article or federal or state law. 
Other waste means ashes, cinders, sand, mud, gravel, asphalt, ceramic wastes, metal or shavings, straw, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood or shavings, sawdust, un-ground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshlings, entrails, paper products, either whole or ground by a garbage grinder larger than one-half inch (½") in diameter, slops, chemical residues, or solids. 
Overload means a discharge or part of a discharge that imposes an organic, inorganic or hydraulic loading on a building sewer or the wastewater system in excess of its actual capacity. 
Pass through means a discharge that exits the wastewater system into waters of the state in quantities or concentrations that, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, are a cause of a violation of any requirement of the BCWCID#1 TPDES permit as issued by the State of Texas (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation). 
Pathogen means an agent that causes disease, especially a living microorganism such as a bacterium or fungus. 
Pathological waste means and includes without limitation: human matter removed during surgery, labor and delivery, autopsy, or biopsy, including body parts, tissues or fetuses, organs, blood, body fluids; laboratory specimens of blood and tissue after completion of laboratory examination; or anatomical remains. 
Person means an individual, corporation, municipal corporation, partnership, or any other legal entity, or the officers, partners, managers, representatives, agents, servants, or employees of an individual, corporation, municipal corporation, partnership, or any other legal entity to which divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article applies and is enforceable. 
pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the weight of the hydrogen ion in grams per liter of solution. pH is the measure of acidity or alkalinity measured in standard units. 
Point source means any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation, or vessel or other floating craft, from which pollutants are or may be discharged. 
Pollutant means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste or wastewater exceeding limits established under divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article that is discharged into the wastewater system. 
Pretreatment, pretreat or treatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state, prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the wastewater system. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes, or by process changes or by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d) (dilution prohibited as substitute for treatment except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement). 
Pretreatment facility means any facility or facilities designed or operated to pretreat discharges in order to comply with pretreatment requirements or pretreatment standards established by federal, state or local regulations. 
Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement set forth in divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article or as required under federal or state law. 
Pretreatment standards or standards mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
Process wastewater means any water which, during manufacturing or processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any raw materials, intermediate products, finished product, byproduct or waste product. 
Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means a treatment works, as defined by section 212 of the Act, which is owned by a state or municipality (as defined by section 502(4) of the Act) or other political subdivision. This definition includes any devices and system used in the transportation, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewerage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature including, but not limited to, pipelines, interceptors and lift stations conveying wastewaters to the BCWCID#1 treatment plants. The term POTW shall also mean the municipality and/or city as defined in section 502(4) of the Act, which shall have jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to its wastewater system and shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from domestic or industrial entities outside of the city who are, by contract agreement with the city, users of the POTW. In divisions 2, 3, 4 and 5 of this article, POTW shall also be deemed to be synonymous with wastewater system as defined in this division. 
Residential user shall mean a person discharging normal domestic wastewater from a single family dwelling, duplex, or other dwelling unit that has complete independent living facilities and that is used solely for residential use and is not used in conjunction with a home occupation. 
Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, and does not include ground, surface and stormwaters. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Sharps means and includes the following material, whether contaminated or not: hypodermic needles; hypodermic syringes with attached needles; scalpel blades; razor blades and disposable razors used in surgery, labor and delivery, or other medical procedures; pasteur pipettes; or broken glass from laboratories. 
Significant user or significant industrial user (SIU) means, except as provided in paragraph (3) of this definition: 
(1)  All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N; or 
(2)  Any other industrial user that discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the wastewater system (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); contributes a process waste stream which makes up five (5) percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the applicable BCWCID#1 treatment plant; or is designated as such by the director on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the wastewater system's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or prohibitions in divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article. 
(3)  Upon finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in paragraph (2) of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the wastewater system's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may at any time, on his/her own initiative or in response to a petition received from an industrial user, determine that such industrial user is not a significant industrial user. 
Slug or slug load means any discharge at a flow rate or concentration, which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 30-73 of this division. A slug discharge is any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through, or in any other way violate divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article. 
Special waste from health care facilities means a waste, which if improperly treated or handled, may serve to transmit an infectious disease or diseases and which is comprised of the following: blood and blood products; microbiological waste; pathological waste; or sharps. 
Standard methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" as prepared, approved, and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation, or through the use of the approved test procedures found in 40 CFR 136 or 30 TAC 319.11. 
Storm sewer means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, inlets, gutters, ditches, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, or storm drains) owned or operated by the city and designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, and which is not used for collecting or conveying sewage and which is not part of the wastewater system. 
Stormwater means rainfall runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. 
Surcharge means the charge, in addition to the wastewater service charge established for the collection and treatment of normal domestic wastewater, which may be assessed against those industrial users whose wastewater discharges exceed any level of pollutant established by divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article. 
Total suspended solids (TSS) means solids measured in mg/l that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, wastewater or other liquid and the level of which is determined by the standard methods. 
Transporter means a person who is registered with and authorized by the TCEQ to transport sewage sludge, water treatment sludge, domestic septage, chemical toilet waste, grit trap waste, or grease trap waste in accordance with 30 Texas Administrative Code § 312.142. 
Unpolluted wastewater means water not containing: pollutants; free or emulsified grease or oil; acids or alkalis; phenols or other substances producing taste or odor in receiving water; toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution; noxious or otherwise obnoxious or odorous gases; more than an insignificant amount in mg/l each of TSS and BOD, as determined by the city; or color exceeding fifty (50) units as measured by the platinum-cobalt method of determination as specified in standard methods. 
Upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards or divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
User means any person, including those located outside the corporate limits of the city, which by any means contributes, causes, or permits the contribution or discharge of waste, wastewater, or other substances into the wastewater system. 
Waste means rejected, unutilized, or other substances in liquid, gaseous or solid form resulting from domestic, agricultural or industrial activities. 
Wastewater means liquid and water-carried wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, institutions, or any other type of facility, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the wastewater system. 
Wastewater service charge means the charge on all users of the wastewater system whose wastewater does not exceed in strength the concentration values established as representative of normal domestic wastewater. 
Wastewater system means and includes all facilities used for collection, pumping, treating, and disposing of wastewater and industrial wastes. Unless the context indicates otherwise, this shall include both BCWCID#1 and city wastewater facilities. In divisions 2, 3, 4 and 5 of this article, wastewater system shall be deemed to be synonymous with a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined in this section and by section 212 of the Act. 
Watercourse means a drainage path or way or the channel of a stream, to include, without limitation, waters in the state, in which water flows within a defined bed and banks, even though the same may be slight, imperceptible or even absent in places, and originates from a definite source or sources. The water need not always be present and may be intermittent if the latter occurs with some degree of regularity, depending on the characteristics of the sources (i.e., water is present or flowing during and/or after a rainfall event). 
Waters in the state means groundwater, percolating or otherwise, lakes, bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Gulf of Mexico inside the territorial limits of the state, and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, navigable or non-navigable, and including the beds and banks of all watercourses and bodies of surface water, that are wholly or partially inside or bordering the state or inside the jurisdiction of the state. 
(b)  The abbreviations below shall have the following meanings: 
BCWCID#1: Bell County Water Control and Improvement District #1, its successors or assigns 
BOD; Biochemical Oxygen Demand 
CFR: Code of Federal Regulations 
COD: Chemical Oxygen Demand 
EPA: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
FOG: Fats, Oils and Greases 
Gpd: Gallons per day 
l: Liter 
mg: Milligrams 
mg/l: Milligrams per liter 
NPDES: National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
POTW: Publicly Owned Treatment Works 
RCRA: Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 
SWDA: Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 USC 6901 et seq.) 
TAC; Texas Administrative Code 
TCEQ; Texas Commission on Environmental Quality 
TPDES: Texas Pollution Discharge Elimination System 
TSS: Total Suspended Solids 
USC: United States Code 
(c)  As used in divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article, reference to any party or governmental regulatory authority or agency means that entity and its successors and assigns. 
(d)  As used in divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article, reference to any law, statute, rule or regulation means that law, statute, rule or regulation as it currently exist or is hereinafter amended or supplemented. 
(Ord. No. 10-009, § II, 3-30-10; Ord. No. 19-009 , § I, 3-26-19) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-009 , § I, adopted, Mar. 26, 2019, renumbered former § 30-71 as § 30-70.  
Sec. 30-72. - Maintenance of sewer service lines. 
(a)  Property owners. Single-family, two-family, three unit, and four unit residential properly owners shall maintain the sewer service line from the building located on the owner's property to the sewer main, except for any portion that is located within the public right-of-way excluding, utility and drainage easements. All other property owners shall maintain the sewer service line from the building located on the owner's property to the sewer main, including portions located within the right-of-way. 
(b)  City. For single-family, two-family, three unit, and four unit residential properties, the city shall maintain the sewer service line within the public right-of-way excluding utility and drainage easements. 
( Ord. No. 19-009 , § I, 3-26-19)  
Sec. 30-73. - Prohibited discharges. 
(a)  Generally. No person may discharge to the wastewater system any waste or wastewater which alone or in conjunction with other waste or wastewater may cause: 
(1)  A BCWCID#1 wastewater system overload; 
(2)  Pass through or contribute to pollution of the wastewater system's receiving waters; 
(3)  Interference with the operation of the wastewater system; 
(4)  The BCWCID#1 wastewater system to be in violation of the NPDES permit or TPDES permit; 
(5)  A hazard to property, public health, welfare or safety; 
(6)  A violation of a permit issued under division 4 of this article; or 
(b)  Specifically. Except as authorized by divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article, no person shall discharge any of the following into the wastewater system: 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the wastewater system, including but not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred-forty degrees Fahrenheit (140° F) or sixty degrees Celsius (60° C), using the standard methods or the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
(2)  pH value. No waste, wastewater, or other substance may be discharged into wastewater system which has a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 10.0, or any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to the wastewater system or wastewater system personnel; 
(3)  Grease, fats, waxes, oils, plastics or other substances, including grease and grit trap waste, whether emulsified or not, which: 
(A)  Will solidify or become discernibly viscous at any temperature between thirty-two degrees Fahrenheit (32° F) and one hundred-fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150° F); 
(B)  Deposit FOG in the wastewater system in such manner as to clog the wastewater system; 
(C)  Represents a FOG discharge resulting from an overload of the user's grease or grit trap; 
(D)  Are not amenable to biological oxidation and will, therefore, pass through to the receiving waters or water in the state without being affected by normal wastewater treatment processes; or 
(E)  Have deleterious effects on the wastewater system's treatment process due to the quantities of these substances exceeding an instantaneous maximum allowable limit of one hundred (100) mg/l. 
(4)  Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD/COD) released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference to, or damage the, wastewater system; 
(5)  Temperature. No person shall discharge liquid, vapor, or any substance having a temperature higher than one hundred-twenty degrees Fahrenheit (120° F) (forty-eight and 9/10ths degrees Celsius, 48.9° C), or that causes the temperatures of the total wastewater treatment plant(s) influent to exceed one hundred-four degrees Fahrenheit (104° F) (forty degrees Centigrade (40° C), or which will inhibit biological activity in the wastewater treatment plant(s) resulting in interference; 
(6)  Automotive oil, petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin; 
(7)  Pollutants which cause toxic gases, vapors or fumes to be present within the wastewater system in a quantity that may cause wastewater system personnel to suffer health or safety problems; 
(8)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants or waste, other than from vehicles (including vacuum trucks and vactor trucks) hauling, trucking, or otherwise transporting normal domestic wastewater, septic tank waste or chemical toilet waste, for the purpose of introducing such wastewater into the wastewater system with the express written authorization (and direction as to location of the disposal site) from the director. A fee shall be established by the director for the dumping of such wastes; 
(9)  Special waste from health care facilities or animal waste, including non-biodegradable materials, except as otherwise allowed by state or federal law; 
(10)  Toxic or poisonous substances, including substances exerting an excessive chlorine requirement to such a degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment plant(s) exceeds the limits established for BCWCID#1 under its TPDES permit for such materials or are in sufficient quantities to violate the provisions of subsection (a) of this section; 
(11)  Chemical discharges. No discharge to the wastewater system shall contain: gasoline, cleaning solvents, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, acetylene generation sludge, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; or hazardous wastes prohibited by local, state or federal law; 
(12)  Others. All waste, wastewater or other substances containing phenols, unionized hydrogen sulfide or other taste-producing and odor-producing substances shall conform to concentration limits established for BCWCID#1 by its TPDES permit. No discharge to the wastewater system may contain: 
(A)  Wastewater which will alone or in conjunction with other wastewater cause the wastewater system influent to contain a total toxic phenol concentration greater than 1.428 mg/l; or 
(B)  Wastewater, which will alone or in conjunction with other wastewater, cause the wastewater entering any entry point into the wastewater system to exceed a hydrogen sulfide concentration greater than 1.0 mg/l. 
(13)  Hazardous metals, toxic materials and conventional pollutants. 
(A)  System limits. The allowable total combined industrial wastewater discharge loading of each of the following pollutants stated in terms of mg/l for discharge to the wastewater system are established for the city as provided and required by agreements governing the operation of the wastewater system. The limits shall also be contained in individual wastewater system use permits. The city reserves the right to revise effluent limitations in accordance with applicable federal, state and local regulations, which may result in changes to limits stated in individual permits. Any categorical or significant industrial user whose effluent contains more than the maximum allowable limit of any of the pollutants listed in paragraph (B) of this subsection, must possess a current wastewater system use permit issued by the city authorizing the discharge of such pollutants. 
(B)  Local limits - Pollutants. The following instantaneous maximum allowable limits for a user's effluent being discharged into the wastewater system are hereby established for the following pollutants: 
Pollutant 	Maximum allowable limit (mg/l): 
(i) 	Arsenic 	*** 
(ii) 	Cadmium as Cd 	3 mg/l 
(iii) 	Chromium as Cr 	3 mg/l 
(iv) 	Copper as Cu 	3 mg/l 
(v) 	Cyanide 	2 mg/l 
(vi) 	Lead 	*** 
(vii) 	Mercury 	0.002 mg/l 
(viii) 	Nickel as Ni 	3 mg/l 
(ix) 	Selenium 	*** 
(x) 	Silver 	*** 
(xi) 	Zinc as Zn 	3 mg/l 
(xii) 	Molybdenum 	*** 
(xiii) 	FOG 	100 mg/l 
(xiv) 	BOD 	250 mg/l 
(xv) 	TSS 	300 mg/l 
(xvi) 	COD 	450 mg/l 
(xvii) 	Dissolved sulfides 	0.1 mg/l 
 
*** Level to be determined by state and federal requirements; 
(14)  Discharge of other toxic materials. No other toxic materials or substances as provided under state or federal law may be discharged into wastewater system without written permission from the director and the approval authority. The cost of studies regarding such discharges shall be borne by the user seeking permission; 
(15)  Garbage. No person may discharge garbage into the wastewater system unless it is shredded to a degree that all particles can be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in the wastewater system. Particles greater than one-half inch (1/2") in diameter are prohibited. All garbage or food waste grinders shall be installed in accordance with the city's adopted plumbing code and chapter 8 of this Code of Ordinances. The director reserves the right to review and approve the installation and operation of any garbage or food waste grinder; 
(16)  Stormwater and other unpolluted drainage. 
(A)  No user shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, unpolluted industrial process water, non-contact cooling water, or other unpolluted drainage into the wastewater system, unless specific written authorization is received from the director in advance of constructing the connection and connecting the same to the wastewater system. The director shall only grant such authorization in unusual circumstances. 
(B)  Stormwater and other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged into such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet in accordance with, and as regulated by, article II, chapter 32 of this Code of Ordinances; 
(17)  Acids, iron pickling waste or electroplating solutions that have not been sufficiently pretreated to comply with divisions 2, 3, 4 and 5 of this article; 
(18)  Radioactive waste. No user shall: 
(A)  Discharge any waste or wastewater into the wastewater system with a radioactive content greater than allowed by applicable provisions of the Texas Radiation Control Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 401.0005 et seq. and the state regulations for control of radiation issued thereunder; or 
(B)  Discharge radioactive wastes or isotopes into the wastewater system without the written permission of the director. In no case shall the director authorize the discharge of radioactive materials that will permit a transient concentration at the BCWCID#1 treatment plant to be higher than 100 microcuries per liter; 
(19)  Additional Discharges that impair or interfere with the wastewater system. No user shall discharge into the wastewater system any waste, wastewater or substance: 
(A)  Capable of causing an overload of the wastewater system; 
(B)  Capable of causing excessive discoloration being discharged into the receiving waters including, without limitation, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions where the color exceeds 50 units as measured by the platinum-cobalt method of determination as specified in the standard methods; or 
(C)  That is not amenable to treatment or reduction by the processes and facilities employed or amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the wastewater system effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(20)  Slug Loads. The city shall regulate the flow and concentration of slug loads when they may: 
(A)  Impair the wastewater treatment process; 
(B)  Cause damage to the wastewater system; 
(C)  Result in treatment costs exceeding those for normal domestic wastewater; or 
(D)  Render the wastewater system effluent unfit for receiving water disposal or industrial use. 
(21)  Other waste as defined in this division; 
(22)  Federal categorical pretreatment standards and state standards. No categorical user shall discharge any waste or wastewater into the wastewater system without complying with divisions 2, 3, 4 and 5 of this article and the applicable state and federal requirements including, without limitation, 40 CFR 403 et seq., which are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference. 
(A)  Upon the promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitation imposed under divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 this article. 
(B)  State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article. 
(23)  Waste or wastewater containing detergent, a surface active agent, or a substance that could cause excessive foaming in the wastewater system or its effluent; or 
(24)  An enzyme, chemical, or other agent that allows FOG or other waste to pass through a pretreatment facility. 
(c)  Dilution prohibited. No user shall use dilution as a partial or complete substitute for adequate pretreatment to achieve compliance with the national categorical standards, state law or the provisions of divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article. This prohibition does not include dilution that is a normal part of the production process or a necessary part of the process to treat the waste or wastewater (i.e.: adding lime for neutralization or precipitation or the mixture of compatible wastes in order to treat at capacity levels rather than treating waste or wastewater in small batches). The director may impose mass limitations on a user that is using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards as provided by federal, state or local regulations. 
(Ord. No. 10-009, § II, 3-30-10; Ord No. 14-012, 2-25-14)  
Sec. 30-74. - Monitoring, inspections, and sampling. 
(a)  Discharge survey. The director may require, and an industrial user shall submit, information relating to the nature and characteristics of a user's discharge by completing a wastewater survey on a form prepared by the director. Failure to complete and return the survey within thirty (30) days of receipt of the notice of requirement shall be a violation of this division. Receipt is presumed to have occurred five (5) days following the date of mailing the discharge survey. 
(b)  The director may require a user to provide and operate monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurements of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems at the user's own expense when facts exist establishing that there is a reasonable probability that a user's discharge exceeds allowable limits and adequate facilities for inspection, sampling or measurement do not currently exist. "Reasonable probability" may be established, for example and without limitation, when: information provided in a completed discharge survey, as required by subsection (a) of this section, indicates that the user's discharge contains substances or pollutants prohibited by section 30-73 of this division; the condition of the wastewater system downstream from the user's facility indicates that substances or pollutants in excess of allowable limits are adversely affecting the wastewater system or are attributing to a waste stream that exceeds the levels of normal domestic wastewater; or, upon inspection and/or consultation with a user, when the director determines that a user's operations do not employ BMPs that will prevent prohibited levels of substances or pollutants from being discharged into the wastewater system. 
(1)  When required by the director, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastewater shall install a control point at user's expense. 
(2)  The monitoring facility or control point should normally be situated on the user's premises near the property line, but the director may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public right-of-way or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed. Relating to control points necessary to verify compliance with division 3, Fat, Oil and Grease Control and Prevention, of this article, control points may be installed either downstream from where industrial wastewater from a grease or grit trap on the building sewer mixes with normal domestic wastewater or prior to that point, but following the industrial wastewater's introduction to the building sewer. 
(3)  There shall be ample room in or near monitoring facilities or control point(s) to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. All equipment that is part of the monitoring facilities shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. 
(4)  Whether constructed on public or private property, the monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the director's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within one hundred-twenty (120) days following written notification by the director. 
(c)  The director shall inspect and monitor all users whenever the director deems that it is necessary to determine whether such users are in compliance with divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article. 
(d)  Persons or occupants of premises where waste or wastewater is created or discharged, and any other premises in which records required to be maintained under this divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article are located, shall allow the director, the approval authority, and the EPA, or their representatives, ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises, including without limitation, access to sewer cleanouts, control points and other points of the building sewer or internal drainage system, for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination, copying, or in the performance of any of their duties. 
(e)  In addition to or instead of the monitoring facilities or control points that may be required by this section, the director, the approval authority, and the EPA shall have the right to set upon the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring, and/or metering operations. 
(f)  Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with user's security guards so that the director, the approval authority, and the EPA will be permitted to enter immediately for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(g)  Measurements, tests, analyses. All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of wastewaters and wastes to which reference is made shall be determined in accordance with standard methods and shall be determined from samples taken at the control point provided for in this division, a location specified in the wastewater system use permit, or upon samples taken at other representative locations approved by the director. 
(h)  Sampling expense. Laboratory processing of initial grab samples collected by the director to determine a user's compliance with federal and state regulations and with divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article shall be borne by the city. Upon request of a user, a composite sample will be collected and analyzed by the director or a third party contractor and/or laboratory at the user's expense, which shall be assessed as a separate line item on the user's utility bill. If the user requests a composite sample, the director may also require the user to install a device of a type and design approved by the director that will allow the sampling equipment to be secured and protected. If the first sample(s) collected indicate that a user is out of compliance the director shall at a minimum, in accordance with division 5 of this article, issue a notice of violation to the user. This provision in no way limits the director's authority to take additional action under division 5 of this article. If, within any twelve-month period from the date of the first notice of violation, additional samples indicate that the user continues to be non-compliant, and in addition to any other action taken by the director under division 5, the expense of obtaining and processing the repeat grab or composite (if requested) samples shall be at the user's own expense and shall be reflected as a separate line item on the user's utility bill. If at any time during this twelve-month period samples are collected and analyzed and indicate that the user is in compliance, this provision shall not be implemented again until another notice of violation is subsequently issued. 
(Ord. No. 10-009, § II, 3-30-10; Ord. No. 14-012, 2-25-14)  
Sec. 30-75. - Act of God or other uncontrollable event. 
If a person can establish that a violation of divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article was caused solely by an act of God, war, strike, riot, or other catastrophe, the event is not a violation. 
(Ord. No. 10-009, § II, 3-30-10)  
DIVISION 3. - FAT, OIL AND GREASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION 
 
Sec. 30-76. - Applicability and prohibitions. 
(a)  This division shall apply to all nonresidential users of the wastewater system and transporters of grease or grit trap waste. 
(b)  Grease or grit traps or interceptors shall not be required for residential users. 
(c)  Food service establishments, as defined in division 2 of this article, that generate fats, oils, or greases as a result of food manufacturing, processing, preparation, or food service shall install, use, and maintain appropriate grease traps or interceptors as required in section 30-77 of this division. 
(d)  Food service establishments, as defined in division 2 of this article, that utilize cooking oil (yellow grease) fryers in the preparation of food products shall provide a recycling or disposal container for used oil on-site and shall property dispose of said used oil as necessary. 
(e)  Other nonresidential users not identified as a food service establishment may be required to institute BMPs and/or comply with this division 3 if, upon sampling, the user's discharge is shown to exceed any pollutant limit established by division 2 of this article or the director determines, based upon a reasonable probability, that the user's discharge exceeds the same. The phrase "reasonable probability" has the same meaning ascribed to it in division 2, subsection 30-74(b) of this article. 
(f)  Facilities generating motor oil, grease, sand, wash water and other wastes or substances harmful or hazardous to the wastewater system as a result of providing commercial service or manufacturing shall install, use, and maintain appropriate grit traps as required in section 30-77 of this division. These facilities include, without limitation, car washes, auto repair, fueling stations and various manufacturing facilities. 
(g)  No user may intentionally or unintentionally allow the discharge of any automotive oil, petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, mineral oil, or any fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin, including, without limitation, cooking oil or yellow grease, into the wastewater system in amounts exceeding the limits established under division 2 of this article which are hereby determined to cause interference with the wastewater system, or cause pollutants to pass through the wastewater system into the environment or water in the state. 
(Ord. No. 10-009, § III, 3-30-10; Ord. No. 14-012, 2-25-14)  
Sec. 30-77. - Installation, cleaning, maintenance, and transporter requirements. 
(a)  Installations. 
(1)  New facilities. 
(A)  Food service establishments which are newly proposed or constructed, or existing facilities which will be expanded or renovated to include a food service establishment, or to expand an existing food service establishment, shall be required to design, install, operate and maintain a grease trap in accordance with the adopted plumbing codes under chapter 8 of this Code of Ordinances and this article. The grease trap shall have adequate capacity to capture all FOG, TSS, BOD and COD in excess of that found in normal domestic wastewater. The food service establishment shall also be required to install and maintain a control point in accordance with section 30-74 of this article. Grease traps and control points shall be installed and inspected prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(B)  Commercial service or manufacturing facilities which are newly proposed or constructed, or existing facilities which will be expanded or renovated that generate motor oil, grease, sand, wash water or other substances that will interfere with the wastewater system shall be required to design, install, operate and maintain a grit trap in accordance with the adopted plumbing codes under chapter 8 of this Code of Ordinances and other applicable ordinances. The facility shall also be required to install and maintain a control point in accordance with this article. Grit traps and control points shall be installed and inspected prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  Existing facilities. Existing grease or grit traps must be operated and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and in accordance with this division. Grease or grit traps that either do not have adequate capacity to capture all FOG, TSS, BOD or COD in excess of that found in normal domestic wastewater, or sand or other deleterious substances as designed, or that are non-functional shall be replaced at the user's expense upon notification by the director. The director may require an existing facility to install a control point, in accordance with section 30-74 of this article, at the user's sole expense, to enable the director to monitor discharges. 
(3)  Grease Trap Capacity Sizing Criteria. Notwithstanding any conflict found in the adopted plumbing code under chapter 8 or this Code of Ordinances, grease traps shall be sized in accordance with the following minimum criteria. The director may adjust the final grease trap size as needed to protect the wastewater system. 
Type of Fixture Trap 	Trap Arm Size 	Fixture Unit Count 
3 compartment sink 	1-1/2", 2" 	3, 4 
2 compartment sink 	1-1/2" 	2 
Dishwasher 	2" 	4 
Garbage grinder 	2" 	4 
Wok stove 	2" 	4 
Floor drains (2",3",4") 	2", 3", 4" 	2,3,4 
Floor sinks* (3", 4") 	3", 4" 	3,4 
Mop sinks 	2", 3", 4" 	2,3,4 
Hand sink 	1-1/2" 	0 
 
Calculation: 
Grease Trap Holding Capacity (GTHC) (gallons) = GTFR in gallons/minute multiplied by 12 minutes (Applicable Retention Time), where Grease Trap Flow Rating (GTFR) = Total Fixture Unit Count multiplied by 3 gallons/minute. 
Example: Fixtures: (1) 3-compartment sink (2"), (1) dishwasher, and (2) 4" floor drains = 16 (Fixture Unit Count) * 3 gallons/minute = 48 gallons per minute (GTFR) * 12 minutes = 576 GTHC 
All facilities are required to install 2-compartment grease traps with a minimum 12-minute total retention time. All floor drains in food preparation area shall drain through the grease trap. 
(4)  All grease and grit trap waste shall be properly disposed of at a permitted facility in accordance with federal, state, and local regulation. 
(5)  Alternate grease removal devices or technologies. 
(A)  An industrial user may propose the use of an alternate grease removal device (AGRD) or other technologies in lieu of a grease or grit trap in those cases where the user can demonstrate that it is impossible or impractical to install, operate, or maintain a grease or grit trap due to one or more of the following conditions: 
(i)  Archeological or historical circumstances prevent the disturbance of the ground or structure where the grease or grit trap and/or plumbing connecting the building fixtures to the grease or grit trap must be installed; 
(ii)  There is not adequate space or alternate locations for installing and maintaining a grease or grit trap; 
(iii)  There is not adequate slope for gravity flow in the building sewer between plumbing fixtures in the building and the grease or grit trap and/or between the grease or grit trap and the wastewater system; 
(iv)  Other conditions or obstacles, in the opinion of the director, prevent the installation of an adequately sized grease or grit trap and control point as required by this divisions 2, 3, 4 and 5 of this article. 
(B)  Alternate grease removal devices or technologies may include, but are not limited to dissolved air flotation, system baffling, active devices, automated grease removal devices, electronic alarms and shut offs or any combination of devices and procedures that will generate a discharge that complies with divisions 2, 3, 4 and 5 of this article. 
(C)  Proposals for the installation of AGRDs or technologies shall be made in writing to the director and shall contain specifications, calculations or other documentation necessary to demonstrate treatment capabilities sufficient to maintain compliance with divisions 2, 3, 4 and 5 of this article. 
(D)  AGRDs or technologies shall be approved by the director in writing prior to the commencement of the installation. This approval by the director in no way endorses the design, device, or its performance, or relieves the user of the responsibility to comply with the requirements specified in divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article. 
(E)  Where the user proposes AGRDs or technologies, the director may require data demonstrating that the user is able to comply with the limitations or other requirements outlined divisions 2, 3, 4. or 5 of this article. The user may also be subject to periodic monitoring to demonstrate continued compliance. 
(F)  Installed AGRDs or technologies shall be maintained in efficient operating condition, which shall mean a condition that consistently produces an effluent in compliance with requirements divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article. Any waste generated by an AGRD shall be properly disposed of in accordance with any applicable local, state or federal regulation. 
(G)  The decision of the director to disapprove the use of AGRDs or technologies shall be final. 
(b)  Cleaning and maintenance. 
(1)  Grease and grit traps shall be maintained in an efficient operating condition at all times. "Efficient operating condition" shall mean a grease or grit trap that fully complies with the provisions of divisions 2, 3, 4 and 5 of this article. 
(2)  Each grease or grit trap pumped shall be fully evacuated unless the grease/grit trap volume is greater than the tank capacity on the vacuum truck in which case the transporter shall arrange for additional transportation capacity so that the trap is fully evacuated within a twenty-four (24) hour period, in accordance with 30 TAC § 312.143. Grease and grit trap cleaning and evacuation shall be completed by a transporter permitted under this article to operate within the city. It is a violation of this article for a user to utilize a non-permitted transporter for cleaning and maintenance. 
(c)  Self-cleaning. 
(1)  Grease trap self-cleaning users must apply for and receive approval from the director annually prior to removing grease from user's own grease trap(s). Applications may be obtained from the director and shall be completed and submitted to the director prior to commencing self cleaning and within thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of a previously approved application. The director may approve an application provided that the application confirms that: 
(A)  The grease trap is no more than fifty (50) gallons in liquid/operating capacity; 
(B)  Proper on-site material disposal methods will be implemented (e.g., absorb liquids into solid form and dispose into trash); 
(C)  Grease trap waste will be placed in a leak proof, sealable container(s) located on the user's premises and in an area for the transporter to pump-out; and 
(D)  Detailed records on these activities will be maintained. 
(2)  Self-cleaners must adhere to all the requirements; procedures and detailed record keeping outlined in their approved application to comply with this division. A maintenance log shall be kept by self cleaning users that indicates, at a minimum, the following information: 
(A)  Date the grease trap was serviced; 
(B)  Name of the person or company servicing the grease trap; 
(C)  Waste disposal method used; 
(D)  Gallons of grease removed and disposed of; 
(E)  Waste oil added to grease trap waste; and 
(F)  Signature of the user after each cleaning that certifies that all grease was removed, disposed of in accordance with this division and an approved application, grease trap was thoroughly cleaned, and that all parts were replaced and are in operable condition. 
(3)  Violations incurred by grease trap self-cleaners will be subject to enforcement action including, without limitation, fines and/or removal from the self-cleaner program. 
(d)  Cleaning/inspection schedules. 
(1)  Grease and grit traps shall be cleaned as often as necessary to ensure that sediment and floating materials do not accumulate to impair the efficiency of the grease trap; to ensure the discharge is in compliance with local discharge limits; and to ensure no visible FOG is observed in discharge. 
(2)  Grease traps shall be completely evacuated and inspected a minimum of every ninety (90) days, or more frequently when: 
(A)  Twenty-five (25) percent or more of the wetted height of the grease trap, as measured from the bottom of the device to the invert of the outlet pipe, contains floating materials, sediment, fats, oils or greases; or 
(B)  The discharge exceeds BOD, COD, TSS, FOG, pH, or other pollutant levels established by divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article; or 
(C)  More frequently if there is a history of non-compliance and the user is administratively directed to do so by the director; or 
(D)  Any time the grease trap is found to have garbage, waste or solids exceeding one-half inch (1/2") in diameter, as necessary to prevent clogs, damage and/or overflows in the wastewater system 
(3)  Any user who owns or operates a grease trap may submit to the director a request in writing for an exception to the ninety (90) day pumping frequency and inspection of their grease trap. The director may grant an extension for required cleaning frequency on a case-by-case basis when: 
(A)  The grease trap user has demonstrated the specific grease trap will produce an effluent, based on standard methods, in consistent compliance with established local discharge limits such as COD, BOD, TSS, and FOG, or other parameters as determined by the director without evacuation every ninety (90) days, or 
(B)  Less than twenty-five (25) percent of the wetted height of the grease trap, as measured from the bottom of the device to the invert of the outlet pipe, contains floating materials, sediment, oils or greases after ninety (90) days. 
(4)  In any event, a grease trap shall be fully evacuated, cleaned, and inspected at least once every one hundred-eighty (180) days. 
(5)  Grit traps shall be completely evacuated and inspected at least once every one hundred-eighty (180) days or more frequently, if required by the director, or if necessary to comply with divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5. 
(e)  Alternative treatment. 
(1)  A user commits an offense if the user introduces, or causes, permits, or suffers the introduction of any surfactant, solvent or emulsifier into a grease or grit trap. Surfactants, solvents, and emulsifiers are materials which allow the FOG to pass from the grease or grit trap into the wastewater system, and include but are not limited to, enzymes, soap, diesel, kerosene, terpene, and other solvents. It is an affirmative defense to an enforcement of this prohibition that the use of surfactants or soaps is incidental to, and not in excess of, normal kitchen hygiene operations. 
(2)  Bioremediation media may be used with the director's prior approval if the user has proved to the satisfaction of the director that laboratory testing which is appropriate for the type of grease or grit trap to be used has verified that: 
(A)  The media is a pure live bacterial product which is not inactivated by the use of domestic or commercial disinfectants and detergents, strong alkalis, acids, and/or water temperatures of one hundred-sixty degrees Fahrenheit (160° F) (seventy-one degrees Celsius, 71° C). 
(B)  The use of the media does not reduce the buoyancy of the grease layer in the grease or grit trap and does not increase the potential for FOG to be discharged into the wastewater system. 
(C)  The use of the bioremediation media does not cause foaming in the wastewater system. 
(D)  The FOG, BOD, COD, and TSS discharged to the wastewater system after use of the media does not exceed the FOG, BOD, COD, and TSS levels which would be discharged if the product were not being used and the grease or grit trap was being properly maintained. pH levels must be between 6 and 10. 
(3)  All testing designed to satisfy the criteria set forth in paragraph (2) above shall be scientifically sound and statistically valid. All tests to determine FOG, TSS, BOD, COD, pH, and other pollutant levels shall be determined in accordance with the standard methods by a state certified laboratory. Testing shall be open to inspection by the director, and shall meet the director's approval. 
(f)  Transporter requirements. 
(1)  Compliance. All transporters providing service to generators using the wastewater system shall at all times comply with all local, state and federal requirements including, without limitation, divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article and 30 TAC § 312.141 et seq. 
(2)  Notification. All transporters providing service to generators using the wastewater system shall, upon discovering a structural or mechanical failure in a generator's grease, grit or other pretreatment facility that is or may cause a discharge of prohibited waste, wastewater or substances into the wastewater system, immediately notify the generator and the director by telephone and in writing within five (5) days of the discovery of such failure. 
(3)  Transporter permit. Within ninety (90) days from the effective date of the ordinance from which this subsection is derived, all transporters operating within the municipal boundaries of the city must obtain a permit from the city's water and sewer utilities division. Operating as a transporter without a permit issued by the city is a violation of this article. Permits shall be valid for a term of one (1) year from the date of issuance and must be renewed annually. The content of a permit application shall contain, at a minimum, the transporter's TCEQ registration number, the types of liquid waste proposed to be transported, a disposal site identification list, a driver and vehicle identification list, proof of liability insurance for all vehicles utilized to transport liquid waste, and an executed acknowledgement by an authorized representative confirming an understanding and consent to all applicable provision of this article. 
(4)  Permit revocation. If a transporter fails to comply with this article or applicable state law, the city may, upon ten (10) days written notice, revoke a permit issued under this article for a period of one (1) year. Permit revocation under this subsection may be appealed in accordance with division 5 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-009, § III, 3-30-10; Ord. No. 14-012, 2-25-14)  
Sec. 30-78. - Manifest and record-keeping requirements. 
(a)  Each pump-out of a grease or grit trap must be accompanied by a manifest to be used for record keeping purposes. 
(b)  Persons who generate, collect and transport grease or grit trap waste (referred to as "waste" in this section) shall maintain a record of each individual collection and deposit. Such records shall be in the form of a manifest obtained from the city. The manifest shall include: 
(1)  Name, address, telephone, and TCEQ registration number of transporter; 
(2)  Name, signature, address, and phone number of the user who generated the waste and the date collected; 
(3)  Type and amount(s) of waste collected or transported; 
(4)  Name and signature(s) of responsible person(s) collecting, transporting, and depositing the waste; 
(5)  Date and place where the waste was deposited; 
(6)  Identification (permit or site registration number, location and operator) of the facility where the waste was deposited; 
(7)  Name and signature of facility on-site representative acknowledging receipt of the waste and the amount of waste received; 
(8)  The volume of the waste received; and 
(9)  A consecutive numerical tracking number to assist transporters, generators, and the city in tracking the volume of waste transported. 
(c)  Manifests shall be divided into five (5) parts and records shall be maintained as follows: 
(1)  One part of the manifest shall have the generator and transporter information completed and be given to the generator at the time of waste pickup; 
(2)  The remaining four (4) parts of the manifest shall have all required information completely filled out and signed by the appropriate party before distribution of the manifest; 
(3)  One part of the manifest shall go to the receiving facility; 
(4)  One part shall go to the transporter, who shall retain a copy of all manifests showing the collection and disposition of waste; 
(5)  One copy of the manifest shall be returned by the transporter to the generator within fifteen (15) days after the waste is received at the disposal or processing facility; and 
(6)  One completed part of the manifest shall be provided by the transporter to the director within fifteen (15) days after the waste is received at the disposal or processing facility. 
(d)  Copies of manifests returned to the generator and retained by a transporter shall be retained for at least three (3) years and be readily available for review by the director upon request. 
(Ord. No. 10-009, § III, 3-30-10; Ord. No. 14-012, 2-25-14)  
DIVISION 4. - PRETREATMENT PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 30-79. - Applicability and requirements. 
(a)  Applicability and requirements. If discharges or proposed discharges to the wastewater system may deleteriously affect the wastewater system, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, create a hazard to life or health, create a public nuisance, or constitute a violation of divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article the director shall require one or more of the following: 
(1)  Pretreatment of the discharge to an acceptable condition prior to introducing the discharge to the wastewater system; 
(2)  Control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
(3)  Payment of a surcharge, if appropriate, to cover the cost of handling and treating waste and wastewater that is not considered normal domestic wastewater. 
(b)  In accordance with divisions 2, 3, 4 and 5 of this article, the director shall determine whether a discharge or proposed discharge is included under subsection (a) above. 
(c)  The director shall reject discharges when: 
(1)  The director determines that a discharge or proposed discharge is prohibited by divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article; and 
(2)  The user does not meet the requirements provided in divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article. 
(d)  Pretreatment facilities; when required. 
(1)  Pretreatment facilities are required at the user's expense prior to the discharge into the wastewater system by any categorical or significant industrial user if any wastes, wastewaters or substances discharged by the user: 
(A)  Have a five-day BOD, greater than 250 mg/l; or 
(B)  Contain more than 300 mg/l of TSS; or 
(C)  Contain any quantity of substances having the characteristics or exceeding the limitations described in division 2, section 30-73 of this article; or 
(2)  If a user is not classified as a categorical or significant industrial user and, therefore, is not required to obtain a wastewater system use permit under section 30-80 below, the user may still be required to adopt certain pretreatment practices and procedures, such as BMPs, prior to discharge into the wastewater system. Such user may also be subject to applicable surcharges provided under this division 
(3)  In lieu of, or in conjunction with pretreatment facilities or BMPs, the director may approve a discharge with the payment of fees, or surcharge, to cover the costs to treat and handle the discharge. The director may also assess extra charges, or surcharges, for exceeding BOD/COD and/or TSS levels in lieu of considering the exceedences to be violations. If the proposed discharge of pollutants will cause interference, pass through or otherwise violate the terms of the city's contract with BCWCID#1, or the laws of the state, payment of a surcharge as an alternative to compliance with discharge standards shall not be allowed or authorized. 
(e)  Pretreatment facilities; approval of plans, specifications required. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed pretreatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the director, and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until such approval is obtained in writing. The director may require that users separate industrial waste or wastewater from normal domestic wastewater until such industrial waste or wastewater has passed through a control point or other monitoring facilities. 
(f)  Pretreatment facilities—Operation. Where pretreatment facilities are provided for any waste, wastewater or other substances, such facilities shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the user at the user's expense. 
(g)  Bypass of pretreatment facilities. 
(1)  Bypass is prohibited and enforcement action may be taken against the user unless the following three (3) conditions are met: 
(A)  The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage or no feasible alternatives existed. As used in this paragraph, severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities that causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources that can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production; 
(B)  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass that occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and 
(C)  The user submits the notices required by this section. 
(2)  The user may allow bypass to occur which does not cause effluent limitations to be exceeded, but only if it is also for essential maintenance to assure efficient operations. 
(3)  Notification of bypass. 
(A)  Anticipated bypass. If the user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior written notice to the director, at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass. 
(B)  Unanticipated bypass. The user shall immediately orally notify the director and submit a written notice to the director within five (5) days of the start of the bypass. Both notices shall specify: 
(i)  A description of the bypass and its cause, including its duration (including the time, volume, and location of the bypass, and the type and concentration of waste, wastewater and substances in the bypass); 
(ii)  Whether the bypass has been corrected; and 
(iii)  The steps being taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent a reoccurrence of the bypass. 
(h)  Surcharge calculation and assessment. Users may be assessed a surcharge for discharges that contain concentrations of TSS and/or BOD/COD higher than that found in normal domestic wastewater in accordance with this division. A user may also be assessed a surcharge that represents the city's cost of pretreating any other type of pollutant prohibited by divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5.** The surcharge shall be in addition to any other wastewater service charge, non-compliant sampling charge or other charge required by other city ordinances and shall be listed as a separate line item on the user's monthly utility bill. Written notice of the assessment of a surcharge shall be given by the director prior to imposition of surcharge. 
(1)  Finding. The city hereby finds that the introduction of nondomestic wastewater, waste, pollutants or substances regulated or prohibited by divisions 2, 3, 4 and 5 of this article, state or federal law, into the wastewater system is damaging to the system and/or results in increased cost of operating and maintaining the system to varying degrees based on the volume, type, character and quality of such wastewater, waste, pollutants or substances, the techniques required to adequately pretreat the same, the increased costs of operating and maintaining the wastewater system to comply with state and federal law and other costs directly attributable to providing waste disposal service. Surcharges assessed in conformance with the provisions of this subsection (h) are necessary to cover this increased cost. 
State Law reference— V.T.C.A., Water Code § 26.176 et seq. 
(2)  Application: TSS/BOD/COD. A user shall be subject to a surcharge for TSS and BOD/COD when its discharge: 
(i)  Exceeds a TSS concentration of three hundred (300) mg/l; and/or 
(ii)  Exceeds a BOD concentration of two hundred-fifty (250) mg/l; or 
(iii)  Exceeds a COD concentration of four hundred-fifty (450) mg/l. 
(3)  Computation of Surcharge. The city may sample for TSS, BOD, and COD, as necessary. Computations of surcharges shall be based on the formulas below and for those concentrations that exceed the levels set forth in subsection (h)(2) of this section, the surcharge shall be applied to that excess. The surcharges for individual TSS and BOD/COD are additive. 
(i)  BOD surcharge/S = V x 8.34 (A[BOD - 250])
(ii)  TSS surcharge/S = V x 8.34 (B[TSS - 300])
(iii)  COD surcharge/S = V x 8.34 (C[COD - 450])
where: 
S = Sum of surcharges in dollars that will appear on the user's monthly bill. 
V = Monthly average volume of user's discharge in millions of gallons whichever is the least of the following volumes: (1) total monthly water consumption during the billing period, (2) the average water consumption for the billing periods of December, January, and February of each fiscal year, or; (3) the total estimated or measured user's discharge as determined by methods specified in the user's wastewater system use permit. 
8.34 = Conversion factor for units of measure in surcharge equations. 
A = $0.3825 per pound of BOD 
B = $0.240 per pound of TSS 
C = $0.1913 per pound of COD 
BOD = BOD concentration in mg/l. For more than one user discharge, this shall be the flow- weighted concentration. 
TSS = TSS concentration mg/l. For more than one user discharge, this shall be the flow- weighted concentration. 
COD = COD concentration in mg/L. For more than one user discharge, this shall be the flow- weighted concentration. 
250 mg/l = Normal daily domestic wastewater average BOD concentration in mg/l. 
300 mg/l = Normal daily domestic wastewater average TSS concentration in mg/l. 
450 mg/l = Normal daily domestic wastewater average COD in mg/l. 
(4)  Sampling and analysis. The city shall sample for TSS, BOD, and/or COD, as necessary. The time of sampling shall be at the sole discretion of the director. The director may select an independent contractor and/or laboratory to conduct the sampling and/or analyses. 
(5)  Period of surcharge. If analyses for TSS, BOD and/or COD indicate that a surcharge is applicable, the surcharge shall be applied to a user's monthly utility bill for a period of twelve (12) months. Prior to expiration of the period, new analyses shall be conducted to establish whether the surcharge continues to be applicable to a user and, if so, what level of surcharge will be assessed for the following twelve (12) months. Notwithstanding the standard twelve (12) month period, a user may request during this time period, at the user's expense, that a maximum of one (1) additional sample be analyzed for purposes of establishing and assessing a surcharge for the remainder of the time period, if any. However, the city reserves the right to reassess and reestablish the amount of the surcharge at any time. 
(6)  Costs of analyses. The cost of sampling and analyses shall be assessed in accordance with division 2, subsection 30-74(h) of this article. 
(7)  Contested charges. 
(A)  A user may contest a charge within thirty (30) days of the date of the director's notification that a surcharge will be assessed or revised as a result of a reassessment. A user must submit any contest in writing and the contest must provide sufficient evidence to contradict the findings of the facts leading to the assessment or reassessment of the surcharge, as determined by the director's notice. Any evidence submitted involving sampling of a user's effluent must be in accordance with the standard methods. Test results, from a state-certified laboratory including chain of custody documentation must be submitted with any contest. The director, after considering the evidence submitted, shall issue a written determination to the user granting or denying the contest within ten (10) days of receipt of such contest. 
(B)  Appeal. Within ten (10) days from the date of the director's written determination the user may, in writing, appeal the determination to the city manager. The city manager shall issue a written determination to the user within ten (10) days' receipt of the appeal. The city manager's determination shall be final. 
(C)  Credit. The assessment or reassessment of a surcharge shall not be stayed in the case of a contest; however, if the director or the city manager determine that the amount of the surcharge was unwarranted, any surcharge amount paid by the user in excess of what the surcharge amount should have been shall be refunded as a credit on the user's utility bill. 
** Surcharges for pollutants or substances other than TSS, BOD and COD may be imposed on a user that discharges pollutants or substances in excess of the levels established by divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article, state or federal law at a rate that represents the city's cost of adequately pretreating the specific pollutant or substance, in accordance with this subsection (h). 
(Ord. No. 10-009, § IV, 3-30-10; Ord. No. 14-012, 2-25-14)  
Sec. 30-80. - Wastewater system use permit. 
(a)  Required. All categorical (including new sources) and/or significant industrial users proposing to connect to or to discharge to the wastewater system shall obtain a wastewater system use permit before connecting or contributing to the wastewater system. Users that are not classified as categorical or significant industrial users, as those terms are defined in division 2 of this article, shall not be required to obtain a wastewater system use permit. All existing sources shall obtain a wastewater system user permit within ninety (90) days of the date of written notice from the director. 
(b)  Application. 
(1)  Users required to obtain a wastewater system use permit shall complete and file an application with the director on a form to be obtained from the director and signed by an authorized representative of the user. Proposed new categorical (including new sources) or significant industrial users shall apply for a wastewater system use permit at least ninety (90) days prior to connecting to or contributing to the wastewater system. 
(2)  The director will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the director may issue a wastewater system use permit subject to terms and conditions provided in divisions 2, 3, 4 and 5 of this article. 
(3)  If the user applying for a permit is located beyond the city limits, that user may be required to enter into a contract with the city prior to the issuance of the permit which requires the user to subject itself to and abide by divisions 2, 3, 4 and 5 of this article, including all permitting, compliance monitoring, reporting, and enforcement provisions contained herein. 
(c)  Modifications. Within nine (9) months, or sooner if required by the regulating agency, of the promulgation of a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, the wastewater system use permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user, subject to a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, has not previously submitted an application for a wastewater system use permit as required by this section, the user shall apply for a wastewater system use permit within ninety (90) days after the promulgation of the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standard. In addition, the user with an existing wastewater system use permit shall submit to the city within ninety (90) days after the promulgation of an applicable Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard the information required by this division. 
(d)  Conditions. 
(1)  Wastewater system use permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of divisions 2, 3, 4 and 5 of this article and all other applicable regulations, user charges, and fees established by the city. Permits shall contain the following: 
(A)  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the waste, wastewater, or substances to be discharged into the wastewater system; 
(B)  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(C)  Limits on the average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization; 
(D)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities; 
(E)  Specifications for monitoring programs which may include: pollutants to be monitored, sampling locations, sampling frequency, number of samples, sampling types, standards for tests, and reporting schedule; 
(F)  Compliance schedules; 
(G)  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports; 
(H)  Requirement for an authorized representative to meet the signatory and certification requirements for all applications and industrial user reports and certifications that pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis; 
(I)  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the director and affording the director access thereto; 
(J)  Requirements for notification of the director of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater system; 
(K)  Statement that the city may make any permit amendment deemed necessary by the city if there is new introduction into the wastewater system of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater system; 
(L)  Requirements for notification of slug discharges, notification of any wastewater system use permit violations, and requirements for re-sampling and reporting; 
(M)  Statement of duration (in no case more than five (5) years); 
(N)  Statement of non-transferability without, at a minimum, prior notification to the city, provision of a copy of the current permit to the new owner or operator, and written approval of the director; 
(O)  Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements; 
(P)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the director to ensure compliance with divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article. 
(2)  The director may modify a wastewater system use permit for good cause including, without limitation, the following reasons: 
(A)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(B)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of the individual wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(C)  A change in the wastewater system that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(D)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the wastewater system, personnel, the receiving waters, or beneficial sludge or treated wastewater use; 
(E)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater system use permit; 
(F)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater system use permit application or in any required reporting; 
(G)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
(H)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater system use permit; or 
(I)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator where requested in accordance with subsection 30-80(e)(1)(N) of this article. 
(3)  The director may revoke a wastewater system use permit for good cause, including, without limitation, the following reasons: 
(A)  Failure to notify the director of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(B)  Failure to provide prior notification to the director of changed conditions pursuant to subsection 30-80(e)(1)(J); 
(C)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(D)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports and certification statements; 
(E)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(F)  Refusing to allow the director immediate access to the facility premises and records; 
(G)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(H)  Failure to pay fines; 
(I)  Failure to pay wastewater service charges, sampling/testing charges and/or surcharges; 
(J)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(K)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or 
(L)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater system use permit or divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article. 
(4)  Wastewater system use permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All prior wastewater system use permits issued to a user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater system use permit to that user. 
(e)  Accidental discharge control plan required. Each categorical user required to obtain a wastewater system use permit under division 4 of this article shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article. The director, upon reasonable cause and in writing, may require significant industrial users to adhere to this subsection (e) and subsection (f) of this section. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the director for review, and shall be approved by the director before construction of any new facilities. All existing categorical users, and significant industrial users if required, shall complete such a plan in ninety (90) days from the date of issuance of a wastewater system use permit. An accidental discharge control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch or slug discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the director of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by this divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article; and 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(f)  No categorical user, or significant industrial user if required, who commences discharging into the wastewater system after the effective date of the original ordinance from which this division was derived shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the director. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article. 
(g)  Notification. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the permitted user to immediately telephone and notify the director of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, wastewater and substances, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. A written report concerning the accidental discharge must be submitted within five (5) days to the director and shall include the same. 
(h)  Upset provisions. 
(1)  An industrial user shall submit the following to the city orally within twenty-four (24) hours of actual or constructive knowledge of an upset and in writing within five (5) days: 
(A)  A description of the discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
(B)  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; 
(C)  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(2)  The industrial user shall control production and/or all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards or standards established by divisions 2, 3, 4 and 5 of this article upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails. 
(Ord. No. 10-009, § IV, 3-30-10)  
DIVISION 5. - COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 30-81. - Compliance monitoring. 
(a)  Right of entry; inspection and sampling. The director shall have the right to enter the property of any user discharging into the wastewater system to determine if the user is complying with all requirements of divisions 2, 3, 4 and 5 of this article. A user shall allow the director immediate access to all parts of the property for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and for the performance of any additional duties necessary to ensure compliance with the same. A person shall make available to the director, upon request, any self-inspection reports, monitoring and manifest records, compliance evaluations, and any other records, reports, or other documents related to compliance with divisions 2, 3, 4 and 5 of this article or compliance with any State or Federal regulation governing the same. 
State Law reference— V.T.C.A., Water Code § 26.173. 
(1)  Where a user has security measures in force that require proper identification and clearance before entry into its property, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security personnel or employees so that, upon presentation of official city issued identification, the director shall be permitted to enter immediately upon request. 
(2)  The director shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations related to all discharges regulated by divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article. 
(3)  If the director determines that there is a reasonably probability that a discharge originating from a user's property does not comply with the provisions of divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article, the director may require any user to conduct specified sampling, testing, analysis, and other monitoring of such discharges, and may specify the frequency and parameters of any such activities necessary to ensure compliance with divisions 2, 3, 4 and 5 of this article. The phrase "reasonable probability" shall have the same meaning ascribed to it in division 2, subsection 30-74(b) of this article. All required sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition. All such activities shall be at the user's sole expense. 
(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction that obstructs safe and easy access to the property to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the director and shall not be thereafter replaced. The costs of providing such access shall be borne by the user. 
(b)  Search warrants. If the city is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample a user's property as part of a routine inspection and sampling program established by the director and designed to verify compliance with divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance of a search warrant to gain entry from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 10-009, § V, 3-30-10; Ord. No. 14-012, 2-25-14)  
Sec. 30-82. - Administrative enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Generally. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the director to take any action, including emergency action or any other enforcement action, without first issuing any other type of notice or order provided under this section. Compliance with any notice or order issued hereunder in no way relieves the alleged violator of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of any notice or order. 
(b)  Warning notice. When the director finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article the director may serve upon that person a written warning notice, specifying the particular violation believed to have occurred and requesting that the person immediately comply with the same. 
(c)  Notification of violation (NOV). When the director finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article, the director may serve upon that person a written NOV. Within ten (10) days of the receipt of the NOV the person shall submit an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention of reoccurrence thereof, to include specific required actions and time lines for completion, to the director. If the person denies that any violation occurred and/or contends that no corrective action is necessary, an explanation of the basis of any such denial or contention shall be submitted to the director within the same time period. Receipt of the NOV is presumed to occur five (5) days following the date the NOV is mailed. 
(d)  Consent orders. The director may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar agreements with any person responsible for the noncompliance with any provision in divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article. Such agreements may include compliance schedules detailing specific action(s) to be taken by the person to correct the noncompliance within a stated time period. Agreements entered into under this paragraph shall be judicially enforceable. 
(e)  Compliance orders. When the director finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article, the director may issue an order to the person directing the person to come into compliance with the same in accordance with a compliance schedule. Compliance orders may contain requirements to address the actual or threatened violation and/or a reoccurrence thereof, including additional monitoring requirements and/or requiring the establishment of BMPs designed to eliminate or minimize the amount of pollutants discharged into the wastewater system. The compliance order may also contain requirements directing the user to install, repair, replace and/or maintain pretreatment facilities necessary to comply with divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article or state or federal law. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for any compliance established by state or federal requirements. 
(f)  Stop work orders. When the director finds that any user, including an authorized representative of an industrial user, of a property under construction has violated, continues to violate or threatens to violate any provision of divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article, the director may issue a stop work order which shall be posted at the property and distributed to all city departments and divisions whose decisions affect any continuing construction activity at the property. Unless express written exception is made by the director, the stop work order shall prohibit any further construction activity at the property and shall bar any further inspection or approval by the city associated with a building permit, grading permit, plat approval, site development plan approval, or any other city approval necessary to commence or continue construction or to assume occupancy at the property. 
(g)  Emergency orders. When the director finds that any user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article, or that the user's past violation(s) are likely to reoccur, and that the user's violation(s) has caused or may cause a discharge to the wastewater system which reasonably appears to present an imminent or substantial threat to the health, safety or welfare of persons or to the environment including, without limitation, a discharge that will adversely affect the wastewater system, the director may issue an order to the person directing such person to immediately cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article; and 
(2)  Take such appropriate preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including immediately halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
Any user issued an emergency order shall immediately comply with the provisions of such order. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply with the emergency order, the director may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize harm to the wastewater system or the personnel operating the same including immediate termination of municipal utility services to the property, seeking injunctive relief and/or any other remedies provided by divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article or by state or federal law. The director may authorize the reconnection of municipal utility services, at the user's sole expense, and may authorize the user to recommence discharging into the wastewater system when it has been demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director that the user's discharges are in full compliance with divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article and that the violation(s) will not reoccur. An emergency order issued under this section shall also require a user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting an imminent or substantial threat to the health, safety or welfare of persons or the environment to submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the director within ten (10) days of the receipt of the emergency order. Receipt is presumed to occur five (5) days following the date the notice is mailed. 
(h)  Termination of utility services. 
(1)  Cause. The city reserves the right to disconnect a user's utility services when a user's discharge reasonably appears to have, or threatens to: 
(i)  Damage or cause interference with the wastewater system or cause pass through; 
(ii)  Cause the city to be noncompliant with its agreement with BCWCID#1, state or federal law, or cause BCWCID#1 to be noncompliant with the terms of its TPDES permit, state or federal law; or 
(iii)  Violate any regulations of divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article, or state or federal regulations. 
(2)  Notification. The director shall attempt to give oral or written notice to a user prior to disconnection. 
(3)  Reconnection. The user's utility services shall remain disconnected until such time as the user has provided evidence sufficient to the director that the cause of previous violations has been eliminated and is unlikely to recur. Reconnection charges shall apply and shall be at the sole expense of the user. 
(4)  Liability. The city shall not be liable for any damage resulting from disconnection of utility services for any reason. 
(Ord. No. 10-009, § V, 3-30-10)  
Sec. 30-83. - Right to reconsideration and appeal. 
(a)  Reconsideration. 
(1)  Any person subject to a permit revocation, compliance order, stop work order or an emergency order issued pursuant to this division may petition the director to reconsider the basis for the director's order within ten (10) days of the affected person's receipt of such order. Notice is presumed to occur five (5) days following the date the notice is mailed. 
(2)  Failure to submit a timely written petition for reconsideration shall be deemed to be a waiver of any further right to administrative reconsideration or review of the order. 
(3)  In its petition, the petitioning party must indicate the provisions of the order objected to, the reasons for the objection(s), any facts that are contested, the facts that support the petitioner's view of the facts, and any alternative terms of any order that the petitioner would accept. 
(4)  The effect of any compliance order shall be stayed upon the director's receipt of the petition pending the director's reconsideration of the petition unless the director expressly makes a written determination to the contrary. The effectiveness of any permit revocation, stop work order or emergency order shall not be stayed pending the director's reconsideration unless the director expressly makes a written determination staying such order. 
(5)  Within ten (10) days of receipt of a petition for reconsideration, the director shall either: 
(a)  grant the petition and withdraw or modify the order accordingly; or 
(b)  deny the petition and provide a written explanation detailing the reasons for the denial. The director's determination shall be personally served upon the petitioner, or his agent, or mailed, certified, return receipt requested, to the petitioner. 
(6)  Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the director to take any other enforcement action or prevent existing or further enforcement action from proceeding without first making the determination contemplated by this section. 
(b)  Appeal. 
(1)  Any person whose petition for reconsideration by the director has not been granted in its entirety and who remains adversely affected by the director's order may appeal the action of the director to the city manager by filing a written appeal with the city secretary within ten (10) days of receipt of the director's decision. Receipt is presumed to occur five (5) days following the date the determination is mailed. 
(2)  Failure to submit a timely written appeal, in accordance with subsection (b)(1) of this section, to the city manager shall be deemed to be a waiver of further administrative review. 
(3)  In its written appeal to the city manager, the appealing party shall indicate the particular provisions of the order objected to, the particular determinations of the director that are contested, the reasons that the director's order and/or determinations are contested, and any alternative order that the appealing party would accept. 
(4)  The effect of the director's order, as issued or modified, shall not be stayed pending the appeal to the city manager, unless the city manager expressly makes a written determination staying the order. 
(5)  Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a written appeal to the city manager, the city manager shall consider the appeal and make a final written determination to the appellant. Such determination shall be personally served upon the appellant, or his agent, or mailed, certified, return receipt requested, to the appellant. 
(6)  Following final determination by the city manager on the appeal, any adversely affected party may challenge such determination by the city manager in an appropriate court of competent jurisdiction. 
(7)  Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the director to take any other enforcement action or prevent existing or further enforcement action from proceeding unless the same is expressly stayed by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 10-009, § V, 3-30-10; Ord. No. 14-012, 2-25-14)  
Sec. 30-84. - Judicial enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Civil remedies. Whenever it appears that a person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article relating to point source effluent limitations or the discharge of a pollutant, other than from a non-point source, into the wastewater system, the city may petition the Bell County District Court for injunctive relief and/or civil penalties not to exceed $5,000 per day. 
State Law reference— V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 54.012 and 54.017. 
(b)  Injunction. Upon a showing of substantial danger of injury or an adverse health impact to any person or to the property of any person other than the user, owner or operator, the city may obtain a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, against the user, owner or the operator of a premises that: 
(1)  prohibits specific conduct that violates divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article; and 
(2)  requires specific conduct that is necessary for compliance with any provision of divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article. 
State Law reference— V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.016. 
(c)  Criminal penalties. 
(1)  Penalty. A person who violates, or causes or permits the violation of, any provision of divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article, including knowingly making any false statement, representation, or certification in any application, record, report, plan, petition, appeal or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article, or any order issued hereunder, or who has falsified, tampered with, or knowingly rendered inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article, commits a Class C misdemeanor which shall be punishable under section 1-8 of this Code. A fine not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) may be imposed for violation of the provisions of divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article that govern fire safety or public health and sanitation. With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. Proof of a culpable mental state, unless otherwise stated in divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article, is not required for conviction of an offense under divisions 2, 3, 4 or 5 of this article. 
(2)  Considerations. In determining the amount of any fine imposed hereunder, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the violation, corrective actions by the violator, the compliance history of the violator, the violator's knowledge, intent and/or negligence, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(d)  Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this division are not exclusive of any other remedies that the city may have under state or federal law or other city ordinances including, without limitation, other civil actions provided under the Texas Water Code. The city may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a violator. The city is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any violator and these actions may be taken concurrently. 
(Ord. No. 10-009, § V, 3-30-10)  
Secs. 30-85—30-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RATES AND CHARGES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 30-101. - Classes of customers. 
Water and sewer customers are classified as follows: 
(1)  Code (A1) residential. Single-family homes and duplexes where each unit has its own water meter; inside city limits. 
(2)  Code (A2) commercial. All business not manufacturing a product, mainly engaged in retail trade, and not otherwise classified; inside city limits. 
(3)  Code (A3) apartments. Five (5) or more living units served by a single meter or combination of meters in a circulating effect. Each meter to be billed individually; inside city limits. 
(4)  Code (A4) mobile home parks. Mobile homes grouped in a park; inside city limits. 
(5)  Code (A5) apartments. Four (4) or less units served by a single meter; inside the city limits. 
(6)  Code (A6) West Bell water supply. Contracts with the City of Killeen, to purchase water, for resale outside the city limits. 
(7)  Code (A7) fireplug (city-owned). To be used inside the city limits only. 
(8)  Code (A8) outside city commercial. All businesses not manufacturing a product, mainly engaged in retail trade or wholesale trade not otherwise classified; outside the city limits. 
(9)  Code (A9) industrial. Manufacturing products mainly for wholesale trade but possible retail. 
(10)  Code (A0) outside city residential. Single-family homes, duplexes, trailer homes, etc., where each unit has its own meter; outside city limits. 
(Code 1963, ch. 14, art. 1, § 17(IV); Ord. No. 90-81, § I, 9-18-90)  
Sec. 30-102. - Tap and water meter charges to be paid by applicant. 
(a)  When tap and water meter charges are due. The water meter and tap charges shall be paid by the applicant at the time the application is made for a building or finish out permit, whichever occurs first. In addition to the water meter and tap charges, the meter deposit shall be required before a certificate of occupancy is issued. However, no application for water meter installation and/or taps shall be accepted until construction plans have been approved by the department of public works. 
(b)  How water meter and tap charges are assessed. Water meter and tap charges shall be assessed per connection, based upon the following classifications: 
(1)  Residence: one (1) connection. 
(2)  Multifamily: one (1) connection for each living unit. 
(3)  Commercial: one (1) connection for each certificate of occupancy issued or meter, whichever is greater. 
(4)  Industrial: as authorized by the city council. 
(5)  Mobile home park and manufactured home subdivisions: one (1) connection for each one (1) living unit. 
(c)  Irrigation meters. Regardless of the connection classification, irrigation meters are subject only to water meter fee charges. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 14, art. 1, § 4(A) [Ord. No. 86-31, § 3, 5-13-86; Ord. No. 86-64, §§ 1,2, 9-9-86; Ord. No. 86-76, § 1, 9-23-86]; Ord. No. 96-16, § I, 3-12-96; Ord. No. 96-37, § I, 5-14-96; Ord. No. 97-13, § I, 2-11-97; Ord. No. 16-064 , § 1, 12-13-16)  
Sec. 30-103. - Base charges for water meter, water tap. and sewer taps. 
(a)  (1)  The base charges shall be made for water meter, water tap and sewer taps as provided in the adopted fee schedule. 
(2)  Water meter and tap charge when city installs water service line. meter, and box in an established subdivision shall be as provided in the adopted fee schedule. 
(3)  The minimum size meter installation shall be three-quarters-inch service and three-quarters-inch by five-eighths-inch meter. All meter installation applications for meter and service larger than one (1) inch shall be sized by the water department. City will not install water lines or meters larger than two (2) inches. Applications for meters larger than one (1) inch shall be accompanied by information indicating fixtures by number and type to be serviced through each meter for proper meter sizing calculations. 
(4)  All sewer base tap charges shall be three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00). 
(5)  Base tap charges for industrial establishments shall be determined by resolution of the city council. 
(6)  All applicants for water and sewer service located outside the city limits shall pay double the water meter and tap charges applicable within the city. 
(b)  Repealed by Ord. No. 97-13, § II, 2-11-97. 
(c)  In addition to tap charges, a meter deposit shall be required before certificate of occupancy. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 14, art. 1, § 4(B) [Ord. No. 86-31, § 3, 5-13-86; Ord. No. 86-64, §§ 1,2, 9-9-86; Ord. No. 86-76, § 1, 9-23-86]; Ord. No. 93-77, § I, 9-14-93; Ord. No. 96-16, § I, 3-12-96; Ord. No. 04-71, § I, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 16-064 , § 1, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 19-047 , § XIV, 9-17-19)  
Sec. 30-104. - Water and sewer extension fund. 
Editor's note— Repealed by Ord. No. 97-58, § II, 10-28-97.  
Sec. 30-105. - Deposit for water meters. 
(a)  Charges shall be made for water meter deposits as provided in the adopted fee schedule. 
(b)  Any deposits that are not claimed within two (2) years after the final disconnection of water shall be handled in a manner consistent with state law for unclaimed monies. 
(c)  All residential customers who maintain their utility account without incurring a penalty for late payment for a period of twelve (12) months shall receive a refund of their deposit. Such refund shall be credited to the customer's utility account. If the customer incurs more than one (1) late charge during any subsequent twelve-month period, a deposit in the amount of the water meter deposit charge in effect at the time the penalty is incurred will be billed to the customer's account. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 14, art. 1, § 16; Ord. No. 88-53, § I, 6-28-88; Ord. No. 98-45; § I, 6-23-98; Ord. No. 00-67, § I, 8-29-00; Ord. No. 04-08, § I, 2-24-04; Ord. No. 19-047 , § XIV, 9-17-19)  
Sec. 30-106. - Miscellaneous charges. 
Charges shall be imposed for services and miscellaneous items as provided in the adopted fee schedule. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 14, art. 1, § 17; Ord. No. 89-44, §§ IV, V, 6-13- 89; Ord. No. 90-81, § I, 9-18-90; Ord. No. 00-67, § II, 8-29-00; Ord. No. 04-71, § I, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 10-009, § VI, 3-30-10; Ord. No. 10-047, § I, 9-14-10; Ord. No. 14-012, 2-25-14; Ord. No. 15-043 , § V, 9-8-15; Ord. No. 19-047 , § XIV, 9-17-19)  
Sec. 30-107. - Payment for water, sewer, and garbage; delinquency. 
(a)  Due date. All bills for water, sewer, and garbage shall be due and payable on or before fifteen (15) days from the billing date specified on the bill. Failure to receive such bill shall not excuse the customer's failure to pay the same before it becomes delinquent. Failure to pay for water, sewer, or garbage when due shall forfeit the right of the customer to use water and have garbage collection, and water and garbage service shall be cut off. Water and garbage service shall not be recontinued until all bills and fees are paid. 
(b)  Delinquent accounts. All unpaid bills for water, sewer and garbage shall become delinquent at the end of the fifteenth business day after the billing date specified on the bill, except when the fifteenth day is on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday during which the collection office of the water, sewer and garbage department is closed, in which case such unpaid bill shall become delinquent at the end of the next succeeding business day. 
(c)  Late notice. As soon as practicable after water, sewer and garbage bills become delinquent, a notice to each customer shall be prepared and mailed to such customer at his last known address. A list of such customers shall be retained in the utility collections office as evidence for all purposes. 
(d)  Late penalty. Delinquent accounts at the end of the fifteenth business day after the billing date, except when the fifteenth day is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, will be assessed a late penalty as provided in the adopted fee schedule. 
(e)  Disconnection. If any water, sewer or garbage customer fails or refuses to pay water, sewer or garbage bill, together with all other unpaid charges due by him, before the close of the twenty-second day after the same becomes due, all water of such customer shall be disconnected on the twenty-third day after such bill becomes due or as soon thereafter as practicable, except that, when such customer or his family contacts the utilities collection department and has approved a signed written request to extend payment. The utilities collection manager or designee may postpone disconnecting such customer's water service. If such bill and penalties are not paid within such extended time, all water connections of such customer shall be promptly disconnected and a delinquent service fee assessed. A delinquent service fee as provided in the adopted fee schedule will be charged to each and every account remaining unpaid on the twenty-third day after the billing date. If the reconnection or connection of water service is requested to be made, and is made, on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., or between the hours of 5:01 p.m. and 6:59 p.m. Monday through Friday, an additional fee as provided in the adopted fee schedule shall be charged. All deposits, fees, charges and bills for water, sewer and garbage service together with penalties due by such customer shall be paid prior to the connection. 
(f)  The utility collections manager may, upon ascertaining that there have been no late payments received from an account holder within the previous 12-month period, waive the assessment of one (1) late penalty and one (1) delinquent fee. In no instance shall there be more than one (1) late penalty and one (1) delinquent fee waived per account holder during each 12-month period. 
(Code 1963, ch. 14, art. 1, § 3 [Ord. No. 68-20, § 1, 7-22-68; Ord. No. 81-37, § 2, 8-11-81]; Ord. No. 90-81, § I, 9-18-90; Ord. No. 00-67, § III, 8-29-00; Ord. No. 04-71, § I, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 10-047, § I, 9-14-10; Ord. No. 19-047 , § XIV, 9-17-19)  
Secs. 30-108—30-125. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RATES  
Subdivision A. - General Provisions 
 
Sec. 30-126. - Manner of collection of rates. 
The charges fixed in this division for water and sewer service shall be entered by the finance director and/or designee in their respective amounts as charges against each such person, owner, occupant or lessee described herein on the water and sewer bill of such person, owner, occupant or lessee and the amount so fixed and charged shall be collected monthly. Should any person, owner, occupant or lessee of any place of abode or of any place of business fail or refuse to pay the charges fixed against him in his place of abode or his place of business when due, the city shall be authorized to cut off and disconnect the water and sewer services to his place of abode or place of business, until such fees shall be paid in full. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 14, art. 1, § 18 [Ord. No. 87-65, § 5, 9-8-87]; Ord. No. 89-69, § V, 9-19-89; Ord. No. 90-81, § II, 9-18-90; Ord. No. 11-082, § I, 9-13-11; Ord. No. 14-066 , § I, 9-9-14)  
Secs. 30-127—30-135. - Reserved.  
Subdivision B. - Water Rates 
 
Sec. 30-136. - Assessed. 
(a)  The following water charges shall apply to all residential users for the consumption of water inside the city limits: 
0 to 2,000 gallons - Meter size: 
5/8" and 3/4" .....$12.70 
1" .....$14.06 
1-1/2" .....$17.47 
2" .....$21.55 
3" .....$31.09 
4" .....$44.74 
6" .....$79.83 
8" .....$119.68 
10" .....$167.40 
Applicable to all meter sizes: 
2,001 to 25,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons .....$3.17 
Over 25,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons .....$3.78 
(b)  The following water charges shall apply to all commercial users for the consumption of water inside the city limits: 
0 to 2,000 gallons - Meter size: 
5/8" and 3/4" .....$13.15 
1" .....$14.60 
1-1/2" .....$18.13 
2" .....$22.38 
3" .....$32.30 
4" .....$46.49 
6" .....$82.98 
8" .....$124.56 
10" .....$174.06 
Applicable to all meter sizes: 
All over 2,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons .....$3.28 
(c)  The following water charges shall apply to all apartment, small apartment, and mobile home park users for the consumption of water inside the city limits: 
0 to 2,000 gallons - Meter size: 
5/8" and 3/4" .....$12.70 
1" .....$14.06 
1-1/2" .....$17.47 
2" .....$21.55 
3" .....$31.09 
4" .....$44.74 
6" .....$79.83 
8" .....$119.68 
10" .....$167.40 
Applicable to all meter sizes: 
All over 2,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons .....$3.17 
(d)  The water rates for all residential users outside the city limits shall be double the water rates for residential users inside the city limits: 
0 to 2,000 gallons - Meter size: 
5/8" and 3/4" .....$25.40 
1" .....$28.12 
1-1/2" .....$34.94 
2" .....$43.10 
3" .....$62.18 
4" .....$89.48 
6" .....$159.66 
8" .....$239.36 
10" .....$334.80 
Applicable to all meter sizes: 
2,001 to 25,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons .....$6.34 
Over 25,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons .....$7.56 
(e)  The water rates for all commercial users outside the city limits shall be double the water rates for commercial users inside the city limits: 
0 to 2,000 gallons - Meter size: 
5/8" and 3/4" .....$26.30 
1" .....$29.20 
1-1/2" .....$36.26 
2" .....$44.76 
3" .....$64.60 
4" .....$92.98 
6" .....$165.96 
8" .....$249.12 
10" .....$348.12 
Applicable to all meter sizes: 
All over 2,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons .....$6.56 
(f)  The water rates for all apartment, small apartment, and mobile home park users outside the city limits shall be double the water rates for apartment, small apartment and mobile home park users inside the city limits: 
0 to 2,000 gallons - Meter size: 
5/8" and 3/4" .....$25.40 
1" .....$28.12 
1-1/2" .....$34.94 
2" .....$43.10 
3" .....$62.18 
4" .....$89.48 
6" .....$159.66 
8" .....$239.36 
10" .....$334.80 
Applicable to all meter sizes: 
All over 2,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons .....$6.34 
(g)  The meter rates for city-owned fireplugs are as follows: 
0 to 2,000 gallons .....$30.03 
All over 2,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons .....$3.28 
(h)  The meter rates for Stonetree Golf Course irrigation shall be equal to the amount charged to the City of Killeen by Bell County Water Control and Improvement District. 
All gallons, per 1,000 gallons .....$0.63 
(Code 1963, Ch. 14, art. 1, § 17(II); Ord. No. 89-69, § IV, 9-19-89; Ord. No. 90-81, § I, 9-18-90; Ord. No. 91-56, § I, 9-17-91; Ord. No. 92-62, § I, 9-8-92; Ord. No. 93-77, § II, 9-14-93; Ord. No. 98-59, § II, 9-15-98; Ord. No. 99-74, § II, 9-14-99; Ord. No. 00-67, § IV, 8-29-00; Ord. No. 01-42, § II, 8-28-01; Ord. No. 03-42, § I, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 04-71, § I, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 06-101, § I, 9-12-06; Ord. No. 09-058, § I, 9-15-09; Ord. No. 10-047, § I, 9-14-10; Ord. No. 11-082, § I, 9-13-11; Ord. No. 14-066 , § I, 9-9-14; Ord. No. 15-043 , § V, 9-8-15)  
Secs. 30-137—30-150. - Reserved.  
Subdivision C. - Sewer Rates 
 
Sec. 30-151. - Rates. 
(a)  The wastewater use rates for all users shall be based on and calculated by the water meter consumption less three thousand (3,000) gallons minimum times the appropriate return flow factor times the cost for each unit of discharge plus the minimum charge shown below for each account category. (Example: Commercial account: Usage 10,000 gallons minus 3,000 gallons = 7,000 gallons: 7,000 gallons x 90% flow factor = 6,300 gallons; 6,300 gallons x 3.80 per 1,000 gallons = $23.95 + $19.15 (minimum charge) = $43.10 (total charge)) 
The wastewater rate shall be per one thousand (1,000) gallons and the minimum monthly fee: 
(1)  Rate for single-family residential. Nineteen dollars and twenty-six cents ($19.26) minimum charge for the first three thousand (3,000) gallons, plus three dollars and eighty cents ($3.80) per one thousand (1,000) gallons thereafter, not to exceed ten thousand (10,000) gallons. 
(2)  Rate for two-family and multifamily (three and four unit) residential. Nineteen dollars and sixty-five cents ($19.65) minimum charge for the first three thousand (3,000) gallons, plus three dollars and eighty cents ($3.80) per one thousand (1,000) gallons in excess of minimum thereafter. 
(3)  Rate for commercial and apartment customers. Nineteen dollars and fifteen cents ($19.15) minimum charge for the first three thousand (3,000) gallons, plus three dollars and eighty cents ($3.80) per one thousand (1,000) gallons in excess of minimum. 
(3)  Rates for motels. Nineteen dollars and fifteen cents ($19.15) minimum charge for the first three thousand (3,000) gallons, plus three dollars and eighty cents ($3.80) per one thousand (1,000) gallons in excess of minimum thereafter. 
(4)  Rate for mobile home parks. Nineteen dollars and sixty-five cents ($19.65) per unit minimum charge for the first three thousand (3,000) gallons per unit, plus three dollars and eighty cents ($3.80) per one thousand (1,000) gallons in excess of minimum, not to exceed ten thousand (10,000) gallons per unit. 
(b)  The following return flow factors will be applied for each class of sewer customer: 
(1)  Residential .....100% 
(2)  Commercial .....90% 
(3)  Outside city residential .....200% 
(4)  Apartments, motels, etc .....90% 
(5)  Laundries and car wash .....90% 
(6)  Industrial .....90% 
(7)  Mobile home parks .....100% 
(8)  Outside city commercial .....180% 
(c)  The return flow in gallons is determined by multiplying the water meter consumption, less three thousand (3,000) gallons minimum, times the return flow factor for each specific classification (i.e., usage 10,000 gallons minus 3,000 gallons minimum = 7,000 gallons; 7,000 gallons x 90% flow factor = 6,300 gallons). 
(1)  Residential. One hundred (100) percent of metered water up to ten thousand (10,000) gallons per month. 
(2)  Commercial. Ninety (90) percent of metered water. 
(3)  Outside city residential. Two hundred (200) percent of metered water up to ten thousand (10,000) gallons per month. 
(4)  Apartments, motels, etc. Ninety (90) percent of metered water. 
(5)  Laundries and car wash. Ninety (90) percent of metered water. 
(6)  Industrial. Ninety (90) percent of metered water. 
(7)  Mobile home parks. One hundred (100) percent of metered water up to ten thousand (10,000) gallons per unit. 
(8)  Outside city commercial. One hundred eighty (180) percent of metered waver. 
(d)  A seventy-five dollar ($75.00) fee will be assessed per call-out if a leak/blockage is determined to be on the private sewer service lateral or portion thereof that is not maintained by the city. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 14, art. 1, § 17(I)(B); Ord. No. 89-69, § II, 9-19-89; Ord. No. 90-81, § I, 9-18-90; Ord. No. 91-56, § II, 9-17-91; Ord. No. 92-62, § II, 9-8-92; Ord. No. 93-77, § III, 9-14-93; Ord. No. 98-59, § III, 9-15-98; Ord. No. 99-74, § III, 9-14-99; Ord. No. 00-67, § V, 8-29-00; Ord. No. 01-42, § III, 8-28-01; Ord. No. 03-42, § II, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 04-71, § I, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 05-73, § I, 9-13-05; Ord. No. 06-101, § I, 9-12-06; Ord. No. 10-047, § I, 9-14-10; Ord. No. 11-082, § I, 9-13-11; Ord. No. 14-066 , § I, 9-9-14; Ord. No. 19-009 , § I, 3-26-19)  
Sec. 30-152. - Proof of discharge. 
Any customer who disagrees with the return flow factors listed in subsection 30-152(b) shall, at his expense, prove the actual discharge or the correct factor. Upon approval of the city manager, the adjusted flow factor will be used to calculate the customer's sewer bill. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 14, art. 1, § 17(C))  
Sec. 30-153. - Discharges from sources other than metered water supply. 
Because some sewer customers may have sources of water other than or in addition to city water, the water meter consumption will not accurately measure the return flow to the sewer. In such cases, meters or measuring devices meeting the approval of the city's director of public works must be installed by the customer on the sources of water not controlled by the city. Such devices must be accessible to the city for monthly reading and checking for proper operation, calibration and proper maintenance by the customer. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 14, art. 1, § 17(D))  
Sec. 30-154. - Charges for users outside city limits. 
All persons connected to and using the sewer systems of the city which are located outside the city limits shall be charged rates to be determined by the city council. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 14, art. 1, § 17(E))  
Sec. 30-155. - Right to connect not guaranteed to users outside city limits. 
No provision of this subdivision shall be construed as giving any person located, living or residing outside the corporate limits of the city the right to tie on or to use the sewer services of the city or the appurtenances thereto. However, the city council may contract with any person for sewer service under such terms and conditions as may appear to the city council to be for the best interest of the city. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 14, art. 1, § 17(F))  
Sec. 30-156. - Charges due date; payments. 
Sewer charges shall be due and payable monthly as water bills are paid to the city water department. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 14, art. 1, § 17(G))  
ARTICLE V. - CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 30-157. - Purposes. 
The purposes of this article are to: 
(a)  Protect the city's potable water system from contamination or pollution by preventing contaminants and pollutants originating from customers' water systems from entering into the city's potable water system that may jeopardize the health, safety and welfare of the customers. 
(b)  Provide for a continuing program of cross-connection control and backflow prevention by requiring the installation of approved backflow prevention assemblies or methods as required by this article, the city plumbing code, the requirements of chapter 290, title 30 of the Texas Administrative Code, and the requirements of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 341, subch. C, all as amended, and requiring the certification and operational testing of all testable backflow prevention assemblies. 
(c)  Comply with the federal Safe Drinking Water Act (title 42, United States Code, chapter 6A, subchapter XII) and state regulations as established by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (title 30, Texas Administrative Code) related to cross-connections and backflow prevention. 
(Ord. No. 08-040, § II, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 30-158. - Applicability. 
This article applies to all connections to the city's potable water system, unless the customer's system is excepted under subsection 30-165(h), both as system protection and as internal protection, and to all installations of backflow prevention assemblies related to the city's potable water system, regardless of whether the connection or assembly is located within the city limits of Killeen or in the city's certificated water service area (30 Texas Admin. Code (TAC) § 290.44(h)(1)). 
(Ord. No. 08-040, § II, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 30-159. - Definitions. 
Air gap separation means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet conveying water or waste to a tank, plumbing fixture, receptor, or other assembly and the flood level rim of the receptacle. 
Approved assembly means a backflow prevention assembly that has been listed approved, manufactured, tested and installed for specific uses in accordance with the standards adopted by the AWWA (Manual M14, latest version) or approved and listed by the University of Southern California Foundation Manual for Cross-Connection Control (latest version) and is otherwise in compliance with this article and the plumbing code. 
Auxiliary water supply means any water supply on or available to a customer's premises from a source other than directly through the city water system. Auxiliary water supplies include all of the following: 
(1)  Water from another public water system. 
(2)  Water from a natural source, such as a well, spring, pond, river or creek. 
(3)  Reclaimed water. 
(4)  Any water supplied by a public water system, including the city water system, that has passed through a point of delivery and is no longer controlled by the city water system. 
AWWA means the American Water Works Association. 
Backflow means the undesirable reversal of flow of water and/or mixtures of water and other liquids, gases, or other substances from a customer's side of the service connection into the city water system. Backflow may occur under either a backpressure or back siphonage condition or as a result of a cross-connection. 
Backflow prevention assembly or assembly means an approved assembly or aggregation of approved assemblies designed to prevent backflow. 
Backpressure means any situation or occurrence where the pressure in a customer's system is higher than in the city water system. 
Back siphonage means an occurrence where the pressure in the city water system becomes less than that of the customer's system due to a vacuum in the city water system causing the flow of water to reverse its flow. 
Building official means the person designated as the building official in the construction code adopted in chapter 8 of this Code. 
Bypass means a connection from the city side of a backflow prevention assembly to the customer side of the assembly for the purpose of diverting the water around the assembly while it is being repaired or replaced. 
Certified backflow prevention assembly tester or certified tester means a person who: (1) holds a current professional certification as a backflow prevention assembly tester as required by 30 Texas Administrative Code § 290.44(h)(4)(A), as amended; and (2) is currently registered with the city director of water and sanitary sewer department. 
Check valve means a valve that seats readily and completely in order to completely cease the flow of water. 
City water system means the entire potable water distribution system of the City of Killeen, including, without limitation, all pipes, facilities, valves, pumps, conduits, tanks, receptacles and fixtures and appurtenances between the water supply source and the point of delivery, used by the city to produce, convey, deliver, measure, treat or store potable water for public consumption or use. 
Contamination means the presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, radiological or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water. Contamination includes both hazardous contaminants and pollutants. 
Cross-connection means any physical connection between the city water system and either another supply of unknown or questionable quality, any source which may contain contaminating or polluting substances, or any source of water treated to a lesser degree in the treatment process, through which backflow may occur. 
Customer means any person or entity that is supplied potable water by or through the city water system and includes an owner, tenant or lessee. 
Customer service inspection means an examination of the customer's system for the purpose of providing or denying water service. This inspection is limited to the identification and prevention of cross-connections, potential contaminant hazards, and illegal lead materials. The customer service inspector has no authority or obligation beyond the scope of the TCEQ's regulations. A customer service inspection is not a plumbing inspection as defined and regulated by the Texas State Board of Plumbing Examiners (TSBPE). 
Customer's system means the entire plumbing system, including all pipes, conduits, tanks, receptacles, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances used to produce, convey, store or utilize potable or non-potable water between the point of delivery and the customer's point of use. 
Director means the director of public works for the City of Killeen or another official as designated by the director. 
Hazardous contaminant means any form of contamination that poses a health hazard with respect to the use of water for drinking or other domestic purposes. 
Health hazard means a cross-connection, potential contamination hazard, or other situation involving any substance that can cause death, illness, spread of disease, or has a high probability of causing such effects if introduced into the potable drinking water supply. 
Non-health hazard means a cross-connection, potential contamination hazard, or other situation involving any substance that generally will not be a health hazard, but will constitute a nuisance, or be aesthetically objectionable, if introduced into the city water system. 
Person means any natural person, entity, corporation, corporate body, partnership, cooperative corporation, association, public or private organization of any character, or political subdivision of the state. 
Plumbing code means the version of the International Plumbing Code or other related provisions in the International Residential Code adopted in chapter 8 of this Code. 
Point of delivery means the point at which water leaves the city water system and enters a customer's system at or near the property line or the edge of an easement. When a water meter is installed on or near the property line or edge of an easement, the point of delivery is the terminal end on the discharge side of the water meter. 
Pollutant means a contaminant that impairs the quality of water in a manner or to a degree that does not create a hazard to public health, but may adversely affect the aesthetic qualities of the water for domestic use. 
Potable water means water that complies with the TCEQ rules for drinking water and other domestic uses. 
Potential contamination hazard means a condition which, by its location, piping or configuration, has a reasonable probability of being used incorrectly, through carelessness, ignorance, or negligence, to create or cause to be created a backflow condition by which contamination can be introduced into the water supply. 
Service connection means the terminal end of a service connection from the city water system. If a meter is installed at the point of delivery, the service connection means the point at which the terminal end on the discharge side of the water meter connects to the customer's system. 
TCEQ means the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality or its predecessor or successor agencies. 
(Ord. No. 08-040, § II, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 30-160. - Conflicts. 
If there is a conflict between any provisions of this article, any other provision of this code or state or federal law including title 30 of the Texas Administrative Code, all as amended, the most restrictive provision shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 08-040, § II, 5-27-08)  
DIVISION 2. - AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITY 
 
Sec. 30-161. - Director of public works. 
(a)  Authority and responsibility. The director, in accordance with this article and title 30, chapter 290 of the Texas Administrative Code, both as amended, is responsible for enforcing the requirements of this article and may establish policies to implement the purposes of this article (30 Texas Admin. Code § 290.44(h)(1)(B)(iii); V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 341, subch. C). 
(b)  Adequate protection determination. To ensure adequate protection in individual cases, the director may assess and determine the degree of hazard to the city's potable water system posed in the case of individual connections, customers or users. When the director determines that a backflow prevention assembly is required for the protection of the city water system, the director will require the customer, at the customer's expense, to properly install an approved assembly at each service connection or hazard point. Notice of such requirement shall be given in accordance with section 30-168 of this article (30 Texas Admin. Code (TAC) § 290.44(h)(1)(B)(iii)). 
(c)  Certified testing required. In accordance with the TCEQ's Rules, the director shall require a certified testing report for all required and testable assemblies where an actual or potential hazard has been determined to exist in accordance with subsection 30-161(d) in the following instances: 
(1)  Prior to providing continuous water service to new construction; 
(2)  On any existing service when the director has reason to believe that cross connections or other unacceptable plumbing practices increase the risk of actual or potential contamination hazards entering into the city water system; 
(3)  After any installation, repair, relocation, alteration, or addition to a customer's system that may affect the system's compliance with this article; and 
(4)  At other times as provided by this article. 
(30 Texas Admin. Code (TAC) § 290.44(h)(4)) 
(d)  Testing by city. City personnel, as directed by the director, may perform periodic tests on assemblies at random locations to ensure that acceptable test standards are being followed by certified testers and randomly select and tag assemblies in a manner that will determine if the assemblies have been tested as required. 
(e)  Authority to compel report production. The director may require from any person the submission of any records relating to the installation, maintenance, repair or testing of backflow prevention assemblies performed in accordance with this article (30 Texas Admin. Code (TAC) § 290.44(h)(1)(B)(ii)). 
(f)  Authority to refuse or terminate service. The director may, upon approval of the city manager, refuse to initiate service or discontinue present service to any customer where the director determines that: (1) an actual or potential sanitary hazard in the customer's system exists; and/or (2) adequate protection against backflow has not been provided or reported in accordance with this article. Notice of terminating service is not required where the actual or potential threat of contamination endangers the health, safety and welfare of the city water system and the customers the system serves (30 Texas Admin. Code (TAC) § 290.46(j)(2)). 
(g)  Authority to revoke certified tester registration. The director may revoke a certified tester's registration in the following cases: 
(1)  Failure to register the serial number or have the gauge tested for accuracy annually; 
(2)  Use of a test gauge that does not meet the manufacturer's calibration standards in preparation of a city backflow test and maintenance report; 
(3)  Two (2) testing or reporting discrepancies within a one-year period, beginning on the date of the first discrepancy, including: 
(i)  False, incomplete, or inaccurate reporting of test completion or certification of a backflow prevention assembly; 
(ii)  Use of inaccurate gauges; 
(iii)  Improper operational certification methods; or, 
(iv)  Failure to comply with subsections 30-163(b) or (d) of this article; 
(4)  Failure to maintain licensure or registration with TCEQ; 
(5)  Failure to comply with subsections 30-163(e) or (f) of this article; or, 
(6)  Conviction of a violation of this article. 
(30 Texas Admin. Code (TAC) § 290.44(h)(4)) 
Revocation under this paragraph is effective upon receipt of written notice from the director sent via certified mail, return receipt requested. Receipt is presumed to occur five (5) calendar days following the date the notice is mailed. Non-receipt of the notice does not affect the validity of a revocation order. Written notice under this paragraph shall provide specific written findings justifying revocation. Registrations for certified tester's that have had a registration revoked shall not be accepted for a period of one (1) year following the effective date of revocation. 
(h)  Appeal of registration revocation. A request for appeal and reconsideration of registration revocation by a certified tester shall be delivered to the city manager within fifteen (15) calendar days of receipt of the revocation notice and shall specifically contest or justify the director's findings as outlined in the revocation notice. The city manager shall have fifteen (15) calendar days to reconsider revocation and shall then issue a written final determination via certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(Ord. No. 08-040, § II, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 30-162. - Responsibilities of customers. 
(a)  Duty. Each customer has a duty to prevent contaminants from entering into the customer's system and the city water system. This duty begins at the point of delivery and includes the customer's entire internal water system. If the director determines that an actual or potential hazard exists in the customer's system, this article, including the requirements to implement an adequate cross-connection control program and/or install a backflow prevention assembly at the service connection and compliance with the applicable testing requirements, shall apply (30 Texas Admin. Code (TAC) § 290.44(h)). 
(b)  Consent to allow access and survey. Each customer, as a condition of receiving water service, consents to allow city personnel access to the customer's property during normal business hours to inspect and survey the customer's system for potential contamination, backflow hazards and cross-connections in accordance with section 30-169. Written consent for access shall be requested by the city prior to conducting an inspection and the property owner shall grant such consent within ten (10) calendar days of receipt of the request for access by the city. If a customer refuses to allow access to city personnel for an inspection or survey in the time frame provided, the director may discontinue or refuse the customer's water service, and/or assume that a high contamination health hazard exists and, therefore, require the highest degree of protection to be used in the customer's system prior to providing water service. If access is denied the director may immediately discontinue water service without further notice and the installation and certification of such required protection shall be required prior to allowing service to the customer. 
(c)  Expense. Each customer, at the customer's expense, shall install, operate, maintain and test approved backflow prevention assemblies as required by this article. 
(d)  Testing requirements. 
(1)  Customer responsibilities. If the director determines that an internal cross-connection program and/or a backflow prevention assembly at the service connection is required, the customer shall: (a) initiate the testing required by this section; (b) have completed any maintenance or installation of backflow assemblies as determined by the test to be necessary; and (c) ensure that an original report is submitted to the director as required by this article (30 Texas Admin. Code (TAC) § 290.44(h)(4)). 
(2)  Initial testing or testing following repair, replacement, alteration or relocation. All required backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested by a certified tester upon installation, repair, alteration or relocation and prior to being placed into service (30 Texas Admin. Code (TAC) §§ 290.44(h)(1)(B) and (4)). 
(3)  Annual testing. All required backflow prevention assemblies which are installed to provide protection against health hazards shall be tested by a certified tester annually following installation, repair or maintenance. (30 Texas Admin. Code (TAC) §§ 290.44(h)(1)(B)(i) and (h)(4)). 
(e)  Installation, repair or maintenance. Each customer, when contracting for the installation, repair or maintenance of backflow prevention assemblies shall employ a person, entity or contractor lawfully permitted to perform such services under state law. A customer must apply for and obtain a permit from the building official before installing, replacing, re-piping or relocating a backflow prevention assembly. 
(f)  Record keeping requirements. Customers shall keep and maintain accurate copies of City of Killeen test and maintenance report forms for all tests and repairs made to backflow prevention assemblies for at least three (3) years from the date of any such act, and shall provide the director with copies of these reports upon written request or as provided for in this article (30 Texas Admin. Code § 290.46(f)(3)(B)(vi). 
(g)  Internal System Inspections - thermal expansion. With the installation of backflow assemblies the potential for creating a "closed-system" occurs. This closed system could result in injury to the water system customer if adequate safety measures, including thermal expansion valves, are not functioning properly. Thermal expansion of heated water may occur wherever potable water is heated in a closed system. This expansion may cause damage ranging from leaking faucets to a ruptured water heater if the condition is not addressed. The city shall not accept any liability resulting from the implementation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 08-040, § II, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 30-163. - Certified backflow prevention assembly testers. 
(a)  Registration of certified testers. Each person qualified to perform services as a certified tester for a city water system customer shall submit a completed city registration form to the director prior to performing any services regulated under this article. Test results or certification of the performance of other services shall not be accepted if the tester is not currently registered with the director. The director shall maintain a current list of registered certified testers, and will make this list available to city water system customers upon request. Registrations will be valid for one (1) year and must be renewed annually. 
(b)  Testing equipment. The certified tester shall furnish the city with the serial number of the tester's test kit, and the tester's test gauge must be tested when purchased and annually thereafter, or more frequently as required by the director, to be in compliance with the University of Southern California's Manual of Cross Connection Control (latest edition) or the American Water Works Association Manual of Cross Connection Control requirements (Manual M14, latest edition). The certified tester must maintain the test gauge within a two (2) percent accuracy deviation and retain test results for three (3) years from the date of any such test. All test results shall be made available to the director upon written request or as provided for by this article (30 Texas Admin. Code (TAC) § 290.44(h)(4)(A) and (B)). 
(c)  Accountability of certified tester. The certified tester is responsible for the competency and accuracy of all tests and reports certifying assemblies to be operating within specifications performed or submitted by the certified tester, and for all work done by any persons under the direction or control of the certified tester. All work performed by a certified tester's assistants must be performed in the tester's presence. Certified testers shall certify that all backflow prevention assemblies comply with the specifications provided in the University of Southern California's Manual of Cross Connection Control (latest edition) or the American Water Works Association Manual of Cross Connection Control requirements (Manual M14, latest edition) and that such assemblies are otherwise in compliance with this article. 
(d)  Reporting and record keeping requirements. A City of Killeen test and maintenance report form must be completed by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester for each assembly tested. The signed and dated original must be submitted to the director for record keeping purposes. Only City of Killeen test and maintenance report forms will be accepted. All test and maintenance reports shall be retained for at least three (3) years from the date of any such test, and shall be made available to the director upon written request or as provided for by this article (30 Texas Admin. Code (TAC) § 290.44(h)(1)(C)). 
(e)  Immediate notification required from a certified tester. If a backflow prevention assembly test fails or an assembly malfunctions and the actual or potential hazard of contamination is not immediately curable through repair or replacement, the certified tester shall notify the director and the customer immediately in person or by telephone. This notification shall also be submitted in writing within five (5) calendar days. If the failure or malfunction of a backflow prevention assembly is not immediately curable through repair or replacement, the director upon notification, shall take all necessary steps, including the immediate cessation of water service through the assembly, to prevent the possible contamination of the city water system. 
(f)  Alteration of backflow assembly. It is a violation of this article for a certified tester to alter the design, material, or operational characteristics of a backflow prevention assembly during testing, repairing or maintaining the assembly without the prior written approval of the director. 
(g)  Qualified. Certified backflow prevention assembly testers are qualified to test and repair assemblies on any domestic, commercial, industrial, or irrigation service. However, certified testers shall only test and repair assemblies on fire lines if they are permanently employed by an approved fire line contractor as required by the State of Texas Fire Marshall's office (30 Texas Admin. Code (TAC) §§ 290.44(h)(1)(A)(i) and (ii)). 
(Ord. No. 08-040, § II, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 30-164. - Backflow assembly installation and maintenance; permit required. 
(a)  Permit and inspection required. Plumbing permits shall be obtained prior to installing, replacing, modifying or relocating existing backflow prevention devices in accordance with chapter 8 of this Code. In addition, plumbing inspections are required to be requested upon completion of the above acts and no inspection shall be requested until the original backflow test results are submitted to the city in accordance with this article. 
(b)  Testing, reporting and record keeping required. When a backflow prevention assembly is installed, replaced, modified or relocated the approved assembly shall be tested prior to being placed into service. The person completing the work in subsection (a) of this section shall submit copies of written reports detailing the work to the customer and original reports to the director on the City of Killeen's test and maintenance report form. The report shall include a list of the materials or replacement parts used. All test, installation and maintenance reports shall be retained for at least three (3) years from the date of any such test, and shall be made available to the director upon written request or as provided for by this article. 
(Ord. No. 08-040, § II, 5-27-08)  
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 30-165. - General requirements. 
(a)  Compliance required. This article, the TCEQ Rules and Regulations for Public Water Systems provided in title 30 of the Texas Administrative Code, the city plumbing code and other applicable state and federal laws, all as amended, will govern the design, construction, operation and maintenance of the city water system with respect to cross-connection control and backflow prevention. Each person shall comply with all applicable provisions of these rules and regulations. 
(b)  Auxiliary and reclaimed water systems. It is unlawful for a person to cause or allow water from an auxiliary water supply or reclaimed water system to enter the city water system. Where a customer is served by an auxiliary water supply or utilizes a reclaimed water system in addition to the city water system, all applicable TCEQ regulations shall be followed, and the director will determine the type of backflow prevention assembly to be used (30 Texas Admin. Code § 290.44(h)(2)). 
(c)  Unlawful connections. It is unlawful for a person to make a connection from the city water system to a customer's system where an actual or potential contamination hazard to the city water system exists and there is no air gap separation between the drinking water supply and the source of potential contamination. Where a containment air gap is impractical and, instead, an individual internal air gap or mechanical backflow prevention assembly is used, a backflow prevention assembly will be required at the service connection in accordance with AWWA Standards on those establishments handling substances deleterious or hazardous to the public health. This requirement does not apply if the customer maintains an adequate internal cross-connection control program that includes an annual inspection by a certified tester (30 Texas Admin. Code §§ 290.44(h)(1)(A) and (B)). 
(d)  Non-potable connections. It is unlawful for a person to make any connection from the city water system to any condensing, cooling or industrial process or any other system of non-potable usage, over which city water system officials do not have sanitary control, in a manner that does not fully comply with the requirements of subsection (c) above. It is unlawful for any person to cause or permit backflow from any such process to be transmitted into the city water system (30 Texas Admin. Code (TAC) § 290.44(h)(2)). 
(e)  Overhead bulk water dispensing stations. Overhead bulk water dispensing stations must be provided with an air gap between the filling outlet hose and the receiving tank to protect against back siphonage and cross-contamination (30 Texas Admin. Code (TAC) § 290.44(h)(3)). 
(f)  Service connections, additional protection. The use of a backflow prevention assembly at a service connection will be considered additional backflow prevention, and does not negate the requirement of backflow prevention on internal hazards as provided by this article or chapter 8 of this code (30 Texas Admin. Code (TAC) § 290.44(h)(5)). 
(g)  Unlawful bypasses. It is unlawful for a person to install, or to cause or permit the installation of, a bypass that has not been approved in advance by the director. All bypasses on backflow prevention assemblies must themselves include provisions for backflow prevention as described in this article. 
(h)  Exception. This article shall not apply at any residence or facility where there is no actual or potential contamination hazard as determined by the director (30 Texas Admin. Code (TAC) § 290.44(h)(6)). 
(Ord. No. 08-040, § II, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 30-166. - Types of backflow prevention required. 
(a)  Generally. Cross-connections vary widely in degree of potential contamination hazards. Backflow may occur under many different pressure differentials, varying from vacuum to very high pressures. The protection afforded by a backflow prevention assembly depends upon its type, the circumstances in which it is installed, and on its proper installation, maintenance and testing. Only approved assemblies shall be used (as defined in section 30-159 of this article). 
(b)  Minimum specific backflow prevention assembly required. Specific backflow prevention assembly requirements for all affected customers and persons shall comply with this Article, TCEQ regulations as provided in title 30, chapter 290 of the Texas Administrative Code and the city's plumbing code, all as amended. In the event that a conflict exists, the most stringent requirement shall control. Only approved assemblies shall be used. The TCEQ table provided below details the types of premises and uses that are commonly subject to compliance with this article, however, notwithstanding this provision or the table below, the director shall retain final approval authority in each individual case. 
Table Insert: (Figure: 30 Texas Admin. Code (TAC) §290.47(I)) 
Assessment of Hazards and Selection of Assemblies 
The following table lists many common hazards. It is not an all-inclusive list of the hazards which may be found connected to public water systems. 
Premises Isolation - Description of Premises 	Assessment
of Hazard 	Required
Assembly 
Aircraft and missile plants 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Animal feedlots 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Automotive plants 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Breweries 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Canneries, packing houses and rendering plants 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Commercial car wash facilities 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Commercial laundries 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Cold storage facilities 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Connection to sewer pipe 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Dairies 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Docks and dockside facilities 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Dye works 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Food and beverage processing plants 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Hospitals, morgues, mortuaries, medical clinics, dental clinics, veterinary clinics, autopsy facilities, sanitariums, and medical labs 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Metal manufacturing, cleaning, processing, and fabrication plants 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Microchip fabrication facilities 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Paper and paper products plants 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Petroleum processing or storage facilities 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Photo and film processing labs 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Plants using radioactive material 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Plating or chemical plants 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Pleasure-boat marinas 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Private/Individual/Unmonitored Wells 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Reclaimed water systems 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Restricted, classified or other closed facilities 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Rubber plants 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Sewage lift stations 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Sewage treatment plants 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Slaughter houses 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Steam plants 	Health 	RPBA or AG 
Tall buildings or elevation differences where the highest outlet is 80 feet or more above the meter 	Nonhealth 	DCVA 
 
Internal Protection - Description of Cross Connection 	Assessment
of Hazard 	Required
Assembly 
Aspirators 	Nonhealth† 	AVB 
Aspirator (medical) 	Health 	AVB or PVB 
Autoclaves 	Health 	RPBA 
Autopsy and mortuary equipment 	Health 	AVB or PVB 
Bedpan washers 	Health 	AVB or PVB 
Connection to industrial fluid systems 	Health 	RPBA 
Connection to plating tanks 	Health 	RPBA 
Connection to salt-water cooling systems 	Health 	RPBA 
Connection to sewer pipe 	Health 	AG 
Cooling towers with chemical additives 	Health 	AG 
Cuspidors 	Health 	AVB or PVB 
Degreasing equipment 	Nonhealth† 	DCVA 
Domestic space-heating boiler 	Nonhealth† 	RPBA 
Dye vats or machines 	Health 	RPBA 
Firefighting system (toxic liquid foam concentrates) 	Health 	RPBA 
Flexible shower heads 	Nonhealth† 	AVB or PVB 
Heating equipment 
 Commercial 
 Domestic 	Nonhealth† 
Nonhealth† 	RPBA 
DCVA 
Hose bibbs 	Nonhealth† 	AVB 
Irrigation systems 
 with chemical additives 
 without chemical additives 	Health 
Nonhealth† 	RPBA 
AVB or PVB 
Kitchen equipment - Commercial 	Nonhealth† 	AVB 
Lab bench equipment 	Health or Nonhealth† 	AVB or PVB 
Ornamental fountains 	Health 	AVB or PVB 
Swimming pools 
 Private 
 Public 	Nonhealth† 
Nonhealth† 	RVB or AG 
RPBA or AG 
Sewage pump 	Health 	AG 
Sewage ejectors 	Health 	AG 
Shampoo basins 	Nonhealth† 	AVB 
Specimen tanks 	Health 	AVB or PVB 
Steam generators 	Nonhealth† 	RPBA 
Steam tables 	Nonhealth† 	AVB 
Sterilizers 	Health 	RPBA 
Tank vats or other vessels containing toxic substances 	Health 	RPBA 
Trap primers 	Health 	AG 
Vending machines 	Nonhealth† 	RPBA or PVB 
Watering troughs 	Health 	AG or PVB 
 
NOTE: AG = air gap; AVB = atmospheric vacuum breaker; DCVA = double check valve backflow prevention assembly; PVB = pressure vacuum breaker; RPBA = reduced-pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. 
*AVBs and PVBs may be used to isolate health hazards under certain conditions, that is, backsiphonage situations. Additional area of premises isolation may be required. 
†Where a greater hazard exists (due to toxicity or other potential health impact) additional area protection with RPBAs is required. 
Uses not listed in this table may require backflow prevention through air gaps or backflow prevention assemblies depending on the nature of the use, the equipment and the plumbing system. These will be determined on an individual basis by the director. 
(c)  Exceptions. A person may request approval from the director for a proposed deviation from or exception to the requirements of this article. Upon request, the director shall conduct a customer service inspection to determine what (if any) hazards are present and shall document what (if any) backflow protection is required and provide the same to the customer. The director may approve a deviation or exception if the deviation or exception does not conflict with applicable law or increase the risk of an actual or potential contamination hazard from entering into the city water system. 
(d)  Criteria for selection of backflow prevention assemblies. The selection of an appropriate backflow prevention assembly depends upon the degree of hazard involved and will be based on the following criteria: 
(1)  whether the assembly could ever be subject to backpressure due to the customer's internal pumping pressures or elevation differentials; 
(2)  the nature of contaminating material under the most critical circumstances; 
(3)  the extent to which additions may be made to the plumbing system at a later date which would affect the initial selection of the assembly; 
(4)  the frequency with which a water supply could be exposed to a hazardous condition; and, 
(5)  the degree of protection of the water supply required, as provided by this article, the local plumbing code and title 30, chapter 290 of the Texas Administrative Code, as enforced by the director. 
(e)  Highly detrimental hazards. Where an actual or potential contamination hazard is determined to be highly detrimental to the general health of the city water system, the director may require a total containment backflow prevention system to provide for backflow prevention assemblies on each internal branch line. The proper backflow protection assembly shall be maintained on each service connection or separation of internal systems. At the point of delivery, an assembly must be installed on each leg or branch (i.e., industrial and domestic). The type of backflow prevention assembly required on each leg or branch shall be in accordance with the highest degree of actual or potential contamination hazard found on the premises. 
(f)  Mobile connections. Any person connecting any part of a vehicle or other container to the city water system shall utilize an air gap method or permanently install an approved backflow prevention assembly on the vehicle or container and shall have the assembly tested in accordance with this article prior to connecting to the city water system. 
(Ord. No. 08-040, § II, 5-27-08)  
DIVISION 4. - PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 30-167. - New facilities. 
(a)  All new facilities, unless excepted from this article under subsection 30-165(h), are required to comply with the requirements of this article. Compliance by a new city water system customer with the requirements for installation of one or more backflow prevention assemblies shall be verified in conjunction with the customer's application for water service or with the customer's building and plumbing permits as provided in section 30-169 of this division. 
(b)  The director may require field inspection of the customer's premises in addition to building plan submittal and review to determine the actual or potential contamination hazards and backflow prevention assembly requirements. 
(c)  All plumbing layouts or building plans submitted to the building inspections division shall be reviewed to assure compliance with the requirements of this article and the plumbing code. All plumbing layouts or plans will be stamped by the building inspections division to indicate that containment backflow prevention may be required. 
(Ord. No. 08-040, § II, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 30-168. - Existing facilities, inspections. 
(a)  Inspection procedure. The director or designated representative may inspect the existing facilities of city water system customers that do not have a record of backflow prevention assembly installation or current annual certified testing report(s) on file in the water and sanitary sewer department and at other times as determined necessary by the director in accordance with this article. The director shall prioritize these inspections based on the severity of the potential health hazard as listed in section 30-166 of this article. After the inspection is completed, the director will provide a written notice to the customer advising of any backflow prevention assembly requirements for the customer's system. 
(b)  Installation and testing required. Upon the receipt of written notice as provided for in paragraph (a) of this section the customer shall have thirty (30) calendar days from the date of receipt of the notice to have the appropriate backflow prevention assemblies installed, replaced or repaired and certification of testing submitted to the director. Notice is presumed to be received five (5) calendar days after the notice is mailed. Upon written request of the customer and for cause, the director may extend this time period if an immediate threat of contamination does not exist for additional time periods, which, when combined, shall not exceed ninety (90) calendar days. 
(c)  Building plan review. Plans submitted to the building inspections department for approval of plumbing modifications, or extensions to an existing plumbing system, may be reviewed by the director to determine the type of backflow prevention method or assembly required. The method and type of assembly required will be noted on the plans. 
(Ord. No. 08-040, § II, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 30-169. - Customer service inspections. 
(a)  A customer service inspection shall be completed prior to providing continuous water service to all new facilities, for any existing facility when the director has reason to believe that potential cross-connections or other contaminant hazards exists, or after any material improvement, correction, or addition to the private distribution facilities that may affect the system's compliance with this article (Texas Admin. Code § 290.46(j)). 
(b)  Only individuals with the following credentials shall be recognized as qualified to conduct a customer service inspection (in accordance with title 30, chapter 290.46(j) of the Texas Administrative Code): 
(1)  Plumbing Inspectors and Water Supply Protection Specialists that have been licensed by the Texas State Board of Plumbing Examiners; or 
(2)  Customer service inspectors who have completed a TCEQ approved course, passed an examination administered by the TCEQ, and hold current professional certification or endorsement as a customer service inspector. 
(c)  The customer service inspection must certify that: 
(1)  No direct connection between the city water system and a potential source of contamination exists and potential sources of contamination are isolated from the city water system by a properly installed air gap or an appropriate backflow prevention assembly; 
(2)  No cross-connection between the city water system and a private water source exists; 
(3)  No connection exists which would allow water to be returned to the city water system; 
(4)  No pipe or pipe fitting containing more than 8% lead has been used for the installation or repair of plumbing at any connection that provides water for human use; and 
(5)  No solder or flux containing more than 0.2% lead has been used for the installation or repair of plumbing at any connection that provides water for human use. A minimum of one lead test shall be performed for each inspection. 
(Ord. No. 08-040, § II, 5-27-08)  
Sec. 30-170. - Penalty and disconnection. 
(a)  A person who violates, or causes or permits the violation of, any provision of this article commits a Class C misdemeanor which shall be punishable under section 1-8 of this Code. A fine not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) may be imposed for violation of provisions in the article that govern fire safety or public health and sanitation. With respect to violations of this code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. Proof of a culpable mental state is not required for conviction of an offense under this article. 
(b)  Failure or refusal on the part of a customer to comply with any provision of this article will constitute grounds for refusing or discontinuing water service. 
(Ord. No. 08-040, § II, 5-27-08)  
Chapter 31 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Airport zoning, § 7-51 et seq.; building and construction regulations, Ch. 8; flood damage prevention, Ch. 12; mobile homes, mobile home parks, etc., Ch. 17; planning and development, Ch. 21; subdivisions and other developments, Ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Zoning, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 31-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Killeen Zoning Ordinance." 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 1)  
Sec. 31-2. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular; the word "building" shall include the word "structure;" the word "shall" is mandatory and not directive; the word "lot" includes the word "plot;" the term "used for" includes the meanings "designed for" or "intended for." Such words and terms are as follows: 
Accessory use or building shall mean a subordinate use or building customarily incident to and located on the same lot occupied by the main use or building. 
All weather surface on privately owned property shall consist of Portland cement concrete or an impervious bituminous surface over a compacted base or other surface approved by the building official. The parking surface must be capable of retaining paint or striping material. 
Alley shall mean a public way which affords only a secondary means of access to property abutting thereon. 
Animal production shall mean the raising and sales of animals or production of animal products produced on site, to include eggs or dairy products, on an agricultural or commercial basis. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, grazing, ranching, dairy farming and poultry farming, and do not include operating feed lots. 
Apartment complex shall mean five (5) or more attached dwelling units on one (1) lot. 
Automotive parts store shall mean an establishment engaged in the retail sales of a variety of parts for vehicles of any kind. 
Boardinghouse or lodginghouse shall mean a building other than a hotel where sleeping rooms are rented to four (4) or more adults for compensation, pursuant to previous arrangements for definite periods of time, but not to the public or transients. 
Building shall mean any structure designed or built for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. 
Building, height of, shall mean the vertical distance from the grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. 
Building line shall mean a line parallel or approximately parallel to the street line and beyond which buildings may not be erected. 
Cemetery shall mean a burial place for deceased humans. 
Child care facility shall mean a facility that furnishes care, training, education, custody, supervision and guidance of a child or group of children, who are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility, for all or part of a twenty-four-hour day. 
Clinic shall mean an establishment where patients, who are not lodged overnight, are admitted for examination and treatment by a group of physicians practicing medicine together. 
Commercial communication tower shall mean a tower built and designed for commercial communication usage including, but not limited to, radio, television and microwave towers. 
Crop production shall mean the raising, harvesting and sales of tree crops, row crops or field crops on an agricultural or commercial basis, produced on site, including, but not limited to, packing and processing. 
Day care center shall mean a child care facility that provides care for more than twelve (12) children under fourteen (14) years of age or less than twenty-four (24) hours a day. It does not include a group day care home or drop-in care center. 
Drop-in care center shall mean a child care facility that provides care for children under fourteen (14) years of age for part of the day. It does not provide regular care for the same child. It does not include a group day care home or day care center. 
Dwelling shall mean any building or portion thereof which is designated for or used for residential purposes. 
Dwelling, multifamily, shall mean a building designed for or occupied exclusively by three (3) or more families. 
Dwelling, single-family, shall mean a building designed for or occupied exclusively by one (1) family. Where a single-family dwelling unit is rented, all adult residents must jointly occupy the entire premises, under a single written lease, for a period of at least thirty (30) consecutive days. 
Dwelling, two-family, shall mean a building designed for or occupied exclusively by two (2) families. 
Family shall mean any number of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit, in which not more than three (3) adults are unrelated by blood, marriage, adoption, or guardianship and occupying a dwelling unit. 
Frontage, block, shall mean all the property on one (1) side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets (crossing or terminating), measured along the line of the street, or if the street is dead-ended, then all of the property abutting on one (1) side between an intersecting street and the dead-end of the street. 
Halfway house shall mean a facility operated under the authority of the Texas Department of Criminal Justice for the Federal Bureau of Prisons for persons on release from more restrictive custodial confinement or initially placed in lieu of such more restrictive custodial confinement, wherein supervision, rehabilitation, and counseling are provided to mainstream residents back into society, enabling them to live independently. 
Hotel shall mean a building in which lodging or boarding and lodging are provided and offered to the public for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms is made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours. As such, it is open to the public and transients in contradistinction to a boardinghouse, a lodginghouse, or an apartment. 
Housekeeping unit shall mean a group of persons jointly occupying a single dwelling unit, including the joint use of and responsibility for common areas, and sharing household activities, responsibilities and expenses. 
Loading space shall mean a space within the main building or on the same lot therewith, providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks, and having a minimum dimension of twelve (12) by thirty-five (35) feet and a vertical clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet. 
Lot shall mean a parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a use permitted in this chapter, including one (1) main building together with its accessory buildings, the open spaces and parking spaces required by this chapter, and having its principal frontage upon a street or upon an officially approved place. 
Lot, depth of, shall mean the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
Lot, width of, shall mean the mean horizontal distance between side lot lines, as measured in a straight line from points at the front building setback line on each side lot line. 
Manufactured housing shall mean a residential housing unit fabricated in an off-site manufacturing facility for installation or assembly at the building site, bearing a label certifying that it is built in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards (see 24 CFR 3280 for legal definition) and Manufactured Housing Standards Act, section 5521f V.A.T.S. 
Motor court or motel shall mean a building or group of buildings used for the temporary residence of motorists or travelers. 
Nonconforming use, building or yard shall mean a use, building or yard, existing legally at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, which does not, by reason of design or use, conform with the regulations of the district in which it is situated. 
Outside storage and display shall mean a primary land use providing for the incidental outdoor storage or display of commodities, materials, goods, equipment, vehicles or merchandise in its normal day-to-day business activities. This definition excludes new and used sale or lease of automobiles, motorcycles recreational vehicles, boats or watercrafts. This definition does not include temporary outside merchandise display, such as a sidewalk sale. 
Parking space, off-street, shall mean an area of not less than one hundred eighty (180) square feet (measuring approximately nine (9) feet by twenty (20) feet) not on a public street or alley, surfaced with an all-weather surface, enclosed or unenclosed. A public street shall not be classified as off-street parking in computing the parking requirements for any use, nor shall head-in parking adjacent to a public street and dependent upon such street for maneuvering space. 
Personal services shall mean an establishment providing services of a personal nature. This classification includes barber and beauty shops, nail and tanning salons, cosmetologists, massage therapists, seamstresses, tailors, shoe repair, dry cleaners (excluding plants), self-service laundries, tattoo parlors as licensed per V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 146, laser tattoo removal, laser hair removal, permanent makeup application, and the like. 
Place shall mean an open, unoccupied space other than a street or alley permanently reserved as the principal means of access to abutting property. 
Planning commission shall mean the planning and zoning commission of the city. 
Private school shall mean a private school, including a parochial school, that offers a course of instruction for students in one (1) or more grades from kindergarten through grade 12, and has more than one hundred (100) students enrolled and attending courses at a single location. 
Sale shall mean sales at both wholesale and retail unless specifically stated otherwise. 
Servants' quarters shall mean an accessory building or portion of a main building located on the same lot as the main building and used as living quarters for servants employed on the premises and not rented or otherwise used as a separate domicile. 
Story shall mean that portion of a building, other than a cellar, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
Story, half, shall mean a partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two (2) opposite exterior walls are not more than four (4) feet above the floor of such story, except that any partial story used for residence purposes, other than by a family occupying the floor immediately below it, shall be deemed a full story. 
Street shall mean a public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
Street line shall mean a dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous street. 
Structural alterations shall mean any change in the supporting members of a structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders. 
Structure shall mean anything constructed or erected, which requires location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground, including but not limited to, buildings of all types, advertising signs, billboards, and poster panels, but exclusive of customary fences or boundary or retaining walls. 
Trailer camp or park shall mean an area designed, arranged or used for the parking or storing of one (1) or more auto trailers which are occupied or intended for occupancy as temporary living quarters by individuals or families. 
Transient shall mean a person who occupies a dwelling unit or sleeping unit for less than thirty (30) consecutive days. 
Yard shall mean an open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of the rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used. 
Yard, front, shall mean a yard extending across the front of a lot between the side lot lines, and being the minimum horizontal distance between the street or place line and the main building or any projections thereof other than the projections of the usual uncovered steps, uncovered balconies, or uncovered porch. On corner lots the front yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension. 
Yard, rear, shall mean a yard extending across the rear of a lot and being the required minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the main building or any projections thereof other than the projections of uncovered steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches. On all lots the rear yard shall be in the rear of the front yard. 
Yard, side, shall mean a yard between the main building and the side line of the lot, and extending from the required front yard to the required rear yard, and being the minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the side of the main buildings or any projections thereto. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, §§ 2, 19; Ord. No. 70-3, 10-28-70; Ord. No. 74-23, § 1, 5-28-74; Ord. No. 76-46. § 1, 8-10-76; Ord. No. 86-23, § 1, 4-22-86; Ord. No. 86-29, §§ 1-3, 5-13-86; Ord. No. 86-70, § 8, 9-23-86; Ord. No. 88-114, § I, 12-13-88; Ord. No. 88-115, § I, 12-13-88; Ord. No. 92-20, § I, 5-12-92; Ord. No. 93-52, § I, 6-22-93; Ord. No. 96-63, § I, 8-13-96; Ord. No. 99-47, § I, 6-8-99; Ord. No. 01-57, § I, 11-27-01; Ord. No. 02-48, § I, 9-24-02; Ord. No. 10-006, § I, 3-9-10; Ord. No. 16-001 , § I, 1-12-16; Ord. No. 20-024 , § I, 5-26-20) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 31-3. - Existing permits and private agreements. 
This chapter is not intended to abrogate or annul: 
(1)  Any permits issued before the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(2)  Any easement, covenant or any other private agreement. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 18-3)  
Sec. 31-4. - Preserving rights in pending litigation and violations under existing ordinances. 
By the passage of this chapter, no presently illegal use shall be deemed to have been legalized unless specifically such use falls within a use district where the actual use is a conforming use. Otherwise, such uses shall remain nonconforming uses where recognized, or an illegal use, as the case may be. It is further the intent and declared purpose of this chapter that no offense committed, and no liability, penalty or forfeiture, either civil or criminal, shall be discharged or affected by the adoption of this chapter; but prosecutions and suits for such offenses, liabilities, penalties or forfeitures may be instituted or causes presently pending be proceeded with in all respects as if such prior ordinance had not been repealed. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 18-4)  
Sec. 31-5. - Completion of authorized buildings. 
(a)  Nothing in this chapter nor in any amendments hereto which change district boundaries shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of a building which shall be completed in its entirety within two (2) years from the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, provided such building was authorized by building permit before the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, and further provided construction shall have been started within ninety (90) days of the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(b)  Commitments with reference to construction of public utility buildings necessary for proposed expansion of the city made prior to the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 18-5)  
Sec. 31-6. - Compliance with the regulations. 
Except as hereinafter specifically provided: 
(1)  No land shall be used except for a purpose permitted in the district in which it is located. 
(2)  No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, nor shall any building be used, except for a use permitted in the district in which such building is located. 
(3)  No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed the height limit herein established for the district in which such building is located. 
(4)  No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered except in conformity with the area regulations of the district in which such building is located. 
(5)  No building shall be erected, or structurally altered to the extent specifically provided hereinafter except in conformity with the off-street parking and loading regulations of the district in which such building is located. 
(6)  The minimum yards, parking spaces, and open spaces, including lot area per family, required by this chapter for each and every building existing at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or for any building hereafter erected, shall not be encroached upon or considered as part of the yard or parking space or open space required for any other building. 
(7)  Residential structures located in districts AR-1, R-1, R-1A, RT-1, R-2 and R-3 shall not be structurally enlarged unless the exterior building façade materials are consistent with the existing façade materials of the existing structure. 
(8)  Every single-family residential or duplex residential building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located on a lot and there shall not be more than one (1) main building on one (1) lot. Multifamily (R-3, R-3F, or R-3A) structures hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be required to comply with all appropriate setback, rear yard, side yard, and parking requirements but shall not be limited to the one (1) main building per lot requirement. All commercial or industrial structures hereinafter erected or structurally altered shall be required to comply with all appropriate setback, rear yard, side yard, and parking requirements but shall not be limited by a main building per lot requirement. 
(9)  No requirement of this chapter shall be construed so as to prohibit the reclassification of a lot to a less restrictive zoning district where a lot of record platted prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived does not conform to any or all of the minimum lot size requirements of area, width or depth of the less restrictive zoning district; provided that the minimum yard requirement of the less restrictive zoning district and the required parking for the intended use shall be met. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 5; Ord. No. 76-68, § 1, 12-28-76; Ord. No. 86-30, §§ 1, 2, 5-13-86; Ord. No. 10-003, § VII, 2-9-10; Ord. No. 16-001 , § I, 1-12-16)  
Sec. 31-7. - Violation and penalties. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or who shall fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect or alter any building, or who shall commence to erect or alter any building in violation of any detailed statement of plan submitted or approved thereunder, shall for each and every violation or noncompliance be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. The owner of that building or premises or part thereof where anything in violation of this chapter shall be placed or shall exist, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or corporation employed in connection therewith who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation shall each be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction shall be subject to the penalties herein provided. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 22; Ord. No. 83-73, § 2, 12-13-83; Ord. No. 83-76, § 2, 12-27-83; Ord. No. 86-23, § 11, 4-22-86; Ord. No. 87-10, § 5, 2-24-87)  
Sec. 31-8. - Validity. 
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase or provision of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional the same shall not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole or any part of provisions thereof, other than the part so decided to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 23; Ord. No. 83-73, § 3, 12-13-83)  
Sec. 31-9. - Interpretation, purpose and conflict. 
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, prosperity or general welfare. It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties; provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon height of building, or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by other ordinances, rules, regulations or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provision of this chapter shall govern. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 24; Ord. No. 83-73, § 4, 12-13-83)  
Secs. 31-10—31-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 31-36. - Administrative official; right of entry; stop work order. 
(a)  The building permitting provisions of this chapter for new development and new construction shall be administered and enforced by the building official and his/her representatives. Code enforcement officers shall enforce any violations and all other provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The building official, building inspectors, and/or code enforcement officers, and any duly authorized person shall have the right to enter as allowed by law upon any premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcement of this chapter. 
(c)  Whenever any construction work is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the building inspector may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on the owner or contractor doing or causing such work to be done, and any such person shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the building inspector to proceed with the work. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 18-1; Ord. No. 06-78, § I, 7-11-06)  
Sec. 31-37. - Requirements for building permit. 
(a)  All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by accurate plot plans, submitted in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing: 
(1)  The actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon. 
(2)  The exact sizes and locations on the lot of the buildings and accessory buildings then existing. 
(3)  The lines within which the proposed building and structure shall be erected or altered. 
(4)  The existing and intended use of each building or part of building. 
(5)  The number of families or housekeeping units the building is designed to accommodate. 
(6)  Such other information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots as may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of this chapter. 
(b)  One (1) copy of such plot plans will be returned to the owner when such plans have been approved. An inspection period of as much as two (2) weeks shall be allowed for inspection of plans before a permit shall be issued. 
(c)  All dimensions shown on these plans relating to the location and size of the lot to be built upon shall be based on an actual survey by a qualified registered surveyor and the lot shall be staked out, with iron pins, on the ground before construction is started. (The lot shall remain staked until after the foundation inspection.) 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 18-2 [Ord. No. 83-76, § 1, 12-27-83])  
Sec. 31-38. - Certificates of occupancy. 
(a)  Required. Certificates of occupancy shall be required for any of the following: 
(1)  Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected or structurally altered. 
(2)  Change in use of an existing building to a use of a different classification. 
(3)  Occupancy and use of vacant land, except agricultural use. 
(4)  Change in the use of land to a use of a different classification. 
(5)  Any change in the use of a conforming use. 
No such occupancy, use or change of use, shall take place until a certificate of occupancy therefore shall have been issued by the inspector of buildings. 
(b)  Procedure for new or altered buildings. Written application for a certificate of occupancy for a new building or for an existing building which is to be altered shall be made at the same time as the application for the building permit for such building. Such certificate shall be issued within three (3) days after a written request for the same has been made to the building inspector or his agent after the erection or alteration of such building or part thereof has been completed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Procedure for vacant land or a change in use. Written application for a certificate of occupancy for the use of vacant land, or for a change in the use of land or a building, or for a change in a nonconforming use, as herein provided, shall be made to the building inspector. If the proposed use is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, the certificate of occupancy therefore shall be issued within three (3) days after the application for same has been made. 
(d)  Contents. Every certificate of occupancy shall state that the building or the proposed use of a building or land complies with all provisions of law. A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of the building inspector or his agent and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land affected. 
(e)  Temporary certificate. Pending the issuance of a regular certificate, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the building inspector for a period not exceeding six (6) months, during the completion of alterations or during partial occupancy of a building pending its completion. Such temporary certificates shall not be construed as in any way altering the respective rights, duties or obligations, of the owners or of the city relating to the use or occupancy of the premises or any other matter covered by this chapter. 
(f)  Certificate for nonconforming uses. A certificate of occupancy shall be required for all lawful nonconforming uses of land or buildings created by adoption of this chapter. Application for such certificate of occupancy for a nonconforming use shall be filed with the building inspector by the owner or lessee of the building or land occupied by such nonconforming use within one (1) year of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter was derived. It shall be the duty of the building inspector to issue a certificate of occupancy for a lawful nonconforming use, but failure to apply for such certificate of occupancy for a nonconforming use, or refusal of the building inspector to issue a certificate of occupancy for such nonconforming use shall be evidence that such nonconforming use was either illegal or did not lawfully exist at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 20)  
Sec. 31-39. - Amendments. 
(a)  Authority. The city council may from time to time amend, supplement or change by ordinance the boundaries of the districts or overlays or the regulations herein established. Each person making application for an amendment to the zoning ordinance shall furnish with his written application the fee set by the council, payable to the city, to be used in defraying the administrative and legal costs necessary to process the rezoning application. Such sum or portion thereof shall not be refunded to the applicant in the event the rezoning request is denied. However, the fee is waived for the first application for a zoning change or amendment after property is annexed, so long as the applicant for the zoning change or amendment owned the property at the time it was annexed. 
(b)  Submission to planning commission. Before taking action on any proposed amendment, supplement or change the city council shall submit the proposed revision to the planning commission for its recommendation and report. 
(c)  Public hearing. A public hearing shall be held by the city council before adopting any proposed amendment, supplement, or change. Notice of such hearing shall be given by publication one (1) time in a paper of general circulation in the city, stating the time and place of such hearing, which time shall not be earlier than fifteen (15) days from the first date of publication. 
(d)  In case of protest. Unless such proposed amendment, supplement, or change has been recommended for approval by the planning commission, or in case of a protest by the owners of twenty (20) percent or more of either the area of the lots included in such proposed change, or the area of those lots or land immediately adjacent thereto and extending two hundred (200) feet from that area, then such change shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of all the members of the city council. In order to allow for proper verification of land ownership and area calculations, all protests shall be: (1) in writing and signed, with both the name of the protester and the physical address of the property owned by that person legibly stated; and, (2) delivered to the office of the director of planning and economic development not later than close of business on the day the planning & zoning commission is to consider the zoning change, amendment, or supplement. The staff of the planning and economic development department shall: (1) accept and file such protests; (2) prior to the city council vote on the matter verify, by the city tax roll and a current plat of the city, that the protester owns property within an area described above and calculate the percentage of land area represented by that protest; and, (3) when the protest(s) represent twenty (20) percent or more of an area described above, then inform the city council of such fact prior to its vote on the matter. Any written protest not presented to the city in compliance with this ordinance shall not be considered in determining the necessity of a three-fourths (3/4 city council vote to approve. 
(e)  Petition by owners. Whenever the owners of at least fifty (50) percent of all the property situated within the area bounded by a line two hundred (200) feet in all directions from the site of any proposed change shall present a petition, duly signed and acknowledged, to the city council, requesting an amendment, supplement or change of the regulations prescribed for such property, it shall be the duty of the city council to vote upon the proposal presented by such petition within ninety (90) days after the filing of same with the city council, in accordance with the above procedure. 
(f)  Limitation on resubmission of petition. When a zoning petition fails to be approved by city council, the same petition shall not be resubmitted to either the city council or the planning and zoning commission for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of such failure, unless the petition is substantially changed from the original petition. A petition shall be considered substantially changed if: 
1)  A different zoning classification from that originally sought is requested; or 
2)  A combination of zoning classifications are requested, the net result of which is to decrease density by at least twenty (20) percent of that originally proposed; or 
3)  The area petitioned to be rezoned is reduced in size by at least twenty (20) percent from the area in the original petition; or 
4)  In relation to established overlays provided by this code, a different use is proposed or the proposed concept or site plan reflects at least a twenty (20) percent change in density, realigns major thoroughfares, reflects comparable changes in any comprehensive plan adopted and changes in code requirements or contains changes that the executive director of planning and development services determines to be substantially different from the original request. 
(g)  A determination that a petition has not been substantially changed by the executive director of planning and development services may be appealed by the applicant to the planning and zoning commission. A determination by the planning and zoning commission as to whether a substantial change has been made to the petition shall be final. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 21 [Ord. No. 66-5, § 1, 9-12-66; Ord. No. 74-59, § 1, 12-23-74]; Ord. No. 96-78, § I, 10-22-96; Ord. No. 96-79, § I, 10-22-96; Ord. No. 09-027, § I, 4-14-09) 
State Law reference— Zoning ordinance amendments, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.006.  
Secs. 31-40—31-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - NONCONFORMING USES 
 
Sec. 31-51. - Use of land. 
The lawful use of land existing upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may be continued although such use does not conform to the provisions hereof, subject to the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 16(A); Ord. No. 89-78, § 1, 9-26-89)  
Sec. 31-52. - Use of building. 
(a)  The lawful use of a building existing upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may be continued, although such use does not conform to the provisions of this chapter, subject to the provisions of this division. 
(b)  Such use may be extended throughout such portions of the building as are arranged or designed for such use, provided no structural alterations are made therein, except those required by law or ordinance or those that conform to the provisions of this division. 
(c)  If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming use of a building may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or more restricted classification. 
(d)  If a nonconforming building is voluntarily removed, the future use of such premises shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(e)  In the event a nonconforming use of any building or premises is discontinued for a period of one (1) year, the use of the same shall thereafter conform to the provisions of the district in which it is located. 
(f)  A nonconforming use, if changed to a conforming use or a more restricted nonconforming use, may not thereafter be changed back to a less restricted use than that to which it was changed. 
(g)  If by amendment to this chapter any property is hereafter transferred to a more restricted district by a change in the district boundaries or the regulations and restrictions in any district are made more restrictive, the provisions of this division shall apply to buildings or premises occupied or used upon the effective date of such amendment. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 16(B); Ord. No. 89-78, § 1, 9-26-89)  
Sec. 31-53. - Repairs and alterations. 
(a)  Regarding residential structures, where the nonconformity results from a failure to conform with the lot area, yard, lot width, lot depth or required setback prescribed by this chapter, a nonconforming structure may be repaired, altered, occupied, used, and maintained in good repair but no such nonconforming structure shall be altered or extended unless the addition or alteration conforms to the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Otherwise, repairs and alterations may be made to a nonconforming building provided that no structural alterations or extensions shall be made except those required by law or ordinance. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 16(C); Ord. No. 89-78, § 1, 9-26-89)  
Sec. 31-54. - Reconstruction. 
(a)  A nonconforming use shall not be extended or rebuilt in case of total destruction by fire or other cause. 
(b)  In the case of partial destruction by fire or other causes not exceeding fifty (50) percent of the building's value, the building official shall issue a permit for reconstruction. 
(c)  If destruction is greater than fifty (50) percent of the building's value, the board of adjustment may grant a permit for repair or replacement after public hearing and after giving due consideration to the property rights of all persons affected, the public welfare, the character of the areas surrounding the nonconforming use, and the purpose of this chapter. 
(d)  In the event a nonconforming use of any building or premises is discontinued for a period of one (1) year, the use of the same shall thereafter conform to the provisions of the district in which it is located. 
(e)  A nonconforming use if changed to a conforming use or a more restricted nonconforming use, may not thereafter be changed back to a less restricted use than that to which it was changed. 
(f)  If by amendment to this chapter any property is hereafter transferred to a more restricted district by a change in the district boundaries, or the regulations and restrictions in any district are made more restrictive or of a higher classification, the provisions of this chapter relating to the nonconforming use of buildings or premises existing upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall apply to buildings or premises occupied or used upon the effective date of such amendment. 
(g)  Repairs and alterations may be made to a nonconforming building, provided that no structural alterations or extensions shall be made except those required by law or ordinance, unless the building is changed to a conforming use. 
(h)  A nonconforming use shall not be extended or rebuilt in case of obsolescence or total destruction by fire or other cause. In the case of partial destruction by fire or other causes not exceeding fifty (50) percent of its value, the building inspector shall issue a permit for reconstruction. If destruction is greater than fifty (50) percent of its value, the board of adjustment may grant a permit for repair or replacement after public hearing and having due regard for the property rights of the persons affected when considered in the light of public welfare and the character of the areas surrounding the designated nonconforming use and the purposes of this chapter. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 16(D); Ord. No. 89-78, § 1, 9-26-89)  
Secs. 31-55—31-65. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT; APPEALS, VARIANCES, ETC.[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Zoning board of adjustment, § 27(6). 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions generally, § 2-116 et seq. 
State Law reference— Board of adjustment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.008 et seq. 
 
Sec. 31-66. - Established. 
A board of adjustment is hereby reestablished in accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.008. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 19-1(A))  
Sec. 31-67. - Membership. 
The board shall consist of seven (7) citizens of the city or of the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, each to be appointed or reappointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council, for staggered terms of two (2) years respectively. At least one (1) member of the board shall be a member of the city planning and zoning commission and his term shall expire at the same time as his term on such commission. Each member of the board shall be removable for just cause by the city council upon written charges and after public hearings, or as otherwise provided by this code. Vacancies shall be filled by the city council for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. The board shall elect its own chairman, who shall serve for a period of one (1) year or until a successor is elected. Up to two (2) alternates may be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council who shall serve in the absence of one (1) or more regular members. Alternate members shall serve of the same period as the regular members and any vacancies shall be filled in the same manner. Alternate members shall be subject to removal in the same manner as the regular members. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 19-1(B); Ord. No. 98-33, § I, 5-26-98; Ord. No. 00-79, § I, 10-24-00; Ord. No. 06-01, § I, 1-10-06)  
Sec. 31-68. - Meetings. 
Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 19-1(C))  
Sec. 31-69. - Hearings. 
The hearings of the board of adjustment shall be public. However, the board may go into executive session in accordance with law. The board shall hear the intervention of any owner of property adjacent to, in the rear of, or across the street from a lot as to which the granting of any building permit is pending, and shall also hear any other parties in interest. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 19-1(D)) 
State Law reference— Open meetings act, V.T.C.A., Government Code, Chapter 551.  
Sec. 31-70. - Rules and regulations. 
The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. The board of adjustment shall act by resolution in which six (6) members must concur. The board shall adopt from time to time such additional rules and regulations as it may deem necessary to carry into effect the provisions of this chapter, and shall furnish a copy of the same to the building inspector, all of which rules and regulations shall operate uniformly in all cases. All of its resolutions and orders shall be in accordance therewith. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 19-1(E); Ord. No. 98-33, § I, 5-26-98; Ord. No. 98-44, § I, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 31-71. - Appeals procedure generally. 
Appeals may be taken to and before the board of adjustment by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department or board of the city. Such appeal shall be made by filing with the office of the board a notice of appeal and specifying the grounds thereof. The office or department from which the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board of adjustment all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. All cases to be heard by the board of adjustment shall always be heard by a minimum number of six (6) members. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 19-2(A); Ord. No. 98-33, § I, 5-26-98; Ord. No. 98-44, § I, 6-23-98)  
Sec. 31-72. - Stay of proceedings. 
An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the building inspector shall certify to the board of adjustment that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of adjustment or by a court of equity, after notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 19-2(B))  
Sec. 31-73. - Notice of hearing on appeal. 
The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal or other matter referred to it, and shall mail notices of such hearing to the petitioner and to the owners of property lying within two hundred (200) feet of any point of the lot or portion thereof on which a variation is desired, and to all other persons deemed by the board to be affected thereby, such owners and persons being determined according to the current tax rolls of the city and depositing of such written notice in the mail shall be deemed sufficient compliance therewith. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 19-2(C))  
Sec. 31-74. - Decision by board. 
The board shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. The board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decision or determination appealed from and shall make such order, requirement, decision or determination as in its opinion ought to be made in the premises, and to that end, shall have all powers of the officer or department from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of six (6) members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the officer or department from which the appeal is taken, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter or to effect any variation in this chapter. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 19-2(D); Ord. No. 98-33, § I, 5-26-98; Ord. No. 98-44, § I, 6-23-98) 
State Law reference— Appeals to board of adjustment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.010.  
Sec. 31-75. - Subpoena witnesses, etc. 
The board shall have the power to subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and punish for contempt, and may require the production of documents, under such regulations as it may establish. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 19-3(A))  
Sec. 31-76. - Appeals based on error. 
The board shall have the power to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error of law in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the building inspector in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 19-3(B))  
Sec. 31-77. - Special exceptions. 
The board shall have the power to hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this chapter upon which the board is required to pass as follows or elsewhere in this chapter, to: 
(1)  Permit the erection and use of a building or the use of premises for railroads. 
(2)  Permit a public utility or public service use or structure in any district, or a public utility or public service building of a ground area and of a height at variance with those provided for in the district in which such public utility or public service building is permitted to be located, when found reasonably necessary for the public health, convenience, safety or general welfare. 
(3)  Permit a transitional use between a business or industrial and a residential district where the side of a lot in district "R-1," "SF-2," or "R-2" abuts upon a lot zoned for business or industrial purposes as follows: 
a.  On a lot in district "R-1" or "SF-2," which sides upon a lot zoned for business or industrial purposes, the board may permit a two-family dwelling on a lot with an area of not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet. 
b.  On a lot in district "R-2," which sides upon a lot zoned for business or industrial purposes, the board may permit a four-family dwelling on a lot with an area of not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet. 
c.  Provided, however, that in no case shall any transitional use have a width of more than one hundred (100) feet. 
(4)  Grant a permit for the extension of a use, height or area regulation into an adjoining district, where the boundary line of the district divides a lot in a single ownership on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(5)  Permit the reconstruction of a nonconforming building which has been damaged by explosion, fire, act of God, or the public enemy, to the extent of more than fifty (50) percent of its fair market value, where the board finds some compelling necessity requiring a continuance of the nonconforming use and the primary purpose of continuing the nonconforming use is not to continue a monopoly. 
(6)  Waive or reduce the parking and loading requirements in any of the districts whenever the character or use of the building is such as to make unnecessary the full provision of parking or loading facilities, or where such regulations would impose an unreasonable hardship upon the use of the lot, as contrasted with merely granting an advantage or a convenience. 
(7)  Permit land within three hundred (300) feet of a multifamily dwelling to be improved for the parking spaces required in connection with a multifamily dwelling, but only when there is positive assurance that such land will be used for such purpose during the existence of the multifamily dwelling. 
(8)  Determine whether an industry should be permitted within district "M-1," light industrial, and district "M-2," heavy industrial, because of the methods by which it would be operated and because of its effect upon uses within surrounding zoning districts. 
(9)  Determine in cases of uncertainty the classification of any use not specifically named in this chapter. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 19-3(C); Ord. No. 93-102, § III, 11-9-93)  
Sec. 31-78. - Variances. 
The board shall have the power to authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed and substantial justice done, including the following: 
(1)  Permit a variance in the yard requirements of any district where there are unusual and practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the carrying out of these provisions due to an irregular shape of the lot, topographical or other conditions, provided such variance will not seriously affect any adjoining property or the general welfare. 
(2)  Authorize upon appeal, whenever a property owner can show that a strict application of the terms of this chapter relating to the use, construction or alteration of buildings or structures or the use of land will impose upon him unusual and practical difficulties or particular hardship, such variances from the strict application of the terms of this chapter as are in harmony with its general purpose and intent, but only when the board is satisfied that a granting of such variation will not merely serve as a convenience to the applicant, but will alleviate some demonstrable and unusual hardship or difficulty so great as to warrant a variance from the comprehensive plan as established by this chapter, and at the same time, the surrounding property will be properly protected. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 19-3(D))  
Sec. 31-79. - Administrative approval of minor encroachments. 
(a)  This section establishes authority for administrative authorization of certain minor encroachments into zoning setback areas. 
(b)  The building official, or his designee, may grant an administrative variance of a building or other permanent improvement encroachment of 8 inches or less into a front, side or rear zoning setback area. 
(c)  In order to administratively approve such variance, the building official must find that the encroachment does not: 
a.  obstruct light, air, movement or traffic visibility; 
b.  lead to overcrowding of land or undue concentration of population; 
c.  increase fire risk; 
d.  violate a building or safety code; or 
e.  pose any hazards to or hardships upon the public. 
(d)  The building official shall refer to the board any request involving an encroachment exceeding 8 inches into the required setback. 
(e)  A property owner or building may receive only one administrative variance in any 12-month period. Subsequent requests must be reviewed by the board. 
(f)  The building official's denial of an administrative variance may be appealed to the board by filing a written notice of appeal within 10 calendar days of the building official's decision. 
(Ord. 02-57, § I, 11-26-02)  
Sec. 31-80. - Jurisdiction limited. 
The board shall have no authority to change any provisions of this chapter and its jurisdiction is limited to hardship and borderline cases that may arise from time to time. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 19-3(E); Ord. 02-57, § I, 11-26-02)  
Sec. 31-81. - Administrative fee. 
A fee in accordance with the adopted fee schedule shall be paid to the city at the same time any application is made either to the board of adjustment requesting the board to take any action, or to the building official requesting an administrative variance. If an applicant wishes to appeal the building official's denial of an administrative variance, the fee originally paid for the building official's review shall also cover the appeal to the board. The purpose of such fee is to defray the cost to the city for the administration and handling of such requests. The fee is nonrefundable. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 19-4 [Ord. No. 70-3, 10-28-70; Ord. No. 74-23, § 1, 5-28-74; Ord. No. 86-29, §§ 1-3, 5-13-86; Ord. No. 86-70, § 8, 9-23-86]; Ord. 02-57, § I, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 19-047 , § XV, 9-17-19)  
Secs. 31-82—31-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED; ZONING MAP[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Districts authorized, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.005. 
 
Sec. 31-121. - Establishment of districts and boundaries. 
(a)  For the purposes of this chapter, the city is hereby divided into twenty-nine (29) districts as follows: 
District A. Agricultural district. 
District A-R1. Agricultural single-family residential district. 
District SR-1. Suburban residential single-family district. 
District SR-2. Suburban residential single-family district. 
District R-1. Single-family residential district. 
District SF-2. Single-family residential district. 
District R-2. Two-family residential district. 
District R-3. Multifamily residential district [inactive]. 
District R-3F. Multifamily (3 or 4 dwelling unit) residential district. 
District R-3A. Multifamily apartment residential district. 
District R-MP. Mobile home and travel trailer park district. 
District R-MS. Manufactured housing district. 
District RT-1. Residential townhouse single-family district. 
District RM-1. Residential modular home single-family district [inactive]. 
District B-1. Professional business district. 
District B-2. Local retail district. 
District B-3. Local business district. 
District B-3A Local business and retail alcohol sales district [inactive]. 
District NBD Neighborhood business district. 
District B-4. Business district. 
District B-5. Business district. 
District B-C-1. General business and alcohol sales district. 
District RC-1. Restaurant and alcohol sales district [inactive]. 
District HOD Historic overlay district 
District B-DC. Business day care district [inactive]. 
District M-1. Manufacturing district. 
District M-2. Heavy manufacturing district. 
District UD University district. 
District CD Cemetery district. 
(b)  The locations and boundaries of the districts herein established are shown upon the official zoning map, which is hereby incorporated into this chapter. Such zoning map, together with all notations, references and other information shown thereon and all amendments thereto, shall be as much a part of this chapter as if fully set forth and described herein. Such zoning map, properly attested, is on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 3 [Ord. No. 76-46, § 2, 8-10-76; Ord. No. 86-23, § 2, 4-22-86]; Ord. No. 93-102, § I, 11-9-93; Ord. No. 96-63, § II, 8-13-96; Ord. No. 02-48, § II, 9-24-02; Ord. No. 04-87, § I, 10-19-04; Ord. No. 05-40, § I, 5-24-05; Ord. No. 06-48, § I, 5-9-06; Ord. No. 09-024, § I, 3-17-09; Ord. No. 10-003, § I, 2-9-10; Ord. No. 10-079, § I, 12-28-10; Ord. No. 20-024 , § I, 5-26-20)  
Sec. 31-122. - Official zoning map. 
(a)  The official zoning map of the city shall be kept in the office of the city secretary and one (1) copy shall be maintained in the office of the building inspector. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the city engineer to keep the official map current and the copies thereof, herein provided for, by entering on such maps any changes which the city council may from time to time order by amendments to this chapter and map. 
(c)  The city secretary shall affix a certificate identifying the map in his office as the Official Zoning Map of the City of Killeen. He shall likewise officially identify the copies directed to be kept by the planning commission and in the office of the building inspector. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 17)  
Sec. 31-123. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the zoning districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets or highways, street lines or highway right-of-way lines, such centerlines, street lines, or highway right-of-way lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(2)  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(3)  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the centerlines or street lines of streets, or the centerlines of right-of-way lines of highways, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale on the zoning map. 
(4)  In unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines on the zoning map shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map. 
(5)  In the case of a district boundary line dividing a property into two (2) parts, the district boundary line shall be construed to be the property line nearest the district boundary line as shown. 
(6)  Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the city council, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacation and all area included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended districts. 
(7)  Where the streets or alleys on the ground differ from the streets or alleys as shown on the zoning map, the streets or alleys on the ground shall control. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 4)  
Sec. 31-124. - Newly annexed areas. 
(a)  Zoning annexed areas. All territory annexed to the city shall be initially classified as district "A" agricultural district. The planning and zoning commission shall within twelve (12) months after date of annexation recommend to the city council a plan for permanent zoning in the area. The procedure to be followed for adoption shall be the same as is provided by law for the adoption of original zoning regulations. If the planning and zoning commission fails to submit a zoning plan to the city council within twelve (12) months after the date of annexation, the planning and zoning commission recommendation shall be deemed to be a recommendation to change the initial annexation zoning to permanent zoning. If the city council fails to act on a plan for initial zoning of an annexed area within sixty (60) days following the date twelve (12) months after the date of annexation, the zoning map for the City of Killeen shall be changed to reflect the permanency of the initial zoning assigned on annexation. Any area annexed during the time period of January 1, 1963, to effective date of this ordinance which continues to bear a "temporary" zoning, the same is hereby designated as the permanent zoning, and all existing "temporary" prefixes are eliminated. 
(b)  Permits in initially zoned areas. In an area initially classified as district "A" agricultural district, no permit for the construction of a building or use of land other than types of buildings or land use allowed in such district under this chapter shall be issued by the building official until such permit has been specifically authorized by the city council after receipt of recommendation from the planning and zoning commission. Permits for the construction of buildings in a newly annexed territory prior to permanent zoning may be authorized under the following conditions: An application for any use shall be made to the building official, such application shall show the use contemplated, and a plot plan showing the size and type of building to be constructed; and if such application is for other than a building allowed in district "A" agricultural district, it shall be referred to the planning and zoning commission for recommendation to the city council, which shall grant or deny the permit; provided that a favorable vote of a three-fourths majority of all members of the city council shall be required if the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission is not followed. 
(c)  Unplatted property. The planning and zoning commission shall not approve any minor plat within the city limits until the area covered by the proposed plat shall have been properly and permanently zoned by the city council. The planning and zoning commission may act on a final plat of a parcel and the zoning request on the same parcel concurrently, only when the plat requires city council approval. 
(Ord. No. 88-114, § VI, 12-13-88; Ord. No. 96-79, § II, 10-22-96; Ord. No. 99-29, § I, 4-13-99)  
Secs. 31-125—31-145. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 31-146—31-155. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DISTRICT "A" AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 31-156. - Use regulations. 
A building or premises in a district "A" agricultural district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Stables, commercial or private. 
(2)  Agricultural uses to include animal production, crop production, horticulture, and support housing. 
(3)  Home occupations as permitted in district "R-1" single-family residential district. 
(4)  Agricultural single-family residential in accordance with division 3 of this article. 
(5)  Accessory buildings customarily incident to the uses in this section. 
(Ord. No. 88-114, § II(6-C-1), 12-13-88)  
Sec. 31-157. - Height regulations. 
No structure shall be erected in a district "A" agricultural district having a height in excess of forty-five (45) feet. 
(Ord. No. 88-114, § II(6-C-2), 12-13-88)  
Sec. 31-158. - Area regulations. 
(a)  Size of yard. The yards in the district "A" agricultural district shall conform to the following: 
(1)  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than forty (40) feet. 
(2)  Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot having a width of not less than ten (10) feet. A side yard adjacent to a side street shall not be less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
(b)  Size of lot. No structure shall be erected on any lot in a district "A" agricultural district less than three (3) acres. 
(Ord. No. 88-114, § II(6-C-3), 12-13-88)  
Sec. 31-159. - Parking regulations. 
The parking regulations for the district "A" agricultural district shall be the same as for district "R-1" single-family residential district. 
(Ord. No. 88-114, § II(6-C-4), 12-13-88)  
Sec. 31-160. - Sign regulations. 
The sign regulations for a district "A" agricultural district shall be the same as for district "R-1" single-family residential district, with the exception of on-premises signs in which signs shall not exceed a total of twenty-four (24) square feet in area per premises or eight (8) feet in height. There shall be no more than three (3) on-premises signs allowed for property in excess of thirty (30) acres in size. 
(Ord. No. 88-114, § II(6-C-5), 12-13-88; Ord. No. 17-010 , § I, 2-14-17)  
Secs. 31-161—31-170. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DISTRICT "A-R1" AGRICULTURAL SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 31-171. - Purpose. 
For the purpose of developing property containing a minimum of one acre of land designed to promote and encourage a transition between suburban and rural character, within a suitable estate environment where the landscape is visually dominant over structures. 
(Ord. No. 88-114, § V(15-5), 12-13-88; Ord. No. 12-072, § I, 9-25-12)  
Sec. 31-172. - Use regulations. 
(a)  A building or premises in a district "A-R1" agricultural single-family residential district shall be used only for the following purpose: 
(1)  Single-family residential homes. 
(2)  Home occupations, accessory uses and buildings as permitted in section 31-186(13). 
(3)  Parks and recreation areas. 
(4)  Churches, synagogues, chapels and similar places of religious worship. 
(5)  Country clubs or golf courses, but not including miniature golf courses, driving ranges or similar forms of commercial amusement. 
(6)  Crop and tree farming, but not including the raising of animals or fowl for commercial purposes, or the sale of any products at retail on the premises. 
(7)  Public and quasi-public buildings for cultural use. 
(8)  Utility substations. 
(b)  Permitted Accessory Uses: 
(1)  One guest home per lot shall be permitted in the district subject to the following standards: 
a.  The guest house shall be a detached accessory use to a principal residence. 
b.  The maximum allowed area of the guest house shall not exceed twenty five (25) percent of the floor area of the principal residence (exclusive of garages). 
c.  One additional off-street parking space shall be required. 
d.  The rental or lease of a guest house shall be prohibited. 
(2)  Non-commercial, animal holding pens of any kind, being no closer than fifty (50) feet from a street line and no closer than two hundred and fifty (250) feet from lot line. 
(Ord. No. 88-114, § V(15-5-2), 12-13-88; Ord. No. 12-072, § I, 9-25-12)  
Sec. 31-173. - Height regulations. 
No structure shall be erected in a district "A-R1" agricultural single-family residential district having a height in excess of forty-five (45) feet, or three (3) 
(Ord. No. 88-114, § V(15-5-2), 12-13-88; Ord. No. 12-072, § I, 9-25-12)  
Sec. 31-174. - Area regulations. 
(a)  Size of yards. The size of yards in the district "A-R1" agricultural single-family residential district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Front yards. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than thirty (30) feet. 
(2)  Side yards. There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot having a width of not less than twenty (20) feet. A side yard adjacent to a side street shall not be less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
(3)  Rear yards. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than forty (40) feet. 
(b)  Size of lot. The size of lots in a district "A-R1" agricultural single-family residential district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Lot area. No building or structure shall be erected on any lot having less than one (1) acre. 
(2)  Lot width. The width of the lot shall not be less than one hundred (100) feet at the front building line. 
(Ord. No. 88-114, § V(15-5-3), 12-13-88; Ord. No. 12-072, § I, 9-25-12)  
Sec. 31-175. - Sign regulations. 
The sign regulations for the district "A-R1" agricultural single-family residential district shall be the same as district "R-1." 
(Ord. No. 88-114, § V(15-5-4), 12-13-88; Ord. No. 12-072, § I, 9-25-12)  
Sec. 31-176. - Residential density. 
The residential density in a district "A-R1" agricultural single-family residential district shall be not more than one (1) principal dwelling unit per lot. 
(Ord. No. 88-114, § V(15-5-5), 12-13-88; Ord. No. 12-072, § I, 9-25-12)  
Sec. 31-177. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3A. - DISTRICT "SR-1" SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 31-178. - Purpose. 
The "SR-1" suburban residential district is created to provide for single family detached residences and other uses at densities that are compatible with the Comprehensive Plan's goals for larger baseline minimum lot size and increased setbacks. The "SR-1" district may be applied to both undeveloped tracts and existing stable neighborhoods in appropriate locations recognized by the Comprehensive Plan. The intent of the district shall be to preserve existing natural features and vegetation, promote excellence in site planning and landscape design, facilitate the efficient layout and orientation of public utilities and community infrastructure, and encourage housing with compatible scale and character of architecture. 
(Ord. No. 12-075, § I, 10-9-12; Ord No. 14-020, 3-11-14)  
Sec. 31-179. - Use regulations. 
A building or premises in a "SR-1" suburban residential single-family district shall be used only for the following purpose: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  Any use permitted in section 31-186(1-13(b)). 
(Ord. No. 12-075, § I, 10-9-12 Ord No. 14-020, 3-11-14; )  
Sec. 31-180. - Height regulations. 
No structure shall be erected in a "SR-1" suburban residential single-family district having a height in excess of thirty-five (35) feet, or two and one-half (2½) stories. 
(Ord. No. 12-075, § I, 10-9-12)  
Sec. 31-181. - Area regulations. 
(a)  Size of yards. The size of yards in the "SR-1" suburban residential single-family district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Front yards. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
(2)  Side yards. There shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet between structures on adjacent lots, with a minimum side yard of ten (10) feet. No side yard for allowable nonresidential uses shall be less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
(3)  Rear yards. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
(b)  Size of lot. The size of lots in a "SR-1" suburban residential single-family district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Lot area. No building or structure shall be erected on any lot having less than eight thousand four hundred (8,400) square feet. 
(2)  Lot width. The width of the lot shall not be less than seventy (70) feet at the front building line. 
(3)  Lot depth. The average depth of the lot shall not be less than one hundred (100) feet. 
(Ord. No. 12-075, § I, 10-9-12; Ord No. 14-020, 3-11-14)  
Sec. 31-182. - Sign regulations for residential uses. 
The sign regulations for the "SR-1" suburban residential single-family district shall be the same as district "R-1." 
(Ord. No. 12-075, § I, 10-9-12)  
Sec. 31-183. - Residential density. 
The residential density (or average density) in a "SR-1" suburban residential single-family district shall be not more than three and one-half (3½) dwelling units per gross acre. 
(Ord. No. 12-075, § I, 10-9-12; Ord. No. 20-024 , § I, 5-26-20)  
Sec. 31-184. - Landscaping regulations. 
(a)  Landscaping required. For residential uses, minimum required landscaping shall be two (2) canopy trees, with at least one (1) planted in the front yard, and eight (8) 3-gallon shrubs in the front yard. 
(1)  Trees. The following requirements shall apply to tree landscaping: 
(a)  Newly planted trees shall measure at least two-inch caliper and six (6) feet high at the time of planting, and shall be planted in a permeable area not less than three (3) feet in diameter. Tree plantings shall be of a recommended species as detailed in section 8-530. 
(b)  Existing trees to be used for landscape credit shall be in a healthy physical state, shall measure at least two-inch caliper and shall be maintained in an undisturbed area within the drip line of the tree. 
(c)  Should an existing or newly planted tree used for landscape credit die, it shall be replaced with new landscaping according to the requirements of this section. 
(d)  Each canopy tree maintained in excess of the total number of trees required by this section may reduce the number of shrubs required by four (4). Each non-canopy tree maintained in excess of the total number of trees required by this section may reduce the number of shrubs required by two (2). Each two (2) square feet of planting bed used and maintained for the purpose of rotating live decorative planting materials shall reduce the number of shrubs required by one (1). 
(e)  The placement of shrubbery shall take into consideration the plant size at maturity and shall be located so as not to conflict with vehicular or pedestrian traffic visibility. 
(2)  Ground cover. The following requirements shall apply to ground cover landscaping: 
(a)  Ground cover or grass shall be planted in the remaining area of the lot or parcel not planted in trees, shrubbery, planting beds, or covered by structures, pavement or other impervious surfaces. 
(b)  Approved non-vegetative ground cover materials (such as washed gravel, bark mulch, lava rock, rock, or other decorative covers generally used in landscaping) may be used to meet the provisions of this section. Where approved, non-vegetative ground cover shall be porous and form a uniform appearance free from weeds and grasses 
(c)  Irrigation. All landscaping required by this section shall be irrigated by either an automated system, or a hose bib attachment within one hundred fifty (150) feet of all landscaping. Automated underground irrigation systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with the requirements of other provisions of this code. The building official may waive irrigation requirements where xeriscaping or a substitute landscaping plan is used. 
(Ord. No. 12-075, § I, 10-9-12; Ord No. 14-020, 3-11-14; Ord. No. 19-040 , § I, 9-10-19)  
Sec. 31-185. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3B. - DISTRICT "SR-2" SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL SINGLE-FAMILY DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 31-185.1. - Purpose. 
The "SR-2" suburban residential single family district is created to provide for single family detached residences and other uses at densities that are compatible with the Comprehensive Plan's goals for larger baseline minimum lot size and increased setbacks. The "SR-2" district may be applied to both undeveloped tracts and existing stable neighborhoods in appropriate locations recognized by the Comprehensive Plan. The intent of the district shall be to preserve existing natural features and vegetation, promote excellence in site planning and landscape design, facilitate the efficient layout and orientation of public utilities and community infrastructure, and encourage housing with compatible scale and character of architecture. 
(Ord. No. 13-017, § I, 3-12-13; Ord No. 14-020, 3-11-14)  
Sec. 31-185.2. - Use regulations. 
(a)  A building or premises in a "SR-2" suburban residential single-family district shall be used only for the following purpose: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  Any use permitted in sections 31-186(1-13(b)). 
(b)  Permitted Accessory Uses: 
(1)  One guest home per lot shall be permitted in the district subject to the following standards: 
a.  The guest house shall be a detached accessory use to a principal residence. 
b.  The maximum allowed area of the guest house shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the floor area of the principal residence (exclusive of garages). 
c.  One additional off-street parking space shall be required. 
d.  The rental or lease of a guest house shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 13-017, § I, 3-12-13; Ord No. 14-020, 3-11-14)  
Sec. 31-185.3. - Height regulations. 
No structure shall be erected in a "SR-2" suburban residential single-family district having a height in excess of three (3) stories. 
(Ord. No. 13-017, § I, 3-12-13)  
Sec. 31-185.4. - Area regulations. 
(a)  Size of yards. The size of yards in the "SR-2" suburban residential single-family district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Front yards. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than thirty-five (35) feet. 
(2)  Side yards. There shall be a minimum side yard of ten (10) feet (10) feet. A side yard adjacent to a side street shall not be less than twenty (20) feet. No side yard for allowable nonresidential uses shall be less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
(3)  Rear yards. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than ten (10) feet. 
(b)  Size of lot. The size of lots in a "SR-2" suburban residential single-family district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Lot area. No building or structure shall be erected on any lot having less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. 
(2)  Lot width. The width of the lot shall not be less than ninety (90) feet at the front building line. 
(Ord. No. 13-017, § I, 3-12-13; Ord No. 14-020, 3-11-14)  
Sec. 31-185.5. - Sign regulations for residential uses. 
The sign regulations for the "SR-2" suburban residential single-family district shall be the same as district "R-1." 
(Ord. No. 13-017, § I, 3-12-13)  
Sec. 31-185.6. - Landscaping regulations. 
(a)  Architectural design. All attached garages in this district shall be constructed as side or rear entry. Detached front loading garages in this district shall be constructed at a minimum depth of forty-five (45) feet as measured from the front property line. 
(b)  Landscaping required. For residential uses, minimum required landscaping shall be two (2) canopy trees, with at least one (1) planted in the front yard, and eight (8) 3-gallon shrubs in the front yard. 
(1)  Trees. The following requirements shall apply to tree landscaping: 
(a)  Newly planted trees shall measure at least two-inch caliper and six (6) feet high at the time of planting, and shall be planted in a permeable area not less than three (3) feet in diameter. Tree plantings shall be of a recommended species as detailed in section 8-530. 
(b)  Existing trees to be used for landscape credit shall be in a healthy physical state, shall measure at least two-inch caliper and shall be maintained in an undisturbed area within the drip line of the tree. 
(c)  Should an existing or newly planted tree used for landscape credit die, it shall be replaced with new landscaping according to the requirements of this section. 
(d)  Each canopy tree maintained in excess of the total number of trees required by this section may reduce the number of shrubs required by four (4). Each non-canopy tree maintained in excess of the total number of trees required by this section may reduce the number of shrubs required by two (2). Each two (2) square feet of planting bed used and maintained for the purpose of rotating live decorative planting materials shall reduce the number of shrubs required by one (1). 
(e)  The placement of shrubbery shall take into consideration the plant size at maturity and shall be located so as not to conflict with vehicular or pedestrian traffic visibility. 
(2)  Ground cover. The following requirements shall apply to ground cover landscaping: 
(a)  Ground cover or grass shall be planted in the remaining area of the lot or parcel not planted in trees, shrubbery, planting beds, or covered by structures, pavement or other impervious surfaces. 
(b)  Approved non-vegetative ground cover materials (such as washed gravel, bark mulch, lava rock, rock, or other decorative covers generally used in landscaping) may be used to meet the provisions of this section. Where approved, non-vegetative ground cover shall be porous and form a uniform appearance free from weeds and grasses. 
(c)  Irrigation. All landscaping required by this section shall be irrigated by either an automated system, or a hose bib attachment within one hundred fifty (150) feet of all landscaping. Automated underground irrigation systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with the requirements of other provisions of this Code. The building official may waive irrigation requirements where xeriscaping or a substitute landscaping plan is used. Xeriscaping shall be in accordance with the applicable guidelines as specified in the City of Killeen Drainage Design Manual and Infrastructure Design and Development Standards Manual, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 13-017, § I, 3-12-13; Ord No. 14-020, 3-11-14; Ord. No. 19-040 , § I, 9-10-19)  
DIVISION 4. - DISTRICT "R-1" SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 31-186. - Use regulations. 
A building or premises in a district "R-1" single-family residential district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  One-family dwellings, including site-built and modular construction. 
(2)  Churches or other places of worship. 
(3)  Colleges, universities or other institutions of higher learning. 
(4)  Country clubs or golf courses, but not including miniature golf courses, driving ranges or similar forms of commercial amusement. 
(5)  Farms, nurseries or truck gardens, limited to the proportion and cultivation of plants, provided no retail or wholesale business is conducted on the premises, and provided further that no poultry or livestock other than normal household pets shall be housed within one hundred (100) feet of any property line. 
(6)  Parks, playgrounds, community buildings and other public recreational facilities, owned and/or operated by the municipality or other public agency. 
(7)  Public buildings, including libraries, museums, police and fire stations. 
(8)  Real estate sales offices during the development of residential subdivisions but not to exceed two (2) years. Display residential houses with sales offices, provided that if such display houses are not moved within a period of one (1) year, specific permission must be obtained from the city council for such display houses to remain on their locations. 
(9)  Schools, public elementary or high. 
(10)  Schools, private with curriculum equivalent to that of a public elementary or high school. 
(11)  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work. 
(12)  Water supply reservoirs, pumping plants and towers. 
(13)  Accessory buildings and uses, incident to the uses in this section and located on the same lot therewith, not involving the conduct of a retail building. 
a.  A sign or outside advertising display (as defined by subsection 101.1 of the International Building Code) shall not be allowed as an accessory use, except that: 
1.  An on-premises ground sign, limited to the provisions of subsection 31-507(A)(3) may be allowed as an accessory use to churches, places of worship, libraries, museums and public buildings. 
2.  Any unilluminated signs allowed in section 31-503 may be allowed as an accessory use to any primary use authorized by this chapter. 
3.  An on-premises sign, limited to the provisions of subsection 31-503(2), may be allowed as an accessory use to those primary uses authorized by subsection (8), provided that such signs shall be allowable only so long as these specified primary uses are allowed. 
No authorized accessory use sign shall be located in a required side or rear yard which is adjacent to any other lot designated for residential use. 
b.  A private garage with or without storeroom and/or utility room shall be permitted as an accessory building; provided that such garage shall be located not less than twenty-five (25) feet from the front lot line and shall not be less than five (5) feet from any interior side lot line and ten (10) feet from any rear lot line and in the case of corner lots not less than the distance required for residences from side streets. A garage or servants' quarters constructed as an integral part of the main building shall be subject to the regulations affecting the main building. 
c.  The term "accessory use" shall include home occupations subject to the following provisions: 
1.  Definition. A home occupation is an accessory use of a dwelling unit or garage for gainful employment, involving the provision of goods and/or services. 
2.  When a use is a home occupation, the owner, lessee or other resident occupant persons having a legal right to the use of the dwelling unit shall also have the vested right to conduct the home occupation without securing special permission from the city to do so. 
3.  Notwithstanding subsection 31-186(13)c.2. above, persons conducting a home occupation are required to comply with, and are subject to, any other city ordinance conditions affecting the occupation and its property, such as off-street parking, building permits, business licenses, fire safety and the life. 
4.  Notwithstanding subsection 31-186(13)c.2. above, persons conducting a home occupation are required to comply with, and are subject to, any and all local, state and/or federal rules, regulations, ordinances, or laws, including, but not limited to, those regarding environmental protection. 
5.  Home occupations are permitted accessory uses only so long as all the following conditions are observed: 
(i)  No persons other than resident occupants of the premises shall be engaged in such occupation; 
(ii)  The home occupation shall not involve the use of advertising signs or window displays on the premises or any other local advertising media which call attention to the fact that the home is being used for business purposes; except that for purposes of a telephone directory listing, a telephone number, but no business address, may be published; 
(iii)  In no way shall the outside appearance of the dwelling be altered from its residential character; 
(iv)  Performance of the occupation activity shall not be visible from the street; 
(v)  The use shall not increase vehicular or pedestrian traffic flow beyond what normally occurs in the applicable zoning district. Additionally, the use shall not increase the number of vehicles parked on the premises by more than two (2) additional vehicles at a time. All customer/client parking shall be off-street and other than in unpaved areas of the front yard; 
(vi)  There shall be no outside storage, (to include trailers), or display related to the home occupation; 
(vii)  No home occupation shall cause an increase in the use of any one (1) or more public utilities (water, sewer, electricity, garbage, etc.) so that the combined total use for dwelling and home occupation purposes exceeds the average for residences in the neighborhood; 
(viii)  One (1) commercial vehicle, capacity of one (1) ton or less (excluding attached trailers) may be used or parked on the property in connection with the home occupation; 
(ix)  Except for articles produced on the premises, no stock in trade shall be displayed or sold on the premises; 
(x)  No mechanical or electrical equipment shall be employed other than the quality and quantity of machinery or equipment customarily found in a home associated with a hobby or avocation not conducted for gain or profit; and 
(xi)  The home occupation use shall not generate noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference beyond what normally occurs in the applicable zoning district. 
6.  Home occupations may, subject to the requirements of subsections 31-186(13)c.1—5, include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following: 
(i)  Office facility of an accountant, architect, attorney, engineer, consultant, insurance agent, real estate broker or member of similar professions; 
(ii)  Author, artist or sculptor; 
(iii)  Dressmaker, seamstress, or tailor; 
(iv)  Music/dance teacher, or similar school of instruction, provided that instruction shall be limited to no more than one (1) pupil at a time; 
(v)  Individual tutoring; 
(vi)  Millinery; 
(vii)  Minister, rabbi, priest or member of religious orders; 
(viii)  Home crafts such as rug weaving, model making; 
(ix)  Office facility of a salesman, sales representative, manufacturer's representative, or service provider, for sale of goods or services, whether said individual or individuals are self-employed or otherwise, and provided that no retail or wholesale transactions or provision of services are made on the premises; 
(x)  Repair shops for small electrical appliances (such as irons, portable fans and the like), typewriters, cameras and other similar small items, provided the item does not have an internal combustion engine; and 
(xi)  Food preparation establishments such as cake maker, provided there is compliance with all state health laws and no consumption of food items by customers on the premises. 
7.  Permitted home occupations shall not in any event be deemed to include: 
(i)  Animal hospitals or clinics, commercial stables, or commercial kennels; 
(ii)  Schools of instruction of any kind with more than one (1) pupil at a time unless such school was established prior to the date of passage of this section; 
(iii)  Restaurants; 
(iv)  Automobile, boat or trailer paint or repair shops (major or minor); 
(v)  Doctor, dentist, veterinarian or other medically related offices; 
(vi)  On-premises retail sales, except garage sales as otherwise provided in this Code; 
(vii)  Laundromats with more than one (1) washing machine and one (1) dryer; 
(viii)  Mortuaries; 
(ix)  Private clubs; 
(x)  Trailer rentals; 
(xi)  Repair shops or service establishments, except as provided in subsection 31-186(13)c.6.(x) above; 
(xii)  Carpentry work; 
(xiii)  Photo developing or photo studios; 
(xiv)  Upholstering; 
(xv)  Antique shops; 
(xvi)  Gift shops; 
(xvii)  Repair shops for any item with an internal combustion engine; and 
(xviii)  Those home occupation uses which, without regard to principal or accessory use conditions, would be classified as assembly, factory-industrial, hazardous, institutional or mercantile occupancies as defined by the 1988 Standard Building Code, as amended. 
8.  No conditional use permit as provided in section 31-456 of this chapter shall be issued for any home occupations prohibited by subsection 31-186(13)c.7. above. 
9.  The provisions of this section shall apply to all home occupations, regardless of the date of their creation/existence, unless specifically exempted by subsection 31-186(13)c.7.(viii), or temporarily exempted by subsection 31-186(13)c.8. above. 
(14)  A subdivision entry sign, when such sign is located on a lot that abuts a subdivision boundary and fronts on a street entering the subdivision. Such sign: 
a.  Shall not have a sign face which exceeds a total of twenty-four (24) square feet; and 
b.  Shall not exceed six (6) feet in height; and 
c.  Shall not be located in a side or rear yard which is adjacent to any other lot designated for residential use; and 
d.  Shall advertise only the name of the subdivision. 
(15)  Cemetery. 
(16)  Licensed community homes or group home for persons with disabilities having not more than six (6) persons with disabilities and two (2) supervisors in accordance with V.T.C.A., Human Resources Code, ch. 123. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 6-1; Ord. No. 87-10, §§ 1,2, 2-24-87; Ord. No. 91-71, § 1, 12-17-91; Ord. No. 92-6, §§ I, II, 3-24-92; Ord. No. 93-52, § II, 6-22-93; Ord. No. 99-47, § II, 6-8-99; Ord. No. 10-059, § III, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 16-001 , § I, 1-12-16; Ord. No. 17-010 , § I, 2-14-17; Ord. No. 20-024 , § I, 5-26-20)  
Sec. 31-187. - Height regulations. 
No building in a district "R-1" single-family residential district shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half (2½) stories in height. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 6-2)  
Sec. 31-188. - Area regulations. 
(a)  Size of yards. The yards in the district "R-1" single-family residential district shall conform to the following: 
(1)  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. Where lots have double frontage running through from one (1) street to another, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets. No parking shall be allowed within the required front yard. 
(2)  Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot having a width of not less than seven (7) feet. A side yard adjacent to a side street shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet. No side yard for allowable nonresidential uses shall be less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
(3)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than twenty-five (25) feet measured from the centerline of the easement as in the subdivision ordinance. 
(b)  Size of lot. The lot requirements for the district "R-1" single-family district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Lot area. No building shall be constructed on any lot less than six thousand (6,000) square feet. 
(2)  Lot width. The width of the lot shall not be less than sixty (60) feet at the front street building line, nor shall its average width be less than sixty (60) feet. 
(3)  Lot depth. The average depth of the lot shall not be less than one hundred (100) feet, except that a corner lot, having a minimum width of not less than eighty (80) feet, may have an average depth of less than one hundred (100) feet provided that the minimum depth is not less than ninety (90) feet. 
(4)  Existing lots. Where a lot having less area, width and/or depth than herein required existed in separate ownership upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the above regulations shall not prohibit the erection of a one-family dwelling thereon. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 6-3)  
Sec. 31-189. - Parking regulations. 
Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in a district "R-1" single-family residential district in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in article V, division 3 of this chapter. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 6-4; Ord. No. 83-33, §§ 2, 3, 6-14-83; Ord. No. 83-38, §§ 2-4, 7-12-83; Ord. No. 86-23, § 3, 4-22-86)  
Secs. 31-190—31-192. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4A. - DISTRICT "SF-2" SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 31-193. - Use regulations. 
A building or premises in a district "SF-2" single-family residential district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings meeting the criteria of the garden home district, with a minimum floor area of one thousand one hundred (1,100) square feet. 
(2)  All uses allowed in section 31-186, including those defined as home occupation uses. 
(Ord. No. 93-102, § II, 11-9-93; Ord. No. 10-014, § I, 4-27-10)  
Sec. 31-194. - Height regulations. 
No building in the "SF-2" single-family residential district shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet or two and one-half (2½) stories in height. 
(Ord. No. 93-102, § II, 11-9-93; Ord. No. 10-014, § I, 4-27-10)  
Sec. 31-195. - Area regulations. 
(a)  Project size. All development projects in this district must contain a minimum of one (1) acre of property. A planned unit development (PUD), as defined in chapter 31, article V, division 8, Killeen code of ordinances, shall be required for any request for a "SF-2" district when the total acreage of the request consists of twenty-five (25) acres or more. The purpose of requiring a PUD is to give the city council the ability to determine the proposed development's impact on existing infrastructure and open/ recreational space and whether additional public improvements to serve denser development are necessary to promote the health, safety and welfare of the development's residents. 
(b)  Size of yards. The yards in the "SF-2" single-family residential district shall conform to the following: 
(1)  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. Where lots have double frontage running through from one street to another, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets. 
(2)  Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot having a width of not less than five (5) feet. A side yard adjacent to a side street shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet. 
(3)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than twenty (20) feet. 
(c)  Size of lot. The lot requirements for the "SF-2" single-family residential district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Lot area. No building shall be constructed on any lot less than five thousand (5,000) square feet of area. 
(2)  Lot width. The width of the lot shall not be less than fifty (50) feet at the front street building line. On corner lots, with two (2) street frontages, the minimum width shall be not less than sixty (60) feet. 
(3)  Lot depth. The average depth of the lot shall be not less than one hundred (100) feet, except that a corner lot having a minimum width of not less than forty-five (45) feet may have an average depth of less than one hundred (100) feet, provided that the minimum depth is not less than ninety (90) feet. 
(d)  Landscaping. All yards shall be fully sodded or covered with other city-approved groundcover, as determined by the Building Official, to ensure compatibility and to control dust, erosion and sediment from migrating off-site. Additionally, for each dwelling unit, a minimum of one (1) six (6) foot tall canopy tree with two-inch caliper, and eight (8) three (3) gallon shrubs, are required to be planted in the front yard. All landscaping must be in place upon final inspection unless an extension is granted in writing by the Building Official. Such extension shall not exceed sixty (60) days. 
(e)  Architectural design. The same exterior architectural elevation may not be used within any grouping of five homes. 
(Ord. No. 93-102, § II, 11-9-93; Ord. No. 94-62, § I, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 10-014, § I, 4-27-10; Ord. No. 19-040 , § I, 9-10-19)  
Sec. 31-196. - Parking regulations. 
Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in a "SF-2" single-family residential district in accordance with the requirements for the uses set forth in article V, division 3 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 93-102, § II, 11-9-93; Ord. No. 10-014, § I, 4-27-10)  
Secs. 31-197—31-200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - DISTRICT "RM-1" RESIDENTIAL MODULAR HOME SINGLE-FAMILY DISTRICT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Mobile homes, mobile home parks, etc., Ch. 17. 
 
Sec. 31-201. - Use regulations. 
(a)  The following uses shall be permitted in a district "RM-1" residential modular home single-family district: 
(1)  All uses permitted in R-1 district, provided that all conventional site-built structures in the district created by this division shall not be entitled to any of the waivers of construction and inspection provisions provided elsewhere in this code and such structures shall be built in conformance with all of those standards as if constructed in an R-1 district. 
(2)  One-family dwellings of modular construction: 
a.  Modular construction as used in this section shall mean factory-produced components transportable to a building site and affixed to a permanent foundation meeting HUD minimum property standards for one- and two-family housing units. (Certification that each module meets the required standards shall be the certification from the manufacturer to the builder that such standards are met, and a copy of such must be provided to the city's building official prior to placing any modules on site in this district.) 
b.  Affixed to permanent foundation as used in this section shall mean that the structure so affixed is free from all devices used for its transportation. 
c.  Residential units of modular construction may not be placed in any other district. 
(b)  Inactive district. All properties with a "RM-1" district zoning in effect prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this paragraph is derived shall continue to be allowed to be used for the uses provided in this section, and regulated by the provisions of this section, until such time as the property is rezoned by action initiated by the property owner or by the city. This "RM-1" district shall be considered inactive as of the date of the ordinance from which this paragraph is derived [May 26, 2020] and, as such, no new applications for an "RM-1" zoning shall be accepted or considered by the city following said date. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 6-A-1; Ord. No. 20-024 , § I, 5-26-20)  
Sec. 31-202. - Height regulations. 
The height regulations for the district "RM-1" residential modular home single-family district shall be the same as provided for the "R-1" district. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 6-A-2)  
Sec. 31-203. - Area regulations. 
The area regulations for the district "RM-1" residential modular home single-family district shall be the same as provided for the "R-1" district. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 6-A-3)  
Sec. 31-204. - Parking regulations. 
The parking regulations for the district "RM-1" residential modular home single-family district shall be the same as provided for the "R-1" district. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 6-A-4 [Ord. No. 75-25, § 1, 8-12-75])  
Secs. 31-205—31-215. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - DISTRICT "RT-1" RESIDENTIAL TOWNHOUSE SINGLE-FAMILY DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 31-216. - Purpose. 
The regulations set forth in this division, or set forth elsewhere in this Ordinance when referred to in this division, are the regulations in the "RT-1" residential townhouse single-family district. The district "RT-1" is established to provide for the development of single-family attached dwelling units along with other uses which are associated with single-family uses e.g., schools, churches, parks, etc. This zoning district permits medium density residential uses and it is a logical transition from nonresidential to residential zoning districts and encourages infill development where adequate public facilities already exist making use of developable lots.  
Sec. 31-217. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Common area shall mean private property owned in common by, and designated for the private use of, the owners or occupants of townhouses in a particular project or subdivision. Common area uses include, but are not limited to, recreation areas, parks and plazas, ornamental areas open to the general view within the project or subdivision, and building setbacks not otherwise required by ordinance. The common area does not include public streets, alleys, required building setbacks or utility easements. 
Dwelling unit shall mean a single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. 
Open Space shall mean property under public or private ownership which is or used for parks, recreation, conservation, preservation of native habitat and other natural resources, surface water impoundment, historic, or scenic purposes. Impervious surfaces are not permitted. 
Townhouse shall mean one (1) single-family dwelling unit within a group of three or more dwelling units in which each dwelling unit extends from foundation to roof and with open space on at least two sides and attached to another dwelling unit on a least one side. 
Townhouse group shall mean three to five townhouses. No dwelling unit shall be located over another dwelling unit and there shall be no visible separation between walls or roofs of adjoining units. Each dwelling unit shall be separated from other units by one or more vertical common firewalls. 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 31-218. - Use regulations. 
All buildings and premises located in the district "RT-1" residential townhouse single-family district shall be limited to townhouse development and accessory buildings and uses as described in section 31-186. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 6-B-1)  
Sec. 31-219. - Height regulations. 
No townhouse in a district "RT-1" residential townhouse single-family district shall be less than two stories with a maximum height of thirty-five (35) feet. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 6-B-4)  
Sec. 31-220. - Area regulations. 
The area regulations for the district "RT-1" residential townhouse single-family district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Townhouse group: 
a.  No townhouse group shall exceed two hundred (200) feet in length. 
b.  There shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet of separation between each townhouse group within a townhouse subdivision. 
(2)  Lot requirements: 
a.  Each townhouse shall be constructed on an individually platted lot. 
b.  Each townhouse lot shall have a lot area of not less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet. 
c.  Each townhouse lot shall have a width of not less than twenty four (24) feet. 
d.  Each lot shall contain a private yard with not less than four hundred (400) square feet of area. Parking areas shall not be included in the computation of the required private yard area. A wall or solid fence not less than six (6) feet in height shall be required on side lot lines where the required private yard adjoins such lot lines. A private yard may contain a patio cover or roof which does not cover more than twenty-five (25) percent of the private yard. 
e.  Front yard: 
1.  The front yard/setback requirement shall be fifteen (15) feet and a front loading garage shall be set back from the property line not less than twenty (20) feet. Carports shall not be permitted in the front yard. 
2.  In no case shall the required front yard of any townhouse be less than any required front yard on the same side of the street between intersecting streets. 
f.  Side yard: 
1.  There shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet of side yard provided at the side property line of any townhouse subdivision. 
2.  A side yard adjacent to a side street shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet. 
g.  Rear yard: 
1.  There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than twenty (20) feet as measured from the rear property line. 
2.  Garages or carports having direct access to a rear alley or common driveway shall be set back from the rear lot line not less than twenty (20) feet. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 6-B-3)  
Sec. 31-221. - Parking regulations. 
The parking regulations for the district "RT-1" residential townhouse single-family district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each townhouse. 
a.  Resident parking spaces shall be provided in the front or rear of each unit. The spaces shall be in the unit's garage, carport, and/or driveway. 
There shall be minimum visitor parking of one-half (0.50) space per unit. Visitor parking shall be provided in a rear surface parking area and accessed via an auto court, or private drive separate from the street, and integral to the overall development. Any fraction thereof shall be rounded up to the next whole number. 
(2)  The width of driveways located in the front yard of townhouse lots shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the width of the respective lots. 
(3)  One-way common drives shall be not less than ten (10) feet in width, and two-way common driveways shall not be less than twenty (20) feet in width.  
Sec. 31-222. - Landscaping regulations. 
Thirty-five (35) percent of all common areas shall be devoted to open space. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 6-B-5; Ord. No. 76-15, § 2, 3-23-76; Ord No 14-010, Art IV, Div 6, 2-25-14; Ord. No. 19-040 , § I, 9-10-19)  
Secs. 31-223—31-230. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - DISTRICT "R-2" TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 31-231. - Use regulations. 
A building or premises in a district "R-2" two-family residential district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Any use permitted in district "R-1." 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 7-1; Ord. No. 99-70, § I, 9-14-99; Ord. No. 05-69, § I, 9-13-05)  
Sec. 31-232. - Height regulations. 
The height regulations for the district "R-2" two-family residential district shall be the same as provided for the "R-1" district. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 7-2; Ord. No. 99-70, § I, 9-14-99)  
Sec. 31-233. - Area regulations. 
(a)  Size of yards. The yards in the district "R-2" two-family residential district shall conform to the following: 
(1)  Front yard. Same as district "R-1." 
(2)  Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot having a width of not less than seven (7) feet. A side yard adjacent to a side street shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet. No side yard for allowable nonresidential uses shall be less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
(3)  Rear yard. Same as district "R-1." 
(b)  Size of lot. The lot requirements for the district "R-2" two-family residential district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Lot area. No building containing two (2) dwelling units shall be constructed on any lot of less than seven thousand (7,000) square feet. 
(2)  Lot width. The width of the lot shall not be less than sixty (60) feet at the front street building line, nor shall its average width be less than sixty (60) feet. 
(3)  Lot depth. The average depth of the lot shall not be less than one hundred ten (110) feet, except that a corner lot, having a minimum width of not less than eighty (80) feet, may have an average depth of less than one hundred ten (110) feet provided that the minimum depth is no less than eighty (80) feet. 
(4)  Exception. Where a lot having less area, width and/or depth than herein required existed and/or was included on a filed plat prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter was derived, the above regulations shall not prohibit the erection of a two-family dwelling on a lot containing less than seven thousand (7,000) square feet, provided the property owner cannot replat adjacent abutting land to meet these new lot restrictions and yard regulations are complied with. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 7-3; Ord. No. 99-70, § I, 9-14-99)  
Sec. 31-234. - Parking regulations. 
Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in a district "R-2" two-family residential district in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in article V, division 3 of this chapter. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 7-4; Ord. No. 99-70, § I, 9-14-99)  
Secs. 31-235—31-245. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - DISTRICT "R-3" MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 31-246. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Uses. A building or premises in an "R-3" multifamily residential district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Any use permitted in district "R-2." 
(2)  Multifamily dwellings. 
(3)  Boarding and lodging houses. 
(4)  Dormitories for students. 
(5)  Fraternity or sorority houses. 
(6)  Institutions of a religious, educational, charitable or philanthropic nature, but not a penal or mental institution. 
(7)  Accessory buildings and uses, customarily incident to the above uses and located on the same lot therewith, not involving the conduct of a retail business. 
(b)  Inactive district. All properties with an R-3 district zoning in effect prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this paragraph is derived shall continue to be allowed to be used for the uses provided in this section, and regulated by the provisions of this section, until such time as the property is rezoned by action initiated by the property owner or by the city. This R-3 district shall be considered inactive as of the date of the ordinance from which this paragraph is derived [February 9, 2010] and, as such, no new applications for an R-3 zoning shall be accepted or considered by the city following said date. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 8-1; Ord. No. 99-70, § II, 9-14-99; Ord. No. 10-003, § II, 2-9-10)  
Sec. 31-247. - Height regulations. 
The height regulations for the district "R-3" multifamily residential district shall be as required by the Standard Building Code. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 8-2; Ord. No. 99-70, § II, 9-14-99)  
Sec. 31-248. - Area regulations. 
(a)  Size of yards. The yards in the district "R-3" multifamily residential district shall conform to the following: 
(1)  Front yard. Same as district "R-1." 
(2)  Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot having a width of not less than five (5) feet. A side yard adjacent to a side street shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet. No side yard for allowable nonresidential uses shall be less than fifteen (15) feet. Lots used for single-family and two-family residential uses shall conform to district "R-1." 
(3)  Rear yard. 
(a)  Single and two family residential same as district "R-1." 
(b)  Other use. Ten (10) feet, except when the lot abuts any more restrictive residential district a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet shall be provided. 
(b)  Size of lot. The lot requirements for the district "R-3" multifamily residential district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Lot area. No building shall be constructed on any lot of less than seven thousand (7,000) square feet, save and except on lots platted and approved prior to the passage of this chapter. Size of building will be governed by off-street parking requirements and yard requirements. In no case shall more than 40% of the total lot area be covered by building(s). 
(2)  Lot width. The width of the lot shall not be less than sixty (60) feet at the front street building line, nor shall its average width be less than sixty (60) feet. 
(3)  Lot depth. The average depth of the lot shall not be less than one hundred (100) feet, except that a corner lot, having a minimum width of not less than eighty (80) feet, may have an average depth of less than one hundred (100) feet provided that the minimum depth is no less than eighty (80) feet. 
(4)  Existing lots. Where a lot having less area, width and/or depth than herein required existed upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the above regulations shall not prohibit the erection of a dwelling thereon, provided yard regulations are complied with. 
(c)  Single-family and two-family residential lots. Lots used for single-family and two-family residential uses shall conform to all the area regulations for district "R-1" or "R-2" as appropriate. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 8-3 [Ord. No. 83-33, § 4, 6-14-83; Ord. No. 83-38, § 5, 7-12-83]; Ord. No. 99-70, § II, 9-14-99; Ord. No. 05-69, § II, 9-13-05)  
Sec. 31-249. - Parking regulations. 
Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in the district "R-3" multifamily residential district in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in article V, division 3 of this chapter; provided however, that required front yard may be used for parking and maneuvering area. Where a lot existed on a filed plat prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter was derived, the parking regulations established by the ordinance shall not be mandatory provided that there is insufficient space for the required parking spaces within the 60% of the lot not occupied by buildings. In no case, shall less than 1-1/3 parking spaces be provided per dwelling lot. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 8-4 [Ord. No. 70-52, § 3, 8-28-70]; Ord. No. 99-70, § II, 9-14-99; Ord. No. 02-48, § III, 9-24-02)  
Sec. 31-250. - Screening device requirements. 
(a)  When property zoned R-3 abuts property zoned for any single-family or two-family use, the property owner shall erect and be responsible for the maintenance of a screening device between such R-3 zoned property and such more restrictively zoned property. 
(b)  A barrier of stone, brick, pierced brick or block, uniformly colored wood or other permanent material of equal character, density and design, at least six (6) feet in height; provided, any such structure in excess of eight (8) feet in height shall be deemed a wall subject to the provisions of the building code of the city. A lattice weave or material covering over a chain link fence is not a screening device. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 8-5 [Ord. No. 74-25, § 1, 5-28-74]; Ord. No. 99-70, § II, 9-14-99)  
Secs. 31-251—31-255. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8A. - DISTRICT "R-3F" MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 31-255.1. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Uses. A building or premises in an R-3F multifamily residential district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  All uses allowed in section 31-186. 
(2)  Multifamily structures containing three (3) or four (4) separate dwelling units. 
(3)  Institutions of a religious, educational, charitable or philanthropic nature, but not a penal or mental institution. 
(4)  Accessory buildings and uses, customarily incident to the above uses and located on the same lot therewith, not involving the conduct of a business. 
(b)  Planned unit development required. Rezoning applications under this division shall be subject to the requirements of 31-256.9 of division 8B of this article, if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 10-003, § III, 2-9-10; Ord. No. 20-024 , § I, 5-26-20)  
Sec. 31-255.2. - Height regulations. 
(a)  No building or structure in an R-3F district shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
(b)  The height of the building or structure is restricted to thirty-five (35) feet. Cooling towers, roof gables, chimneys, vent stacks, water stand pipes and tanks, church steeples, domes and spires, and school buildings may extend for an additional height not to exceed forty-five (45) feet above the average grade line of the building. 
(Ord. No. 10-003, § III, 2-9-10)  
Sec. 31-255.3. - Area regulations. 
(a)  Size of yards. The yards in the R-3F district shall conform to the following: 
(1)  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a minimum depth of twenty-five (25) feet. No parking, storage or similar use shall be allowed in required front yards. 
(2)  Side yard. A minimum side yard of seven and a half (7.5) feet shall be provided. If the building or structure sides on a public street, then the setback shall be fifteen (15) feet. No storage or similar use shall be allowed in required side yards. 
(3)  Rear yard. A minimum rear yard of twenty (20) feet shall be provided, except when the lot abuts property with a more restrictive zoning (A-R1, R-1, SF-2, RM-1, RT-1, or R-2), a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet shall be provided. No storage or similar use shall be allowed in required rear yards. 
(b)  Size of lots. The lot requirements for the R-3F district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Lot area. The lot area shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet or larger. 
(2)  Lot width. The width of the lot shall not be less than seventy (70) feet at the front street building line, nor shall its average width be less than seventy (70) feet. 
(3)  Lot depth. The average depth of the lot shall not be less than one hundred (100) feet. 
(Ord. No. 10-003, § III, 2-9-10)  
Sec. 31-255.4. - Architectural design. 
(a)  The same front elevation may not be used within a grouping of five (5) lots. Variation in elevations shall include a minimum of three (3) of the following elements: 
(1)  Variation in color and materials; 
(2)  Banding/wall plane projections or recesses having a depth of at least one (1) inch and at least one (1) foot in width for a one (1) story building, and two (2) feet in width for a two (2) story building (or a combination of two (2) one (1) foot wide strips); 
(3)  Canopies projecting a minimum of four (4) feet from the plane of the primary facade walls; 
(4)  Windows and doors different in size, location and/or shape; 
(5)  Changes in rooflines. 
(b)  Windows shall be provided with trim or recesses, rather than flush with the wall. 
(Ord. No. 10-003, § III, 2-9-10; Ord. No. 19-040 , § I, 9-10-19)  
Sec. 31-255.5. - Landscaping. 
All yards shall have vegetative groundcover of sufficient quality and quantity, or other groundcover approved by the building official, to control dust, erosion and sediment from leaving the site. For each dwelling unit, a minimum of one (1) six-foot tall tree with two-inch caliper, and three (3) three-gallon shrubs, are required. All required trees shall be placed in the front or the side of the building. All landscaping must be in place upon final inspection and prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy (unless an extension, not to exceed thirty (30) days, has been requested and approved in writing by the building official). 
(Ord. No. 10-003, § III, 2-9-10)  
Sec. 31-255.6. - Parking regulations. 
Off street parking spaces shall be provided in the R-3F district in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in article V, division 3 of this chapter, provided however, that required side and rear yards may be used for parking and maneuvering area. Contiguous parking lots shall not allow for uninterrupted vehicular movement in order to prevent raceway effect. 
(Ord. No. 10-003, § III, 2-9-10)  
Sec. 31-255.7. - Screening device requirements. 
(a)  Definition. For the purposes of this section, the phrase "screening device" shall mean a barrier of stone, brick, pierced brick or block, uniformly colored wood or other material upon request and approved in advance by the building official, at least six (6) feet in height; provided, any such structure in excess of eight (8) feet in height shall be deemed a wall subject to the provisions of the building code of the city. A lattice weave or material covering over a chain link fence is not a screening device. 
(b)  When required. When property zoned R-3F abuts property zoned A-R1, R-1, SF-2, RM-1, RT-1, or R-2, the property owner of the R-3F zoned property shall erect and be responsible for the maintenance of an approved screening device along the common lot line between the R-3F zoned property and the A-R1, R-1, SF-2, RM-1, RT-1, or R-2 property. 
(Ord. No. 10-003, § III, 2-9-10)  
Secs. 31-255.8—31-256. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8B. - DISTRICT "R-3A" MULTIFAMILY APARTMENT RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 31-256.1. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Uses. A building or premises in an R-3A multifamily apartment residential district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the R-1 or R-2 districts. 
(2)  Apartment complexes. 
(3)  Boarding and lodging houses. 
(4)  Fraternity or sorority houses. 
(5)  Dormitories for educational or employment purposes as a primary use. 
(6)  Any group housing activity not otherwise identified in another multifamily or business district. 
(7)  Accessory buildings and uses, customarily incident to the above uses and located on the same lot therewith, not involving the conduct of a business. 
(b)  Planned unit development required. Rezoning applications requesting zoning under this division shall be subject to the requirements of 31-256.9 of this division, if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 10-003, § IV, 2-9-10; Ord. No. 20-024 , § I, 5-26-20)  
Sec. 31-256.2. - Height regulations. 
The height of any building or structure in this district shall not exceed thirty five (35) feet except by providing an additional one (1) foot to every applicable setback distance as provided under section 31-256.3 for each two (2) feet of additional building or structure height over thirty-five (35) feet. 
(Ord. No. 10-003, § IV, 2-9-10)  
Sec. 31-256.3. - Area regulations. 
(a)  Size of yards. The minimum yards in the R-3A district shall conform to the following: 
(1)  Front yard. Same as the R-3F district. 
(2)  Side yard. Same as the R-3F district. 
(3)  Rear yard. Twenty five (25) feet. 
(b)  Size of lot. The lot requirements for the R-3A district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be one half (1/2) acre. For developments larger than one half (1/2) acre the minimum land area per dwelling unit shall not be less than two thousand five hundred (2500) square feet. 
(2)  Lot width. The width of the lot shall not be less than eighty (80) feet at the front street building line, nor shall its average width be less than eighty (80) feet. 
(Ord. No. 10-003, § IV, 2-9-10)  
Sec. 31-256.4. - Architectural design. 
(a)  The same front elevation may not be used within a grouping of five (5) lots. Variation in elevations shall include a minimum of three (3) of the following elements: 
(1)  Variation in color and materials; 
(2)  Banding/wall plane projections or recesses having a depth of at least one (1) inch and at least one (1) foot in width for a one (1) story building, and two (2) feet in width for a two (2) story building (or a combination of two (2) one (1) foot wide strips); 
(3)  Canopies projecting a minimum of four (4) feet from the plane of the primary facade walls; 
(4)  Windows and doors different in size, location and/or shape; 
(5)  Changes in rooflines. 
(b)  Windows shall be provided with trim or recesses, not flush with the wall. 
(Ord. No. 10-003, § IV, 2-9-10; Ord. No. 19-040 , § I, 9-10-19)  
Sec. 31-256.5. - Landscaping. 
All yards shall have vegetative groundcover of sufficient quality and quantity, or other groundcover approved by the building official, to control dust, erosion and sediment from leaving the site. For each two (2) dwelling units, a minimum of one (1) six-foot tall tree with two-inch caliper, and six (6) three-gallon shrubs, are required. All landscaping must be in place upon final inspection and prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy (unless an extension, not to exceed thirty (30) days, has been requested and approved in writing by the building official). 
(Ord. No. 10-003, § IV, 2-9-10)  
Sec. 31-256.7. - Parking regulations. 
Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in the R-3A district in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in article V, division 3 of this chapter provided, however, that required side and rear yards may be used for parking and maneuvering area. Contiguous parking lots shall not allow for uninterrupted vehicular movement in order to prevent raceway effect. 
(Ord. No. 10-003, § IV, 2-9-10)  
Sec. 31-256.8. - Screening device requirements. 
(a)  A barrier of stone, brick, pierced brick or block, uniformly colored wood or other material upon request and approved in advance by the building official, at least six (6) feet in height; provided, any such structure in excess of eight (8) feet in height shall be deemed a wall subject to the provisions of the building code of the city. A lattice weave or material covering over a chain link fence is not a screening device. 
(b)  When required. When property zoned R-3F abuts property zoned A-R1, R-1, SF-2, RM-1, RT-1, or R-2, the property owner of the R-3F zoned property shall erect and be responsible for the maintenance of an approved screening device along the common lot line between the R-3F zoned property and the A-R1, R-1, SF-2, RM-1, RT-1, or R-2 property. 
(Ord. No. 10-003, § IV, 2-9-10)  
Sec. 31-256.9. - Planned unit development (PUD) required. 
(a)  A planned unit development (PUD) as provided in chapter 31, article V, division 8, Killeen code of ordinances shall be required for any request for an R-3F and/or R-3A district when the total acreage of the request alone, or when the total acreage of the request combined with all adjacent areas zoned R-2, R-3, R-3F, and R-3A, and/or areas within a two-thousand feet radius of any of the property seeking to be rezoned, consist of twenty-five (25) acres or more. The purpose for requiring a PUD is to provide the planning and zoning commission and the city council with the ability to determine the proposed development's impact on surrounding properties, existing infrastructure and open/recreational space and also to determine whether additional public improvements to serve denser multifamily development are necessary to promote the health, safety and welfare of the development's residents. 
(b)  Properties are considered adjacent and subject to the computation of this section if they are continuously zoned for multifamily and/or two family residential use regardless of ownership, property lines, easements or rights-of-way. 
(c)  The applicant shall provide any public infrastructure beyond the city's minimum development standards that is required to service the proposed development, including open/recreational space and oversized water, sewer and drainage facilities and greater street widths. 
(d)  The applicant is responsible for determining whether or not a PUD is required. However, if the director of planning and development services determines at any time that a PUD is required and one was not submitted the applicant shall be informed in writing and they shall either modify their application to include the PUD or withdraw the application and have all associated application fee(s) returned. 
(Ord. No. 10-003, § IV, 2-9-10)  
Secs. 31-257—31-260. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - DISTRICT "R-MP" MOBILE HOME AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARK 
 
Sec. 31-261. - Use regulations. 
(a)  No building or premises in the district "R-MP" mobile home district shall be used and no buildings shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered, or enlarged, nor shall a certificate of occupancy be issued, except for the following uses: 
(1)  Mobile home, conforming to the current ordinance regulating same, either: 
a.  As a part of a mobile home park; or 
b.  Provided, however, that mobile trailer parks in existence on the date of the ordinance from which this section is derived with proper zoning and current mobile trailer park permits shall hereinafter be designated "R-MP" mobile home district. All other mobile trailer parks shall be considered nonconforming. 
(2)  Accessory buildings and structures incidental to the above uses, including community center, swimming pools, etc. 
(3)  Installations owned and operated by the city, the county, the state or public utility companies, which installations are necessary for the public safety, governmental services, or the furnishing of utility services to or through the "R-MP" district. 
(4)  All uses allowed in section 31-186, including those defined as home occupation uses. 
(b)  Provided, however, that mobile trailer parks in existence on the date of the ordinance from which this section is derived with proper zoning and current mobile trailer park permits shall hereinafter be designated as "R-MP" mobile home district. All other mobile trailer parks shall be considered nonconforming. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 9-1; Ord. No. 96-63, § III, 8-13-96; Ord. No. 20-024 , § I, 5-26-20)  
Sec. 31-262. - Height regulations. 
The height regulations for the district "R-MP" mobile home district shall be the same as for the "R-3" district. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 9-2)  
Sec. 31-263. - Area regulations. 
(a)  Size of yards. The yards in the district "R-MP" mobile home district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Front yard. The minimum front setback shall be twenty-five (25) feet from front property line of park. 
(2)  Rear yard. The minimum setback shall be ten (10) feet from rear property line of the park, except when such property abuts an R-1 district a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet rear yard shall be provided. 
(3)  Side yard. The minimum side yard setback shall be ten (10) feet from the side property line of the park. 
(b)  Size of lots. The size of lots in the district "R-MP" mobile home district shall be as provided in chapter 17, article II, division 3 of this code. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, §§ 9-3, 9-4; Ord. No. 96-63, § III, 8-13-96)  
Sec. 31-264. - Parking regulations. 
Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in the district "R-MP" mobile home district in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in article V, division 3 of this chapter. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 9-5 [Ord. No. 70-52, § 3, 8-28-70]; Ord. No. 96-63, § III, 8-13-96)  
DIVISION 9A. - DISTRICT "R-MS" MANUFACTURED HOUSING DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 31-265. - Application. 
The intent of this district is to allow for the construction of a subdivision within the city which is to be developed with manufactured housing exclusively. The subdivision so developed will, in all aspects possible, conform to the criteria of the single family residential district, to include, but not limited to, all necessary public infrastructure, i.e., public streets, sidewalks, public utility and drainage systems. 
(Ord. No. 96-63, § III, 8-13-96)  
Sec. 31-266. - Use regulations. 
(a)  No building or premises in the district "R-MS" manufactured housing district shall be used and no buildings shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered, or enlarged, nor shall a certificate of occupancy be issued, except for the following uses: 
(1)  Manufactured housing, as defined herein, as part of a manufactured home subdivision, for occupancy as a single-family home, shown on a subdivision plat approved by the commission and city council and filed for record, designed specifically for and restricted to a manufactured home development. 
(2)  Installations owned and operated by the city, the county, the state or public utility companies, which installations are necessary for the public safety, governmental services, or the furnishing of utility services to or through the "R-MS" district. 
(Ord. No. 96-63, § III, 8-13-96)  
Sec. 31-267. - Area regulations. 
(a)  Area requirements. 
(1)  Project size. All projects for development in this district must contain a minimum of five (5) acres of property. No subdivision proposed for this district may contain less than ten (10) individual lots. 
(Ord. No. 96-63, § III, 8-13-96)  
Sec. 31-268. - Height regulations. 
No building in the district "R-MS" manufactured housing district shall exceed thirty-five (35') feet or two and one-half (2½) stories in height. 
(Ord. No. 96-63, § III, 8-13-96)  
Sec. 31-269. - Area regulations. 
(a)  Size of yards. The yards in the district "R-MS" manufactured housing district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Front yard. There shall be front yard having a depth of not less than twenty (20') feet. Where lots have double frontage running through from one (1) street to another, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets. 
(2)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than twenty (20') feet. 
(3)  Side yard. Residences located in this district shall have a minimum side yard of seven (7') feet. 
(b)  Size of lots. The size of lots in the district "R-MS" manufactured housing district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Lot width. The minimum lot width in the district shall be fifty (50') feet. 
(2)  Area. The minimum lot area in this district shall be five thousand (5,000') square feet. 
(Ord. No. 96-63, § III, 8-13-96)  
Sec. 31-270. - Siting requirements. 
(a)  All manufactured housing placed in this district shall be permanently placed on a foundation approved and inspected under the provisions of chapter 8 of the City Code, with all equipment utilized for moving the manufactured housing being removed from the structure. 
(b)  All manufactured housing placed in this district shall be provided with appropriate skirting and/or foundation shielding as directed in chapter 8 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 96-63, § III, 8-13-96)  
Sec. 31-271. - Parking regulations. 
Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in the district "R-MS" manufactured housing district in accordance with the provisions for the specific use set forth in article V, division 3 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 96-63, § III, 8-13-96)  
Secs. 31-272—31-275. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - DISTRICT "B-1" PROFESSIONAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 31-276. - Use regulations. 
[Use regulations are as follows:] 
(1)  Uses customarily incidental to the primary use, as hereinafter provided, subject to the special conditions contained in subsection 31-276(2). 
a.  Physical therapy clinic. 
b.  Chemical or X-ray laboratory. 
c.  Dispensing optician. 
d.  Dispensing apothecary. 
e.  Dental laboratory. 
(2)  Buildings may be used for one (1) or more of the uses prescribed in subsection 31-276(1) only under the following conditions: 
a.  The total area of a professional building devoted to any single incidental use shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the gross floor area of the building. 
b.  The total area of a professional building devoted to incidental uses in the aggregate shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area of the building. 
c.  Public access to such incidental uses shall be from the interior of the building. 
d.  No parking space shall occupy any part of the required front yard, except as provided in subsection 31-287(a)(1)b. 
e.  Sign standards for this district shall apply to both primary and incidental uses. 
f.  No building in this district shall be constructed or altered to produce a storefront, show window or display window, and there shall be no merchandise visible from the exterior of the building. 
g.  No outside storage shall be permitted in this district. 
(3)  Office, general business. 
(4)  An on-premises residential use or living quarters may be included in one (1) structure in a commercial land use district when the main use of the structure is commercial, provided both uses are in compliance with appropriate building codes and the proprietor or an employee of the commercial activity is a resident in the living quarters. 
(5)  All uses allowed in section 31-186, with the exception of one-family dwellings. 
(6)  Studio for photography, interior decoration. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-1; Ord. No. 99-70, § III, 9-14-99; Ord. No. 05-69, § III, 9-13-05; Ord. No. 06-11, § I, 1-24-06; Ord. No. 16-001 , § I, 1-12-16)  
Sec. 31-277. - Height regulations. 
The height regulations in the district "B-1" professional business district shall be as required by the Standard Building Code. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-2; Ord. No. 99-70, § III, 9-14-99)  
Sec. 31-278. - Area regulations. 
(a)  Size of yards. The size of yards in the district "B-1" professional business district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a minimum depth of twenty-five (25) feet. No parking, storage or similar use shall be allowed in required front yards in district "B-1," except that automobile parking will be permitted in such yards in accordance with off-street parking requirements. 
(2)  Side yard. A side yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet in width shall be provided on the side of a lot adjoining a side street. A side yard of not less than ten (10) feet in width shall be provided on the side of a lot adjoining any "R" zoned residential district. Otherwise, no side yard is required. No parking, storage, or similar use shall be allowed in any required side yard or in any required side street yard adjoining any "R" zoned residential district, except automobile parking in accordance with off-street parking requirements. The required side yard setback adjacent to a street shall not be required, provided all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The subject property is included in the area of the City of Killeen identified as special parking district "A," described as an area bounded by the innermost rights-of-way or straight line extensions of the rights-of-way of Avenue G, Park Street, Green Avenue, and 12 th Street. 
b.  The proposed construction is the rebuilding or repair of an existing structure, the proposed structure is not enlarged beyond the dimensions of the existing foundation, and the proposed structure is to be constructed on the existing building foundation. 
c.  Any new construction, other than that described in subsection (b) above, shall maintain a side yard setback adjacent to a street not less than the side yard setback provided by the existing structures on the block in which the subject property is located. 
d.  Notwithstanding subsections (a) through (c), no construction will be permitted: 
1.  in conflict with section 28-241, as amended; 
2.  in conflict with the city's thoroughfare plan, as amended, in effect at the time of construction; or 
3.  which encroaches into the city's right-of-way. 
(3)  Rear yard. No rear yard is required except that a rear yard of not less than ten (10) feet in depth shall be provided upon that portion of a lot abutting or across a rear street from any "R" zoned residential district. 
(b)  Size of lot. There are no limitations to the size of lots in the district "B-1" professional business district. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-3; Ord. No. 82-76; Ord. No. 90-95, § I, 9-25-90; Ord. No. 93-102, § IV, 11-9-93; Ord. No. 99-70, § III, 9-14-99; Ord. No. 05-69, § III, 9-13-05; Ord. No. 16-001 , § I, 1-12-16)  
Sec. 31-279. - Parking regulations. 
Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in the district "B-1" professional business district in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in article V, division 3 of this chapter. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-4; Ord. No. 99-70, § III, 9-14-99)  
Sec. 31-280. - Screening device requirements. 
(a)  Definition. For the purposes of this section, the phrase "screening device" shall mean a barrier of stone, brick, pierced brick or block, uniformly colored wood or other permanent material of equal character, density and design, at least six (6) feet in height, provided, any such structure in excess of eight (8) feet in height shall be deemed a wall subject to the provisions of the building code of the city. 
(b)  When required. A screening device shall be erected before any use of the property in "B-1" when such property abuts residentially zoned property. Insofar as it is practical, such screening device shall be erected along the entire length of the common line between such business property and the abutting residentially zoned property. A lattice weave or material covering over a chain link fence is not considered a screening device. 
(c)  Responsibility to erect. When a screening device is required under the terms of this section, it shall be the responsibility of the user of the commercial or industrial property to erect the required screening device, and the same shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the premises on which the device is located. 
(d)  Maintenance. All screening devices required by this section or action of the planning commission shall be perpetually maintained by the user of the property on which the device is located. 
(e)  Height limited. No fence or other screening device, whether required or not, shall exceed eight (8) feet in height, without prior approval. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-6; Ord. No. 70-52, § 3, 8-28-70; Ord. No. 99-70, § III, 9-14-99)  
Secs. 31-281—31-290. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - DISTRICT "B-2" LOCAL RETAIL DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 31-291. - Use regulations. 
A building or premises in the district "B-2" local retail district shall be less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in leasable area and used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Any use permitted in district "B-1" or "B-DC." 
(2)  Appliance (household) sales. 
(3)  Bakery shop (retail sales only). 
(4)  Personal services establishments. 
(5)  Construction field office and yard: on the job site; for duration of construction only. 
(6)  Day care center. 
(7)  Custom personal service shops, such as a health studio (to include massage establishments as defined in V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 455, as amended), answering service, typing service, tailor, employment agency, FM piped music, income tax service, letter or mailing service, marriage counselor, secretarial service or shoe repair. 
(8)  Drugstore or pharmacy. 
(9)  Electric utility substation. 
(10)  Florist (retail): retail sales of flowers and small plants. No flower or plant raising or outside display or storage. 
(11)  Grocery store (drive-in). 
(12)  Bank, savings and loan or other financial institution. 
(13)  Registered public surveyor. 
(14)  Restaurant, coffee shop or café (no drive-in service). 
(15)  Retail stores, (other than listed): offering all types of personal consumer goods for retail sales. 
(16)  Fine arts instruction, or sale of art objects. 
(17)  Lodges and fraternal organizations with less than five thousand (5,000) square feet of leasable space. 
(18)  Drop-in care centers. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-A-1; Ord. No. 88-115, § II, 12-13-88; Ord. No. 92-20, § II, 5-12-92; Ord. No. 99-70, § IV, 9-14-99; Ord. No. 04-87, § II, 10-19-04; Ord. No. 16-001 , § I, 1-12-16; Ord. No. 20-024 , § I, 5-26-20)  
Sec. 31-292. - Height regulations. 
The height regulations in the district "B-2" local retail district shall be as required by the Standard Building Code. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-A-2; Ord. No. 99-70, § IV, 9-14-99)  
Sec. 31-293. - Area regulations. 
(a)  Size of yards. The yards in the district "B-2" local retail district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Front yard: Where all the frontage on both sides of the street between two (2) intersecting streets is located in district "B-2," "B-3," "B-4" or "B-5," no front yard is required. Where the frontage on one (1) side of the street between two (2) intersecting streets is located partly in districts "B-2," "B-3," "B-4" and "B-5," and partly in an "R" district, the front yard shall conform to the "R" district regulations for a distance of not less than three hundred (300) feet from the district boundary. Where a front yard is required along the frontage on one (1) side of a street, the front yard requirements of the property directly opposite on the other side of the street shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet, except that such yard requirements shall not apply where the property in the "R" district backs up to the street. No parking, storage or similar use shall be allowed in required front yards in districts "B-2," "B-3," "B-4" and "B-5," except automobile parking in accordance with off-street parking requirements. 
(2)  Side yards: Same as district "B-1." 
(3)  Rear yard. Same as district "B-1." 
(b)  Size of lot. There are no minimum lot area or width requirements in district "B-2" local retail district. 
(c)  Lot coverage. There are no lot coverage limitations in the district "B-2" local retail district. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-A-3; Ord. No. 99-70, § IV, 9-14-99; Ord. No. 05-69, § IV, 9-13-05)  
Sec. 31-294. - Parking regulations. 
Off-street parking and loading spaces in the district "B-2" local retail district shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in article V, division 3 of this chapter. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-A-4; Ord. No. 99-70, § IV, 9-14-99)  
Sec. 31-295. - Screening device requirements. 
The screening device requirements in the district "B-2" local retail district shall be the same as required in the "B-1" district. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-A-5 [Ord. No. 70-52, § 3, 8-28-70; Ord. No. 86-23, § 4, 4-22-86]; Ord. No. 99-70, § IV, 9-14-99)  
Secs. 31-296—31-305. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 12. - DISTRICT "B-3" LOCAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 31-306. - Use regulations. 
A building or premises in the district "B-3" local business district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the "B-2" district. 
(2)  Bakery or confectionery, wholesale. 
(3)  Day camp. 
(4)  Hospital, nursing home, or assisted living facility. 
(5)  Mortuary or funeral chapel excluding cremation services. 
(6)  Appliance (household) sales and repair service. 
(7)  Bakery or confectionery: engaged in preparation, baking, cooking and selling of products at retail on the premises, with six (6) or less employees. 
(8)  Boat and accessory sales, rental and service. 
(9)  Bowling alleys. 
(10)  Oil/lube station. 
(11)  Cleaning, pressing and dyeing: with six (6) or less employees. 
(12)  Florist, garden shop, greenhouse or nursery office (retail): no growing of plants, shrubs or trees out-of-doors on premises; no outside display or storage unless behind the required front yard or the actual setback of the principal building, whichever is greater. 
(13)  General food products, retail sales, such as supermarkets, butcher shops, dairy stores, seafood sales or health food sales. 
(14)  Cafeteria or catering service. 
(15)  Marine supplies, sales and service. 
(16)  Lodges or fraternal organizations with greater than five thousand (5,000) square feet of leasable space. 
(17)  Restaurant or café permitted to offer alcoholic beverages for sale operating under the rules and regulations promulgated by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission, as amended, all of which are adopted hereby and made a part hereof for all purposes. No restaurant will be permitted to dispense any type of alcoholic beverage through any "drive-through" facility or window. 
(18)  Tennis or swim club. 
(19)  Small animal clinic, pet grooming shop and/or inside kennel and boarding. No cremation or outside kennels. 
(20)  Hotel or motel. 
(21)  Retail uses and businesses of all sizes to include secondhand goods and antiques with no outside storage or display of second hand goods. 
(22)  Gasoline service station, auto laundry or car wash. 
(23)  Auto parts sales, new, at retail. 
(24)  A customarily incidental use: sale of beer and/or wine only for off-premises consumption only shall be considered a customarily incidental use in this district, but not in any residential district or any more restrictive business district. 
(25)  Theaters of general release. 
(26)  Mini/self-storage facilities: a building or group of buildings in a controlled access and fenced compound that contains varying sizes of individual compartmentalized and controlled access stalls or lockers for the storage of customer's goods or wares. No outside storage, sales, service, or repair activities, other than the rental of storage units shall be permitted on-premises. 
(27)  Storage warehouse with leasable space of less than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet. 
(Ord. No. 16-001 , § I, 1-12-16; Ord. No. 20-024 , § I, 5-26-20)  
Sec. 31-306.1. - Supplemental standards for restaurants engaged in the on-premises sale and consumption of alcohol. 
(a)  During any consecutive twelve-month period, a restaurant shall not obtain more than fifty (50) percent of its gross receipts from the on-premises sale of alcoholic beverages. In conjunction with renewal of TABC licensing, it shall be required to provide the most recent comptroller's certification of sales receipts to the planning and development services department prior to the city's approval of the permit renewal. 
(b)  Restaurants may not be within three hundred (300) feet of a church, public or private school or public or private hospital. The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the church, public or private school, or public or private hospital shall be as prescribed by the V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.33, as amended. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-B-1 [Ord. No. 76-46, § 3, 8-10-76]; Ord. No. 88-115, § III, 12-13-88; Ord. No. 96-80, § III, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 99-29, § II, 4-13-99; Ord No. 14-021, 3-11-14)  
Sec. 31-307. - Height regulations. 
The height regulations in the district "B-3" local business district shall be the same as district "B-2." 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-B-2)  
Sec. 31-308. - Area regulations. 
The area regulations in the district "B-3" local business district shall be the same as district "B-2." 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-B-3)  
Sec. 31-309. - Parking regulations. 
Off-street parking and loading spaces in the district "B-3" local business district shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in article V, division 3 of this chapter. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-B-4)  
Sec. 31-310. - Screening device requirements. 
The screening device requirements in the district "B-3" local business district shall be the same as required in the "B-1" district. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-B-5 [Ord. No. 70-52, § 3, 8-28-70])  
DIVISION 12A. - DISTRICT "B-3A" LOCAL BUSINESS AND RETAIL ALCOHOL SALES DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 31-311. - Use regulations. 
(a)  A building or premises in the "B-3A" local business and retail alcohol sales district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the "B-3" district, in accordance with the requirements of this division. 
(2)  Package stores to be operated under, and in accordance with, a valid Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission issued package store permit provided that such establishment: 
(a)  complies with all applicable rules and regulations established under the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code (TABC) and/or promulgated by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission, as amended. Said rules and regulations are hereby adopted and incorporated herein for all purposes; and 
(b)  is not located within: three hundred (300') feet of a church, public or private school or public hospital; one thousand (1000') feet of a public school if a request is submitted to city council by the board of trustees of a school district under Section 38.007, Texas Education Code; or one thousand (1000') feet of a private school if a request is submitted to city council by the governing body of the private school. The measurement of the distances shall be as provided under TABC § 109.33 and in accordance with the procedures established by the TABC, as amended, which is hereby adopted and incorporated herein for all purposes. The city council may, however, allow a variance from this distance requirement in accordance with TABC § 109.33(e). The following exemptions to the above-stated distance requirements and expansion of the application of the distance requirements from day-care centers and child-care facilities are provided under the TABC and are hereby adopted to provide: 
(i)  The one thousand (1000') public or private school distance extension shall not apply to the holder of: a retail on-premises consumption permit or license if less than fifty (50%) percent of the gross receipts for the establishment is from the sale or service of alcoholic beverages; a retail off-premises consumption permit or license if less than fifty (50%) percent of the gross receipts for the premises, excluding the sale of items subject to the motor fuels tax, is from the sale or service of alcoholic beverages; or a wholesaler's, distributor's, brewer's, distiller's and rectifier's, winery, wine bottler's or manufacture's permit or license, or any other license or permit held by a wholesaler or manufacturer as those words are ordinarily used and understood in TABC, chapter 102. 
(ii)  The one thousand (1000') foot private school distance extension shall not apply to the holder of: a license or permit issued under TABC chapters 27, 31, or 72 who is operating on the premises of the private school; or a license or permit covering an establishment where minors are prohibited from entering under TABC § 109.53 and that is located within one thousand (1000') feet of a private school. 
(iii)  The three hundred (300') foot general distance prohibition shall not apply to the holder of: a license or permit who also holds a food and beverage certificate covering an establishment that is located within three hundred (300') of a private school; or a license or permit covering a premises where minors are prohibited from entering under TABC § 109.53 and that is located within three hundred (300') feet of a private school. In this section, "private school" means a private school, including a parochial school that offers a course of instruction for students in one or more grades from kindergarten through grade 12 and has more than one hundred (100) students enrolled and attending courses at a single location. 
(iv)  This subsection applies only to a permit or license holder under TABC chapter 25, 28, 32, 69, or 74 who does not hold a food and beverage certificate. Except as provided by this subsection, the provisions of this section 31-311(2) relating to a public school also apply to a day-care center and a child-care facility as those terms are defined by section 42.002, Texas Human Resources Code. However, the one thousand (1000') foot distance extension by request is not available to a day-care center or child-care facility. This subsection does not apply to a permit or license holder who sells alcoholic beverages if: (1) the permit or license holder and the day-care center or child-care facility are located on different stories of a multistory building; or (2) the permit or license holder and the day-care center or child-care facility are located in separate buildings and either the permit or license holder or the day-care center or child-care facility is located on the second story or higher of a multistory building. This subsection does not apply to a foster group home, foster family home, family home, agency group home, or agency home as those terms are defined by section 42.002, Texas Human Resources Code. 
(3)  Uses listed in the "B-3A" local business and retail alcohol sales district shall not be incorporated by right into less restrictive zoning districts, including, without limitation, the "B-3", "B-4", or "B-5" districts, but shall be considered to be a stand-alone zoning district, except as provided for in this division. 
(b)  Inactive district. All properties with a "B-3A" district zoning in effect prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this paragraph is derived shall continue to be allowed to be used for the uses provided in this section, and regulated by the provisions of this section, until such time as the property is rezoned by action initiated by the property owner or by the city. This "B-3A" district shall be considered inactive as of the date of the ordinance from which this paragraph is derived [May 26, 2020] and, as such, no new applications for an "B-3A" zoning shall be accepted or considered by the city following said date. 
(Ord. No. 10-079, § II, 12-28-10; Ord. No. 20-024 , § I, 5-26-20)  
Sec. 31-312. - Height regulations. 
The height regulations in the "B-3A" local business and retail alcohol sales district shall be the same as the "B-2" district. 
(Ord. No. 10-079, § II, 12-28-10)  
Sec. 31-313. - Area regulations. 
The area regulations in the "B-3A" local business and retail alcohol sales district shall be the same as the "B-2" district with the following exceptions: 
(1)  the size of the lot upon which the establishment is sited shall not be less than ten-thousand (10,000) square feet; and 
(2)  a rear yard set-back of twenty-five (25') feet shall be provided for any lot abutting or located across a rear street from any residential zoned district. 
(Ord. No. 10-079, § II, 12-28-10)  
Sec. 31-314. - Parking regulations. 
Off-street parking and loading spaces in the "B-3A" local business and retail alcohol sales district shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in article V, division 3 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10-079, § II, 12-28-10)  
Sec. 31-315. - Screening device requirements. 
The screening device requirements in the "B-3A" local business and retail alcohol sales district shall be the same as required in the "B-1" district. 
(Ord. No. 10-079, § II, 12-28-10)  
Sec. 31-316. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-040 , § I, adopted Sept. 10, 2019, repealed § 31-316 which pertained to architectural design requirements and derived from Ord. No. 10-079, § II, adopted Dec. 28, 2010.  
DIVISION 12B. - DISTRICT "NBD" NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 31-316.1. - Purpose. 
The "NBD" neighborhood business district is created to provide for limited commercial uses serving the common and frequent needs of the residents in the immediate vicinity. This district is intended to permit the development of unified shopping centers, whether in single or multiple ownerships. 
(Ord. No. 13-037, § I, 5-14-13)  
Sec. 31-316.2. - Use regulations. 
A building or premises in a "NBD" neighborhood business district shall not exceed gross building size of 10,000 square feet and no single leased/owned business area shall exceed 4,000 square feet. This district shall allow all uses within the "B-3" Local Business District with the following exclusions: 
(1)  Home for the aged. 
(2)  Hospital, nursing home, or assisted living facility. 
(3)  Mortuary or funeral chapel. 
(4)  Appliance (household) sales and service. 
(5)  Boat and accessory sales, rental and service. 
(6)  Marine supplies, sales and service. 
(7)  Restaurant or café with drive-in or drive-through service. 
(8)  Tennis or swim club. 
(9)  Hotel or motel. 
(10)  Gasoline service station in excess of four (4) pumps, auto laundry or car wash. 
(11)  Auto parts sales, new at retail 
(12)  Theaters or general release. 
(13)  Mini/self-storage facilities 
(14)  Outdoor fruits and vegetable sales (farmer's markets) 
(15)  Bowling alley. 
(16)  Oil/lube service station. 
(Ord. No. 13-037, § I, 5-14-13; Ord. No. 20-024 , § I, 5-26-20)  
Sec. 31-316.3. - Height regulations. 
No structure shall be erected in a "NBD" neighborhood business district having a height in excess of twenty-five (25) feet. 
(Ord. No. 13-037, § I, 5-14-13)  
Sec. 31-316.4. - Area regulations. 
(a)  Size of yards. The size of yards in the "NBD" neighborhood business district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Front yards. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
(2)  Side yards. There shall be a minimum side yard of thirty feet (30) feet if abutting a residentially zoned property. A side yard adjacent to a non-residential zoned property is zero. A side yard adjacent to a side street shall not be less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
(3)  Rear yards. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than thirty (30) feet. 
(b)  Size of lot. The size of lots in a "NBD" neighborhood business district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Lot area. No building or structure shall be erected on any lot having less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
(2)  Lot width. The width of the lot shall not be less than one hundred (100) feet. 
(3)  Lot depth. The average depth of the lot shall not be less than one hundred (100) feet. 
(Ord. No. 13-037, § I, 5-14-13)  
Sec. 31-316.5. - Screening and Buffer Area regulations. 
The screening device requirements in the district "NBD" neighborhood business district shall be the same as required in the "B-1" district. (Landscaping and adequate buffers are required and must protect abutting and adjacent residential areas from potential impacts of parking, lighting and undesirable scale of commercial building elements. The required buffer shall be thirty (30) feet when siding or backing on to all residential districts. This may be reduced to twenty (20) feet by planting trees in accordance with the following formula: 
A minimum eight 8 feet tall canopy tree shall count for 200 sq ft. 
A minimum eight 8 feet tall non-canopy tree shall count for 100 sq ft. 
The reduction in buffer area shall be calculated based on total square footage of the additional landscaping. 
For example: 
Lot dimensions: 100' X 300' 
Canopy trees proposed 5 
Credit for these trees: 5 X 200 = 1000 sq ft. 
Therefore reduction shall be: 
1000 sq. ft. divided by 100 (lot width) = 10 ft. and the net buffer required is Gross buffer required minus buffer reduction (30' minus 10' = 20'). 
No development shall be authorized within the buffer area except for required or permitted landscaping and screening, stormwater detention facilities, and pedestrian walkways. The increased setbacks, which are measured from the property line, shall be required on the property in the higher intensity zoning district, and shall be observed at the time of construction. These buffer requirements are in addition to the screening standards. 
(Ord. No. 13-037, § I, 5-14-13)  
Sec. 31-316.6. - Sign regulations. 
Signs within the "NBD" neighborhood business district shall be a maximum size of eighty (80) square feet and be constructed as a monument sign or mounted flat against an exterior wall. Signs shall be non-flashing and illuminated from an interior source. 
(Ord. No. 13-037, § I, 5-14-13)  
Sec. 31-316.7. - Architectural regulations. 
The intent of the building design standards is to improve the visual appeal of storefronts and businesses to provide for compatibility with residential neighborhoods and reduce visual and noise impacts on abutting residential areas. 
(1)  Windows shall be provided rather than blank walls. Windows shall begin from twelve (12) to thirty six (36) inches above the finished grade of the floor. A minimum of sixty (60%) percent of all glass which faces the street shall be transparent. Window painting or advertising signs are not permitted. 
(2)  Exterior walls shall be articulated to reduce the mass and scale of an uniform impersonal appearance of large buildings and to provide visual interest. No uninterrupted length of any facade shall exceed 50 feet and architectural features on exterior walls providing a minimum of three (3) of the following elements 
a)  Variation in color and materials; 
b)  For walls between 50 feet and up to 100 feet in length wall plane projections or recesses having a depth of at least one (1) foot and extending at least two (2) feet of the length of the facade between projections and recesses; 
c)  For walls between 100 and up to 200 feet in length wall plane projections or recesses having a depth of at least two (2) feet and extending at least three (3) feet of the length of the facade between projections and recesses; 
d)  For walls greater than 200 feet in length wall plane projections or recesses having a depth of at least two (2) feet and extending at least five (5) feet of the length of the facade between projections and recesses. 
e)  Variation of a minimum of two (2) feet in height of parapets. Variation to parapet height may include pilasters and projecting raised entrance features; 
f)  Pilasters projecting from the plane of the wall by a minimum of sixteen (16) inches; 
g)  Canopies projecting a minimum of six (6) feet from the plane of the primary facade walls; 
h)  Banding shall be complimentary to scale with the building (approved by the executive director of planning and development services. 
i)  Repetitive ornamentation including decorated applied features such as wall-mounted light fixtures or applied materials. Repetitive ornamentation shall be located with a maximum spacing of forty (40) feet. 
j)  The executive director of planning and development services may grant an administrative approval to use materials not listed when the intent of the regulations is met, or when special situations arise regarding the rear of buildings. 
(3)  Roof Lines. To provide a visual terminus to the tops of buildings and soften flat roof designs, roof designs must conform to one of the following options: 
a)  Roof line with architectural focal point. A roof line focal point refers to a prominent rooftop feature such as a peak, tower, gable, dome, barrel vault or roof line trellis structure. 
b)  Roof line variation. The roof line articulated through a variation or step in roof height or detail, such as: 
c)  Projecting cornice. Roof line articulated through a variation or step in cornice height or detail. Cornices must be located at or near the top of the wall or parapet. 
d)  Articulated parapet. Roof line parapets shall incorporate angled or curved detail elements. 
e)  Pitched roof or full mansard. A roof with angled edges, with or without a defined ridgeline and extended eaves. 
f)  Rooftop and mechanical equipment shall effectively be screened from view through one or more of the following methods: 
1.  A concealing roof line; 
2.  A screening wall or grillwork directly surrounding the equipment; 
(Ord. No. 13-037, § I, 5-14-13; Ord. No. 19-040 , § I, 9-10-19)  
Sec. 31-316.8. - Parking and Lighting regulations. 
(1)  Off-street parking and loading that is required in Sec 31-279 shall be provided for all uses in this zone. 
(2)  Parking shall not be located in the rear or side when abutting single family residentially zoned property. 
(3)  Light standards shall not exceed sixteen (16) feet in height, and shall be fully shielded. Light shall not shine on any abutting property or public right-of-way. 
(4)  Wall-mounted exterior lighting shall not shine on any abutting property or right-of-way. 
(5)  An access management plan shall be submitted with any plat for subdivision of property or approval of a site plan. 
(Ord. No. 13-037, § I, 5-14-13)  
Secs. 31-317—31-320. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 13. - DISTRICT "B-4" BUSINESS DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 31-321. - Use regulations. 
A building or premises in the district "B-4" business district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the "B-3" district. 
(2)  Trailer rental and sales. 
(3)  Auto sales. Where the major business is the showroom display and sale of new automobiles by an authorized dealer and used car sales, repair work and storage facilities on the same premises shall be purely incidental; provided, that the area allowed for the repair and storage of cars shall not be nearer than twenty (20) feet from the required front line of the principal building. 
(4)  Auto sales. Used cars; no salvage, dismantling or wrecking on premises; no display of vehicles in required front yard; junked vehicles must be placed behind a screening device. 
(5)  Commercial parking (public garage or parking lot). 
(6)  Auto upholstery or muffler shop. 
(7)  Auto repair (garage), with on-site junked vehicles being enclosed within a building. 
(8)  Cold storage plant (locker rental). 
(9)  Building material or lumber sales (no outside storage). 
(10)  Cleaning, pressing and dyeing: 
a.  No direct exterior exhaust from cleaning plant permitted. 
b.  Dust must be controlled by either bag or filter and separator or precipitator so as to eliminate the exhausting of dust, odor, fumes or noise outside the plant. 
(11)  Garden shop, greenhouse or nursery (retail). 
(12)  Ballpark, stadium, athletic field (private). 
(13)  Philanthropic institutions (not elsewhere listed). 
(14)  Cabinet, upholstery, woodworking shop. 
(15)  Plumbing, electrical, air conditioning service shop (no outside storage). 
(16)  Trade or business school. 
(17)  Garment manufacturing in a space of four thousand (4,000) square feet or less, with all loading and unloading off-street. 
(18)  Halfway house. 
(19)  Liquor stores to be operated under, and in accordance with, a valid Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission issued package store permit provided that such establishment: 
a.  Complies with all applicable rules and regulations established under the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code (TABC) and/or promulgated by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission, as amended. Said rules and regulations are hereby adopted and incorporated herein for all purposes; and 
b.  Is not located within: three hundred (300) feet of a church, public or private school or public hospital; one thousand (1,000) feet of a public school if a request is submitted to city council by the board of trustees of a school district under V.T.C.A., Education Code § 38.007; or one thousand (1,000) feet of a private school if a request is submitted to city council by the governing body of the private school. The measurement of the distances shall be as provided under V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.33 and in accordance with the procedures established by the TABC, as amended, which is hereby adopted and incorporated herein for all purposes. The city council may, however, allow a variance from this distance requirement in accordance with V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.33(e). The following exemptions to the above-stated distance requirements and expansion of the application of the distance requirements from day-care centers and child-care facilities are provided under the TABC and are hereby adopted to provide: 
1.  The one thousand-foot public or private school distance extension shall not apply to the holder of: a retail on-premises consumption permit or license if less than fifty (50) percent of the gross receipts for the establishment is from the sale or service of alcoholic beverages; a retail off-premises consumption permit or license if less than fifty (50) percent of the gross receipts for the premises, excluding the sale of items subject to the motor fuels tax, is from the sale or service of alcoholic beverages; or a wholesaler's, distributor's, brewer's, distiller's and rectifier's, winery, wine bottler's or manufacture's permit or license, or any other license or permit held by a wholesaler or manufacturer as those words are ordinarily used and understood in V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code ch. 102. 
2.  The one thousand-foot private school distance extension shall not apply to the holder of: a license or permit issued under V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code chs. 27, 31, or 72 who is operating on the premises of the private school; or a license or permit covering an establishment where minors are prohibited from entering under V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.53 and that is located within one thousand (1,000) feet of a private school. 
3.  The three hundred-foot general distance prohibition shall not apply to the holder of: a license or permit who also holds a food and beverage certificate covering an establishment that is located within three hundred (300) [feet] of a private school; or a license or permit covering a premises where minors are prohibited from entering under V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.53 and that is located within three hundred (300) feet of a private school. In this section, "private school" means a private school, including a parochial school that offers a course of instruction for students in one (1) or more grades from kindergarten through grade 12 and has more than one hundred (100) students enrolled and attending courses at a single location. In addition, the three hundred-foot general distance prohibition shall have no impact the right of a duly licensed and permitted establishment from continuing to operate if a church, public or private school or public or private hospital locates within three hundred (300) feet of the existing business establishment. 
4.  This subsection applies only to a permit or license holder under V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code chs. 25, 28, 32, 69, or 74 who does not hold a food and beverage certificate. Except as provided by this subsection, the provisions of this section 31-311(2) relating to a public school also apply to a day-care center and a child-care facility as those terms are defined by V.T.C.A., Human Resources Code § 42.002. However, the one thousand-foot distance extension by request is not available to a day-care center or child-care facility. This subsection does not apply to a permit or license holder who sells alcoholic beverages if: (1) the permit or license holder and the day-care center or child-care facility are located on different stories of a multistory building; or (2) the permit or license holder and the day-care center or child-care facility are located in separate buildings and either the permit or license holder or the day-care center or child-care facility is located on the second story or higher of a multistory building. This subsection does not apply to a foster group home, foster family home, family home, agency group home, or agency home as those terms are defined by V.T.C.A., Human Resources Code § 42.002. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-C-1; Ord. No. 76-46, § 4, 8-10-76; Ord. No. 83-61, 10-11-83; Ord. No. 16-001 , § I, 1-12-16; Ord. No. 20-024 , § I, 5-26-20)  
Sec. 31-322. - Height regulations. 
The height regulations in the district "B-4" business district shall be the same as district "B-2." 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-C-2)  
Sec. 31-323. - Area regulations. 
The area regulations in the district "B-4" business district shall be the same as district "B-2." 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-C-3)  
Sec. 31-324. - Parking regulations. 
Off-street parking and loading spaces in the district "B-4" business district shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in article V, division 3 of this chapter. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-C-4)  
Sec. 31-325. - Screening device requirements. 
The screening device requirements in the district "B-4" business district shall be the same as required in the "B-1" district. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-C-5 [Ord. No. 70-52, § 3, 8-28-70])  
Secs. 31-326—31-335. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 14. - DISTRICT "B-5" BUSINESS DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 31-336. - Use regulations. 
A building or premises in the district "B-5" business district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the "B-4" district. 
(2)  Building material and lumber sales (outside storage permitted). 
(3)  Storage warehouse, greater than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet. 
(4)  Veterinarian clinic or pet kennel with outside pens. 
(5)  Railroad or bus passenger terminal. 
(6)  Tire recapping or retreading. 
(7)  Impound yards provided no salvaging or dismantling is allowed on the premises and site is properly screened. 
(8)  Any commercial use not included in any other district, provided such use does not involve salvaging, manufacturing or industrial type storage or dismantling, and is not noxious or offensive because of odors, dust, noise, fumes or vibrations. 
(9)  Mobile home sales. 
(10)  Indoor firing range. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-D-1 [Ord. No. 76-46, § 5, 8-10-76]; Ord. No. 88-114, § III, 12-13-88; Ord. No. 99-70, § V, 9-14-99; Ord. No. 04-87, § III, 10-19-04; Ord. No. 10-079, § III, 12-28-10; Ord. No. 16-001 , § I, 1-12-16; Ord. No. 20-024 , § I, 5-26-20)  
Sec. 31-337. - Height regulations. 
The height regulations in the district "B-5" business district shall be the same as district "B-2." 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-D-2; Ord. No. 99-70, § V, 9-14-99)  
Sec. 31-338. - Area regulations. 
(a)  Size of yards. The yards in the district "B-5" business district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Front yard. Same as district "B-2." 
(2)  Side yard. Same as district "B-2." 
(3)  Rear yard. Same as district "B-2." 
(b)  Size of lot. The size of lots in the district "B-5" business district shall be the same as district "B-2." 
(c)  Lot coverage. Lot coverage in the district "B-5" business district shall be the same as district "B-2." 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-D-3; Ord. No. 99-70, § V, 9-14-99; Ord. No. 05-69, § V, 9-13-05)  
Sec. 31-339. - Parking regulations. 
Off-street parking and loading spaces in the district "B-5" business district shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in article V, division 3 of this chapter. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-D-4; Ord. No. 99-70, § V, 9-14-99)  
Sec. 31-340. - Screening device requirements. 
The screening device requirements in the district "B-5" business district shall be the same as required in the "B-1" district. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-D-5; Ord. No. 70-52, § 3, 8-28-70; Ord. No. 99-70, § V, 9-14-99)  
Secs. 31-341—31-350. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 15. - DISTRICT "B-C-1" GENERAL BUSINESS AND ALCOHOL SALES DISTRICT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3. 
 
Sec. 31-351. - Use regulations. 
A building or premises in the "B-C-1" general business and alcohol sales district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Business establishments dispensing alcoholic beverages under the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, in accordance with permits issued, and the rules and regulations promulgated by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission, all of which are adopted hereby and made a part hereof for all purposes. 
(2)  Any uses permitted in a "B-5" district, excluding the sale of beer, wine and/or any other alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption. 
(3)  Business establishments dispensing alcoholic beverages may not be within three hundred (300) feet of a church, public or private school or public or private hospital. The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the church, public or private school or public or private hospital shall be as prescribed by the V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.33, as amended. New applications for a B-C-1 general business and alcohol sales district zoning shall require the notification of all property owners within two hundred (200) feet in all directions of the area for which the B-C-1 zoning is requested, so long as those properties are within the corporate limits of the City of Killeen. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-E-1 [Ord. No. 76-46, § 7, 8-10-76]; Ord. No. 01-57, § II, 11-27-01; Ord. No. 05-40, § II, 5-24-05; Ord. No. 16-001 , § I, 1-12-16)  
Sec. 31-352. - Height regulations. 
The height regulations in the "B-C-1" general business and alcohol sales district shall be the same as district "B-5." 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-E-2; Ord. No. 05-40, § II, 5-24-05)  
Sec. 31-353. - Area regulations. 
The area regulations in the "B-C-1" general business and alcohol sales district shall be the same as district "B-5." 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-E-3; Ord. No. 05-40, § II, 5-24-05)  
Sec. 31-354. - Parking requirements. 
The parking and loading requirements for the "B-C-1"general business and alcohol sales district shall be the same as district "B-5." 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-E-4; Ord. No. 05-40, § II, 5-24-05)  
Sec. 31-355. - Screening device requirements. 
The screening device requirements for the "B-C-1"general business and alcohol sales district shall be the same as district "B-5." 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-E-5; Ord. No. 70-52, § 3, 8-28-70; Ord. No. 05-40, § II, 5-24-05)  
Secs. 31-356—31-380. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 16. - DISTRICT "RC-1" RESTAURANT AND ALCOHOL SALES DISTRICT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 3. 
 
Sec. 31-381. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Uses: A building or premises in the district "RC-1" restaurant and alcohol sales district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  A restaurant permitted to offer alcoholic beverages for sale operating under the rules and regulations promulgated by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission, as amended, all of which are adopted hereby and made a part hereof for all purposes. 
(2)  Any commercial, nonresidential use permitted in the B-4 district. 
(b)  Inactive district. All properties with an RC-1 district zoning in effect prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this paragraph is derived shall continue to be allowed to be used for the uses provided in this section, and regulated by the provisions of this section, until such time as the property is rezoned by action initiated by the property owner or by the city. This RC-1 district shall be considered inactive as of the date of the ordinance from which this paragraph is derived (March 11, 2014) and, as such, no new applications for an RC-1 zoning shall be accepted or considered by the city following said date. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-G-1; Ord. No. 04-87, § IV, 10-19-04; Ord. No. 10-015, § I, 4-27-10; Ord No. 14-021, 3-11-14)  
Sec. 31-382. - Supplemental use regulations. 
(a)  If the property is being used as a restaurant prior to an application for zoning under this division, it must be in a "B-3," "B-4," or "B-5" zoned district as provided by this article, or be operating under subsection 31-456(9)(a). 
(b)  During any consecutive twelve-month period, a restaurant in an RC-1 zone shall not obtain more than fifty (50) percent of its gross receipts from the on-premises sale of alcoholic beverages. When required by the city to verify compliance, documentation certifying compliance with this requirement shall be provided by a certified public accountant or enrolled agent attesting to such fact. At a minimum, an "Independent Accountant's Report" on Applying Agreed-Upon Procedures of such restaurant by a certified public accountant or enrolled agent, showing the gross receipts derived from the provision of services and goods other than the on-premises sale of alcoholic beverages and the provision of alcoholic beverages service separately shall be provided to the city's planning and development services department within six (6) weeks of the date of the written request from the same. The preparation of this report and any other documentation of this requirement shall be at the expense of the restaurant. In order to verify the finding of the Independent Accountant's Report, the city manager, or his designee, may require the restaurant owner or manager to present the financial books and records of the business for examination. Such request must be complied with within seven (7) business days of the request. 
(c)  If good cause is found, the city council may require that a full audit of the financial books and records be completed by a certified public accountant, and the audit report provided to the city within six (6) weeks of the request. All costs of the audit shall be borne by the restaurant. 
(d)  A request for an extension in order to comply with the reporting requirements of 31- 382(b) must be made in writing and received in the city's planning and development services department no later than the business day prior to the expiration of the deadline established in 31-382(b). No extension longer than 30 days will be granted. 
(e)  No restaurant which receives the RC-1 zoning designation will be permitted to dispense any type of alcoholic beverage through any "drive-through" facility or allow any customers to remove from, or bring into, the interior of the premises any kind of alcoholic beverage. 
(f)  Restaurants zoned RC-1 may not be within three hundred (300) feet of a church, public or private school or public or private hospital. The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the church, public or private school, or public or private hospital shall be as prescribed by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.33, as amended. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-G-2; Ord. No. 04-87, § IV, 10-19-04; Ord. No. 05-40, § II, 5-24-05; Ord. No. 10-015, § I, 4-27-10)  
Sec. 31-383. - Height regulations. 
The height regulations in the district "RC-1" restaurant and alcohol sales district shall be the same as district "B-5." 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-G-3; Ord. No. 04-87, § IV, 10-19-04)  
Sec. 31-384. - Area regulations. 
The area regulations in the district "RC-1" restaurant and alcohol sales district shall be the same as district "B-5." 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-G-4; Ord. No. 04-87, § IV, 10-19-04)  
Sec. 31-385. - Parking requirements. 
The parking regulations for the district "RC-1" restaurant and alcohol sales district shall be the same as district "B-5." 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-G-5; Ord. No. 04-87, § IV, 10-19-04)  
Sec. 31-386. - Screening device requirements. 
The screening device requirements in the district "RC-1" restaurant and alcohol sales district shall be the same as district "B-5." 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-G-6; Ord. No. 04-87, § IV, 10-19-04)  
Sec. 31-387. - Additional requirements and penalties in this district. 
(a)  A violation of the provisions of this division, as herein defined, shall be subject to sanction as outlined in (b) below. For the purposes of this division, "violation" shall mean: 
(1)  The failure of any restaurant in this district to allow its books and records to be inspected by the city or to provide documentation of compliance from a certified public accountant or enrolled agent in the time periods provided under section 31-382 to verify that the provisions of section 31-382(b) are being complied with; or 
(2)  Failure to obey any other provision of the ordinances of the city or the laws of the state concerning the sale of beer, wine or any other alcoholic beverages; or 
(3)  Failure to obey any provisions of the ordinances of the city other than those provisions concerning the sale of beer, wine or any other alcoholic beverages; or 
(4)  Operation of a private club, whether or not any permit or permits from the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission have been revoked or suspended. 
(b)  The city council shall determine, after notice to the parties and a public hearing before the council, whether a violation has occurred, whether the violation was committed by: 
(1)  The property owner; or 
(2)  The owner, co-owner, operator or agent or employee of the operator of a restaurant; 
and whether the right of the violator to use that restaurant where the violation occurred for the dispensing of alcoholic beverages shall be suspended for a period not to exceed six (6) months or revoked. The property owner and the owner, co-owner and operator of the restaurant shall be notified of the hearing and the grounds of the violation by certified mail, return receipt requested, at least five (5) days before the date of the hearing. Each person notified shall have the right to be heard, either individually or through a representative at such hearing. Any sanction imposed by the city council may be suspended for a period of up to sixty (60) days upon such terms and conditions as the council, in the sound exercise of its discretion, may deem proper. 
(c)  Any person whose right to use a restaurant for the dispensing of alcoholic beverages is suspended or revoked shall also have revoked or suspended for a like period the right to use any other restaurant for the dispensing of alcoholic beverages which is owned, co-owned or operated by the same person. 
(d)  No person whose right to use a restaurant for the dispensing of alcoholic beverages is revoked shall be entitled, for a period of one (1) year from the date of revocation, to have any other property in the city zoned RC-1 or B-C-1. 
(e)  Imposition of a sanction because of the action of the owner, co-owner, operator, agent or employee of a restaurant shall not affect the right of a subsequent tenant to use the premises to dispense alcoholic beverages unless the sanction is also imposed on the property owner. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-G-7 [Ord. No. 79-3, 1-23-79; Ord. No. 81-48, 9-22-81]; Ord. No. 04-87, § IV, 10-19-04; Ord. No. 05-40, § II, 5-24-05; Ord. No. 10-015, § I, 4-27-10; Ord. No. 10-059, § III, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 31-388. - Independent accountants' report on applying agreed-upon procedures. 
INDEPENDENT ACCOUNTANTS' REPORT ON APPLYING AGREED-UPON PROCEDURES 
Report Date 
"ABC Client" and City of Killeen 
We have performed the procedures enumerated below, which were agreed to by "ABC Client" and City of Killeen (the specified parties), solely to assist you with respect to the compliance with the RC-1 zoning designation (Restaurant and Alcohol Sales District) that requires that no more than fifty (50) percent of an establishment's gross receipts shall be obtained from the on-premises sale of alcoholic beverages as of the twelve month period ended "Date". "ABC Client's" management is responsible for the company's accounting records used for the preparation of the Texas Sales and Use Tax Returns and Texas Mixed Beverage Gross Receipts Tax Report. This agreed-upon procedures engagement was conducted in accordance with attestation standards established by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants. The sufficiency of these procedures is solely the responsibility of those parties specified in the report. Consequently, we make no representation regarding the sufficiency of the procedures described below either for the purpose for which this report has been requested or for any other purposes. 
Our procedures and findings are as follows: 
a.  We obtained copies of all Texas Sales and Use Tax Returns (food service) for the period specified above. We calculated the gross receipts from services and goods other than the on-premises sale of alcoholic beverages for the period in the amount of $__________. 
b.  We obtained copies of all Texas Mixed Beverage Gross Receipts Tax Reports (alcohol sales) for the period specified above. We calculated the gross receipts from alcoholic beverages for the period in the amount of $__________. 
c.  We totaled the amounts in items a. and b. above to calculate gross receipts from services and goods other than the on-premises sale of alcoholic beverages and gross receipts from the on-premises sale of alcoholic beverages. 
d.  As a result of the calculations above, the gross receipts from services and goods other than the on-premises sale of alcoholic beverages represent ______% of the gross receipts of "ABC Client." 
e.  "ABC Client" "is/is not" in compliance with the RC-1 zoning designation (Restaurant and Alcohol Sales District) that requires that no more than fifty (50) percent of an establishment's gross receipts shall be obtained from the on-premises sale of alcoholic beverages. 
We are not engaged to, and did not; conduct an audit, the objective of which would be the expression of an opinion, on the accounting records. Accordingly, we do not express such an opinion. Had we performed additional procedures, other matters might have come to our attention that would have been reported to you. 
This report is intended solely for the information and use of "ABC Client" and City of Killeen and is not intended to be and should not be used by anyone other than those specified parties. 
Firm's signature 
(Ord. No. 05-40, § II, 5-24-05; Ord. No. 10-015, § I, 4-27-10)  
Secs. 31-389, 31-390. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 17. - DISTRICT "HOD" HISTORIC OVERLAY DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 31-391. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this division, the following definitions shall apply: 
Awning shall mean a shelter projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a building constructed of rigid and nonrigid materials on a supporting framework. 
Auxiliary sign shall mean a sign indicating general information such as credit cards, pricing official notices required by law, directions, shop hours, community services, occupant and profession, and realty information. 
Banner shall mean a sign made of cloth, plastic, or light fabric with no enclosing framework. Pennants are considered banners. 
Downtown action agenda shall mean the document adopted by city council per resolution 07-023R. 
Façade shall mean the entire building front including the parapet. 
Ground sign shall mean a billboard or similar type of sign which is supported by one or more uprights, poles or braces in or upon the ground. 
Hanging sign shall mean any sign affixed to either an awning or the building. 
Historic shall mean properties older than fifty years. 
Internally lit sign shall mean a sign with an artificial light source incorporated internally for the purpose of illuminating the sign. 
Off-premises sign shall mean a sign visible from any public traveled road or street displaying advertising or other copy that pertains to any business, person, organization, activity, event, place, service, or product not manufactured, sold, or provided on the same premises on which the sign is located. This definition for off-premises signs shall include any sign that does not qualify as an approved on-premises sign. 
Parapet shall mean a low protective wall along the edge of the roof. 
Poster shall be a sign made of paper or any non rigid material with no enclosing framework. 
Projecting sign shall mean a sign other than a wall sign, which projects from and is supported by a wall of a building or structure. 
Reflective tinting shall mean any window tinting which demonstrates a reflective quality and impedes clear visibility into a building. 
Roof sign shall mean a sign erected upon or above a roof or parapet of a building or structure. 
Sign shall mean any letter, figure, character, mark, plane, point, marquee sign, design, poster, pictorial, picture, stroke, stripe, line, trademark, reading matter or illuminated service, which shall be constructed, placed, attached, painted, erected, fastened or manufactured in any manner whatsoever, so that the same shall be used for the attraction of the public to any place, subject, person, firm, corporation, public performance, article, machine or merchandise, whatsoever, which is displayed in any manner outdoors. 
Sign area shall mean that area being the total square footage of the combined message or display surface. This area does not include structural supports for a sign, whether they be columns, pylons, or a building, or part thereof. 
Sign structure shall mean any structure which supports or is capable of supporting a sign. 
Temporary sign shall mean any sign constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard, metal, or other light materials, not intended for long term use. Banners and posters are temporary signs. 
Wall sign shall mean any sign attached to or erected against the wall of a building or structure, with the exposed face in a plane parallel to the plane of the wall as defined in appendix H of the city's adopted building code. 
Window covering shall mean any material including, but not limited to, curtains, wood, fabric, cardboard, or paper which impedes visibility and is not intended to be used for the attraction of the public to any place, subject, person, firm, corporation, public performance, article, machine, or merchandise, whatsoever, which is affixed in any manner to the window or area surrounding the window. 
(Ord. No. 09-024, § II, 3-17-09; Ord. No. 17-010 , § I, 2-14-17)  
Sec. 31-392. - Statement of purpose. 
The historic overlay district (HOD) is intended to establish and provide for the protection, preservation, and enhancement of buildings, structures, sites and areas of architectural, historical, archaeological, or cultural importance or value. The HOD is envisioned as a tool to help stabilize and improve property values; to encourage neighborhood conservation; to foster civic pride and past accomplishments; to protect and enhance city attractions for tourists and residents; to strengthen the economy; and to promote the use of historical and cultural landmarks for the general welfare of the community. Additionally, the historic overlay district is intended to help promote the development of a downtown consistent with the community objectives identified in the downtown action agenda. 
The following standards or requirements shall apply to the historic overlay district: 
A.  Any regulations for the HOD shall apply to all properties or structures wholly contained within that district, and to those portions of any property within the district. 
B.  Because the HOD is an overlay district, the regulations for the underlying zoning district shall remain in effect, except as otherwise provided in the zoning ordinance. 
C.  In case of any conflict between the regulations applicable in the underlying zoning district, and the regulations of the HOD, the regulations of the HOD will take precedence, even where the applicable regulation may not be a higher standard. 
D.  The findings adopted by the city council for a historic overlay district shall define the scope of the city's interest in protecting the historic resources in the district and shall provide the guidelines to be used by the heritage preservation officer or heritage preservation board, along with any applicable design guidelines in considering whether to grant or deny an order of design compliance. 
(Ord. No. 09-024, § II, 3-17-09)  
Sec. 31-393. - Overlay district boundary. 
The historic overlay district boundary regulations apply to all property located within the historic district as identified in the 2008 historic resources survey and described as: 
Point of beginning intersection of Santa Fe Plaza Drive & 8 th Street; thence north 14 deg. 30' 0.60" east 537.46 feet; thence south 76 deg. 9' 7" east 198.66 feet; thence north 13 deg. 56' 53" east 424.30 feet; thence north 76 deg. 3' 17" west 764.08 feet; thence south 15 deg. 7' 45" west 248.06 feet; thence north 75 deg. 43' 33" west 196.48 feet; thence south 14 deg. 10' 31" west 736.10 feet; thence south 75 deg. 30' 5" east 384.33 feet; thence north 13 deg. 13' 32" east 31.89 feet; thence south 75 deg. 43' 59" east 378.61 feet to the point of the beginning. 
A map of the area described is available in the city planning office. 
(Ord. No. 09-024, § II, 3-17-09)  
Sec. 31-394. - Conditional use permit. 
The city council by an affirmative majority vote may by ordinance grant a conditional use permit as provided in section 31-456 of this chapter for any business land use or any use identified in the "full list" of the Killeen downtown action agenda for a specific parcel in the district and may impose appropriate conditions and safe guards to assure that these land uses are compatible with the character of the district setting and buildings. Conditional use permits granted shall be considered permanent provided the property owner remains in continuous compliance with any conditions or safeguards imposed. 
(Ord. No. 09-024, § II, 3-17-09; Ord. No. 10-059, § III, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 31-395. - Heritage preservation officer or heritage preservation board (HPB) and order of design compliance. 
Except for ordinary maintenance and repair, an order of design compliance from the heritage preservation board or the heritage preservation officer is required prior to commencing any alteration or development in the historic overlay district. Ordinary maintenance shall mean repair of any exterior or architectural feature of a landmark or property within the district which does not involve a change to the architectural or historic value, style or general design. Ordinary maintenance shall also include the limited replacement, in kind or with compatible substitute material, of extensively deteriorated, broken or missing parts of features. 
(Ord. No. 09-024, § II, 3-17-09)  
Sec. 31-396. - General guidelines. 
When considering an application for an order of design compliance the heritage Preservation officer or heritage preservation board shall be guided by: the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Treatment of Historic Properties: With Guidelines for Preserving, Rehabilitation, Restoring, & Reconditioning as amended; any adopted design guidelines; and the following minimum standards: 
A.  Only uses that are compatible with the historic use of the property or that require minimal alteration of the building, structure or site and its environment shall be allowed. 
B.  The distinguishing original qualities or character of a building, structure, or site and its environment should not be destroyed. The removal or alteration of any historic material or distinctive architectural features should be avoided. 
C.  All buildings, structures, and sites shall be recognized as products of their own time. Alterations that have no historic basis and which seek to create an earlier appearance shall be discouraged. 
D.  New or "in-fill" construction shall be compatible with the height, scale, massing, volume, and construction material of the neighboring buildings. All new construction should be compatible with the character of the district setting and buildings. 
E.  Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship that characterize a building, structure, or site shall be maintained and preserved. 
F.  Deteriorated architectural features are to be repaired rather than replaced, whenever possible. In the event that replacement is necessary, the new material should match the material being replaced in composition, design, color, texture, and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of missing architectural features should be based on accurate duplications of features, substantiated by historic physical or pictorial evidence rather than on conjectural designs or the availability of different architectural elements from other buildings or structures. 
G.  The surface cleaning of structures shall be undertaken with the gentlest means possible. Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause damage to historic materials shall not be used. 
H.  Contemporary design for alterations and additions to existing properties shall be allowed when such alterations and additions do not destroy significant historic, architectural, or cultural material and when such design is compatible with the size, scale, color, material, and character of the property, neighborhood, or environment. 
I.  The heritage preservation officer or heritage preservation board may enforce the provisions of this section at law or at equity. 
J.  The HPB may develop and the city council may approve such supplemental guidelines as it may find necessary to implement the regulations of the historic overlay district. 
K.  In case of any conflict between the regulations applicable in this division and any adopted design guidelines for the historic overlay district, the design guidelines of historic overlay district shall take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 09-024, § II, 3-17-09)  
Sec. 31-397. - Height and area regulations. 
A.  Height. Proposed new buildings in the historic overlay district shall not exceed an overall height of thirty-six (36) feet, unless approved by the HPB and the applicant can demonstrate the following: 
1.  The proposed building or addition shall be compatible with the height, scale, massing and volume reflected in the historic overlay district and shall not conflict with the historic character of the district; and 
2.  The proposed building shall be a contribution to the aesthetic and economic goals as defined in the downtown action agenda. 
B.  Setbacks. Building setbacks adjacent to public rights-of-way in the historic overlay district shall generally be assumed to be zero feet, or "built to" the right-of-way line. The heritage preservation officer or heritage preservation board shall determine appropriate setbacks in accordance with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards as amended and any adopted design guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 09-024, § II, 3-17-09)  
Sec. 31-398. - Sign guidelines. 
All new signs shall be developed with the overall context of the building and the area in mind. Sign materials, location, illumination and size shall be compatible with the architectural features of the building and the distinct character of the district and shall be appropriate to the era in which the building was constructed or the predominant era of neighboring buildings. The HPB may develop and the city council may approve such supplemental sign guidelines as it may find necessary to implement the regulations of the historic overlay district. Unless otherwise stated, permitting requirements established in chapter 31 of the city's zoning ordinance shall be strictly enforced. 
A.  The following signs shall be prohibited: 
1.  Signs that eclipse or obstruct significant architectural detail. 
2.  Off-premises signs. 
3.  Roof signs. 
4.  Temporary signs except where provided in this division. 
5.  Ground signs and detached pole signs except for those erected by the city for traffic control and except where otherwise provided for in this division. 
6.  Signs allowed without a permit under subsection 31-503(1) larger than 18" x 24" in size. One sign under this subsection is allowed per property, and it must be displayed inside the building's window. 
7.  Banners except where provided for in this division. 
8.  Posters. 
B.  The following temporary signs may be considered: 
1.  A-frame sandwich boards, signs mounted on easels or free standing frames with sign inserts. 
a.  Board signs which are limited to twelve (12) square feet of surface per side and should in no case exceed four (4) feet in height and three (3) feet in width. 
b.  A sign mounted on an easel or free standing frame with a sign insert that is limited to six (6) square feet of surface per side and in no case exceeds five (5) feet in height, three (3) feet in width. 
2.  Temporary signs and banners may be approved for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days provided that they are limited to a maximum of twenty-four (24) square feet. 
3.  Minimum standard. 
a.  A temporary sign when installed should not obscure windows. 
b.  In no case will a temporary sign be allowed to substitute as a permanent sign. 
c.  All temporary signs must have a permit issued by the permits and inspections department and are subject to review by the heritage preservation officer or heritage preservation board except as provided for in chapter 31 of the city's zoning ordinance. 
C.  Location. 
1.  Awning signs are allowed when they are painted or applied flat against the surface of the awning tail. 
2.  Signs may be hung below rigid awnings or porches. 
3.  Projecting and/or hanging signs are allowed when they have a minimum clearance of nine (9) feet from the sidewalk. 
4.  An on-premises, free standing, low profile sign may be permitted when: 
a.  The building setback adjacent to the public right-of-way is more than zero (0) feet; 
b.  The low profile sign has two poles; 
c.  The low profile sign is provided as an alternative to an attached permitted sign or existing pole sign; 
d.  The low profile sign has no more than two (2) faces; 
e.  The low profile sign is located no less than eighty (80) feet apart from any other freestanding sign; 
f.  The low profile sign does not exceed six (6) feet in height; and 
g.  The structure of the low profile sign is constructed of materials and colors compatible with those utilized in the primary building façade. 
5.  The following signs shall be prohibited: 
a.  Signs projecting above building facades. 
b.  Signs on sidewalks without an order of design compliance. 
c.  Signs mounted on top and at the edge of awnings or porches. 
D.  Size. 
1.  The maximum size for signage on the front of a historic building is based on the following guideline: For every one (1) linear foot of building primary or entry frontage one (1) square foot of sign area is allowed. For multi-tenant buildings one and one-half (1.5) square feet of sign area is allowed for every one (1) linear foot of building primary or entry frontage. 
2.  Signs on secondary or side-street frontages should not exceed the size of sign on the primary or entrance frontage, with the exception of historic murals. 
3.  The size of unframed lettering on buildings or awnings shall be determined by an imaginary square or rectangle that encompasses the sign graphics. 
4.  Each face of a hanging sign shall be no more that twelve (12) square feet in size. 
5.  Projecting signs should be no more than twelve (12) square feet in size. 
6.  Auxiliary signs should be no more that four (4) square feet. 
7.  All signs should be sized to make walking on sidewalks easily accessible and safe. 
E.  Material. 
1.  Use of plastic on sign faces is restricted to signs that have an appearance compatible with the historic context of the building and are specifically approved by the heritage preservation officer or heritage preservation board. 
2.  No fluorescent materials and/or paints are allowed except when the use of such materials is compatible with the historic context of the building and are specifically approved by the heritage preservation officer or heritage preservation board. 
3.  No reflective materials and/or paints are allowed except for silver or gold leaf. 
F.  Lighting. 
1.  Internally illuminated signs shall not be allowed unless internally illuminated signs were utilized in the era in which the building was built. 
2.  Neon is considered a limited special use consideration only applicable to signs for use on buildings constructed after 1920. If the majority of the surrounding buildings are of an earlier era, guidelines for the earlier era will be followed. 
3.  Prohibited sources of illumination include: 
a.  Quartz halogen 
b.  Metal halide 
c.  Mercury Vapor 
G.  Sign attachments, including wires, rods, brackets, and other hardware will be compatible to the historic context of the building. 
H.  Sign Maintenance. 
1.  Signs and sign supports shall be kept in good repair and preserved. 
2.  Display surfaces of signs shall be kept neatly painted at all times. Painted signs shall be repainted routinely so as to prevent peeling paint. 
3.  Electrical components of signs must be protected from exposure to weather at all times unless they are designed for such exposure. 
4.  Electrical circuits to signs that are no longer in use shall be disconnected at the electrical panel and shall be removed. 
(Ord. No. 09-024, § II, 3-17-09; Ord. No. 10-064, § I, 10-19-10; Ord. No. 17-010 , § I, 2-14-17)  
Sec. 31-399. - Windows and window signs. 
A.  Window signs shall not cover more that twenty (20) percent of the total glass area of the window on which they are placed. The size is determined by an imaginary square or rectangle that encompasses the window sign graphics. A glass door shall be considered a separate window for the purpose of this section. 
B.  Regulations for window signs shall extend back twenty-four inches from the inside of the window surface. 
C.  Windows may not be covered or obscured with any materials that will impede visibility to include, but not limited to, curtains, wood, fabric, or paper. Horizontal and vertical blinds are permitted provided that they are not closed to a degree that visibility is completely impeded. 
D.  Window openings shall be considered present for the purposes of this section unless they have been completely enclosed, are fully integrated into the overall structure of the building and represent finished work by use of similar or like materials of existing wall structure, and that said work was permitted at the time of alteration. 
E.  Tinting shall be allowed as a sun screening device but must have a light transmission value of seventy-five (75) percent or more. 
F.  Reflective tinting shall be prohibited. 
G.  Security bars on windows and doors shall be prohibited in the Historic Overlay District. Interior security gates shall be permitted provided that they are retractable and are retracted during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 09-024, § II, 3-17-09; Ord. No. 10-064, § I, 10-19-10)  
Sec. 31-400. - Nonconforming. 
(a)  Nonconforming signs, for the purposes of this division, are signs which are legally constructed or placed at the time of the enactment of this division but fail to conform to this division in one (1) or more respects. Nonconforming signs shall be allowed to continue and reasonable maintenance of said signs shall be allowed. The changes in advertising message and/or maintenance and repair upon an existing sign shall not be considered a relocation, replacement or structural alteration. 
(b)  A nonconforming structure may be repaired, used, and maintained in good repair but no such nonconforming structure shall be altered or extended unless the addition or alteration conforms to the provisions of this division. 
(c)  Nonconforming signs shall not be relocated or replaced without being brought into compliance with all requirements of this division. A sign will be considered in need of replacement if the repairs to the sign exceed fifty (50) percent of its valuation, as determined by independent, professionally prepared estimates submitted to the permits and inspections department before any construction takes place. 
(d)  Permits for existing temporary signs that do not comply with the requirements of this division shall not be renewed. 
(e)  A nonconforming sign or sign structure, identifying or advertising any business or activity that ceases to operate on the premises on which the sign is located for a period exceeding twelve (12) months shall thereafter conform to requirements of this division or be removed. 
(f)  A nonconforming sign or sign structure identifying or advertising any business or activity that ceases to operate on a leased premises on which the sign is located for a period exceeding twenty-four (24) months shall thereafter conform to requirements of this division or be removed. 
(g)  Nonconforming window coverings shall be removed or brought up to requirements of this division within twelve (12) months of the adoption of this division. 
(Ord. No. 09-024, § II, 3-17-09; Ord. No. 10-064, § I, 10-19-10)  
DIVISION 18. - DISTRICT "B-DC" BUSINESS DAY CARE DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 31-401. - Use regulations. 
A building or premises in the district "B-DC" business day care district shall be used only for the following purpose: 
(1)  Day care center. 
Inactive district. All properties with a "B-DC" district zoning in effect prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this paragraph is derived shall continue to be allowed to be used for the uses provided in this section, and regulated by the provisions of this section, until such time as the property is rezoned by action initiated by the property owner or by the city. This "B-DC" district shall be considered inactive as of the date of the ordinance from which this paragraph is derived [May 26, 2020] and, as such, no new applications for an "B-DC" zoning shall be accepted or considered by the city following said date. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-H-1; Ord. No. 20-024 , § I, 5-26-20)  
Sec. 31-402. - Height regulations. 
The height regulations in the district "B-DC" business day care district shall be as required by Standard Building Code. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-H-2)  
Sec. 31-403. - Area regulations. 
The area regulations in the district "B-DC" business day care district shall be the same as district "B-1." 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-H-3)  
Sec. 31-404. - Parking regulations. 
Off-street parking and loading spaces in the district "B-DC" business day care district shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of specific uses set forth in article V, division 3 of this Code. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-H-4)  
Sec. 31-405. - Screening device requirements. 
The screening device requirements for the district "B-DC" business day care district shall be the same as district "B-1." 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 10-H-5 [Ord. No. 86-23, § 5, 4-22-86])  
Secs. 31-406—31-415. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 19. - DISTRICT "M-1" MANUFACTURING DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 31-416. - Use regulations. 
A building or premises in the district "M-1" manufacturing district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the "B-5" district. 
(2)  Paper products manufacture. 
(3)  Wood, paper, plastic container manufacture. 
(4)  Stone monument works. 
(5)  Petroleum products wholesale storage. 
(6)  Processing of chemicals or mineral extractions, not elsewhere classified. 
(7)  Food processing. 
(8)  Foundry, forge plant, rolling mill, metal fabrication plant. 
(9)  Feed mill. 
(10)  Petroleum or chemical products manufacture (indoors). 
(11)  Planing mill. 
(12)  Railroad yard, roundhouse, shop. 
(13)  Textile or garment manufacture. 
(14)  Automobile, mobile home, heavy equipment manufacture. 
(15)  Electroplating. 
(16)  Sewage treatment plant. 
(17)  Electrical equipment or appliance manufacture (large). 
(18)  Furniture, cabinet, kitchen equipment manufacture. 
(19)  Oil well tools, oil well equipment manufacture. 
(20)  Aircraft, aircraft hardware or parts manufacture. 
(21)  Crematoriums. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 11-1; Ord. No. 76-46, § 9, 8-10-76; Ord. No. 16-001 , § I, 1-12-16)  
Sec. 31-417. - Height regulations. 
The height regulations for the district "M-1" manufacturing district shall be the same as district "B-2." 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 11; Ord. No. 05-69, § VI, 9-13-05)  
Sec. 31-418. - Area regulations. 
(a)  Size of yards. The size of yards in the district "M-1" manufacturing district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Front yard. Where none of the frontage on either side of the street between two (2) intersecting streets is located in an "R" district, no front yard is required. Where the frontage on one (1) side of the street between two (2) intersecting streets is located partly in district "M-1" and partly in an "R" district, the front yard shall conform to the "R" district regulations for a distance of not less than three hundred (300) feet from the district boundary. Where a front yard is required along the frontage on one (1) side of a street, the front yard requirements of the property directly opposite on the other side of the street shall be not less than twenty-five (25) feet. No parking, storage or similar use shall be allowed in required front yards in district "M-1." 
(2)  Side yards. No side yard is required except that a side yard or a side street yard of not less than twenty-five (25) feet in width shall be provided on the side of the lot adjoining or across a side street from an "R" district. No parking, storage or similar use shall be allowed in required side yards or side street yards in district "M-1." 
(3)  Rear yards. No rear yard is required except that a rear yard of not less than fifty (50) feet in depth shall be provided upon that portion of a lot abutting or across a rear street from an "R" district, except that such yard requirement shall not apply where the property in the "R" district also backs up to the rear street. No parking, storage or similar use shall be allowed in required rear yards in district "M-1" within twenty-five (25) feet of the rear property line. 
(b)  Size of lot. The size of lots in the district "M-1" manufacturing district shall be the same as district "B-2." 
(c)  Lot coverage. Lot coverage in the district "M-1" manufacturing district shall be the same as district "B-2." 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 11-3; Ord. No. 05-69, § VI, 9-13-05)  
Sec. 31-419. - Parking regulations. 
The off-street parking and loading spaces in the district "M-1" manufacturing district shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in article V, division 3 of this chapter. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 11-4)  
Sec. 31-420. - Screening device requirements. 
The screening device requirements in the district "M-1" manufacturing district shall be the same as district "B-1." 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 11-5 [Ord. No. 70-52, § 3, 8-28-70])  
Secs. 31-421—31-430. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 20. - DISTRICT "M-2" HEAVY MANUFACTURING DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 31-431. - Use regulations. 
A building or premises in the district "M-2" heavy manufacturing district shall be used for the following purposes: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the "M-1" district. 
(2)  Grain elevator. 
(3)  Flour mill. 
(4)  Yeast plant. 
(5)  Petroleum or chemical products bulk storage. 
(6)  Planing mill. 
(7)  Clay products manufacture. 
(8)  Galvanizing, hot-dip metal process. 
(9)  Any building or premises may be used for any purpose not now or hereafter prohibited by any provision of law; provided, however, that no building shall be erected, reconstructed, or structurally altered for residential purposes, except for resident watchmen and caretakers employed on the premises; and provided further that no building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the following uses until and unless the location of such use shall have been approved by the board of adjustment. 
The board of adjustment shall consider the application and request the advice and recommendation of the fire marshal and the director of public health or other person discharging the duties of health officer of the city. 
If the board finds that the location desired and the use requested will not be dangerous to the health, safety and public welfare of the city in general and the surrounding neighborhood in particular, it shall approve the application. If, on the other hand, the board finds that the location desired and the use requested will gravely endanger the safety of the city and the surrounding neighborhood by reason of fire or explosion or that the use desired at such location will seriously affect the health, welfare and comfort of the city and the surrounding neighborhood by reason of the emission of foul, offensive odors and gases or the discharge of smoke or dust, it may deny the application for approval of the use at that location. 
a.  Cotton or cottonseed processing or storage. 
b.  Paper manufacture. 
c.  Poultry raising or processing. 
d.  Stockyards, feed pens, livestock sales with barns and/or shipping facilities. 
e.  Slaughter of animals or meat packing. 
f.  Boiler works. 
g.  Fireworks and munitions manufacture or storage. 
h.  Fertilizer manufacture. 
i.  Salvage or reclamation of products (outside). 
j.  Stone, sand gravel or mineral extraction. 
k.  Auto wrecking or salvage yard, in conformance with current ordinance regulating same. 
(10)  No use allowed in this district shall be construed to include the sale of beer, wine and/or any other alcoholic beverages at retail. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 12-1 [Ord. No. 76-46, § 10, 8-10-76; Ord. No. 77-15, § 1, 3-8-77]; Ord. No. 04-87, § V, 10-19-04)  
Sec. 31-432. - Height regulations. 
The height regulations in the district "M-2" heavy manufacturing district shall be the same as district "M-1." 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 12-2)  
Sec. 31-433. - Area regulations. 
(a)  Size of yards. The size of yards in the district "M-2" heavy manufacturing district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Front yard. Where none of the frontage on either side of the street between two (2) intersecting streets is located in an "R" or "B" district, no front yard is required. Where the frontage on one (1) side of the street between two (2) intersecting streets is located partly in district "M-2" and partly in an "R" district, the front yard shall conform to the "R" district regulations for a distance of not less than three hundred (300) feet from the district boundary. Where the frontage on one (1) side of a street is in an "R" or "B" district, the front yard requirements of the property directly opposite on the other side of the street shall be not less than fifty (50) feet. No parking, storage or similar use shall be allowed in required front yards in district "M-2" within twenty-five (25) feet of the street line. 
(2)  Side yards. No side yard is required except that a side yard or a side street yard of not less than fifty (50) feet in width shall be provided on the side of the lot adjoining or across the street from an "R" or "B" district. No parking, storage or similar use shall be allowed in required side yards in district "M-2" within twenty-five (25) feet of the side property line. 
(3)  Rear yards. No rear yard is required except that a rear yard of not less than fifty (50) feet in depth shall be provided upon that portion of a lot abutting or across a rear street from an "R" or "B" district. No parking, storage or similar use shall be allowed in required rear yards in district "M-2" within twenty-five (25) feet of the rear property line. 
(b)  Size of lot. The size of lots in the district "M-2" heavy manufacturing district shall be the same as district "B-2." 
(c)  Lot coverage. Lot coverage in the district "M-2" heavy manufacturing district shall be the same as district "B-2." 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 12-3; Ord. No. 05-69, § VII, 9-13-05)  
Sec. 31-434. - Parking regulations. 
Off-street parking and loading spaces in the district "M-2" heavy manufacturing district shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in article V, division 3 of this chapter. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 12-4)  
Sec. 31-435. - Screening device requirement. 
The screening device requirements in the district "M-2" heavy manufacturing district shall be the same as district "B-1." 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 12-5 [Ord. No. 70-52, § 3, 8-28-70])  
Secs. 31-436, 31-437. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 21. - DISTRICT "UD" UNIVERSITY DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 31-438. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the university district is to preserve and enhance surrounding property values, prevent overcrowding of land and undue concentration of population, and to promote land use consistent with neighboring properties. 
(Ord. No. 16-028 , § I, 6-28-16)  
Sec. 31-439. - University district boundary. 
The university district regulations apply to all property located in the current or future corporate city limits for a depth of one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet at the following locations: north of the State Highway 201 right-of-way for a distance of approximately sixty-six hundred (6,600) feet west of the intersection of State Highway 201 and State Highway 195; west and east of the State Highway 195 right-of-way for a distance of approximately one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet north of the intersection of State Highway 195 and State Highway 201; and, east of the State Highway 195 right-of-way for a distance of approximately seventy-six hundred (7,600) feet south of the intersection of State Highway 195 and State Highway 201, the first nine hundred and fifty (950) feet of depth within this segment of the district, as measured from State Highway 195, shall be designated for commercial use. The remaining five hundred and fifty (550) feet of depth of this segment shall be designated for mixed-use development, or residential use via a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 06-48, § II, 5-9-06; Ord. No. 12-033, § I, 7-10-12)  
Sec. 31-440. - Use regulations. 
(a)  A building or premises in the university district shall only be used for uses permitted in the "B-2" district, subject to the provisions of this division, and for the following purposes: 
(1)  Bank, savings and loan or other financial institution excluding credit access businesses as defined by the Texas Finance Code. 
(2)  Hospital, nursing home, or assisted living facility. 
(3)  Household appliance sales and repair service, no outside storage. 
(4)  Retail bakery or confectionery: engaged in preparation, baking, cooking, selling and delivery of products. 
(5)  Business day care. 
(6)  Bowling alleys. 
(7)  Cleaning or laundry (self-service). 
(8)  Cleaning or laundry, (pick-up station). 
(9)  Florist, garden shop, greenhouse or nursery office (retail): no growing of plants, shrubs or trees out-of-doors on premises; no outside display or storage unless behind the required front yard or the actual setback of the principal building, whichever is greater. 
(10)  General food products, retail sales, such as supermarkets, butcher shops, dairy stores, seafood sales or health food sales. 
(11)  Cafeteria or catering service. 
(12)  Office, general business. 
(13)  Restaurant or café (with drive-thru or dine in service). 
(14)  Tennis, swim club, health club or gym. 
(15)  Small animal clinic or pet grooming shop. 
(16)  Hotel or motel. 
(17)  Job printing. 
(18)  Gasoline service station, auto laundry, car wash, or oil / lube service station. 
(19)  Retail sales of new auto parts: no outside storage. 
(20)  A customarily incidental use: sale of beer and/or wine for off-premises consumption only shall be considered a customarily incident use in this district. 
(21)  Theaters of general release. 
(22)  A restaurant permitted to offer alcoholic beverages for sale operating under the rules and regulations promulgated by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission, as amended, and in accordance with chapter 31, division 16, restaurant and alcohol sales district, as amended. 
(23)  Package stores operating under the rules and regulations promulgated by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission, as amended, and in accordance with chapter 31, division 12A, district B-3A, local business and alcohol sales district, as amended. 
(24)  Mixed-use development, being located nine hundred fifty (950) feet to one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet east of the east right-of-way of State Highway 195, and for a distance of approximately seventy-six hundred (7,600) feet south of the intersection of State Highway 195 and State Highway 201, for the commercial and residential use of a building, set of buildings, or neighborhood, where the first floor is designed, constructed and used for commercial use only while allowing access to residential uses. 
(25)  Art gallery, book store or library. 
(b)  Any conflict between this district and the districts incorporated herein, or the regulations provided by the other districts, shall be resolved so that the most stringent provision shall control. 
(Ord. No. 06-48, § II, 5-9-06; Ord. No. 12-033, § I, 7-10-12; Ord. No. 16-028 , § I, 6-28-16; Ord. No. 20-024 , § I, 5-26-20)  
Sec. 31-441. - Conditional use permit. 
The city council by an affirmative majority vote may by ordinance grant a conditional use permit as provided in section 31-456 of this chapter for any residential or business land use for a specific parcel in the overlay district and may impose appropriate conditions and safeguards to assure that these land uses are compatible with and appropriate for locations adjacent to the future four-year university. Conditional use permits granted shall be considered permanent provided the property owner remains in continuous compliance with any conditions or safeguards imposed. 
(Ord. No. 06-48, § II, 5-9-06; Ord. No. 10-059, § III, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 31-442. - Height and area regulations. 
No building or structure in university district "UD" shall exceed four (4) stories or forty-five (45) feet in height. The height of any building or structure in this district that exceeds thirty-five (35) feet shall provide an additional one (1) foot to every applicable setback distance for each one (1) foot of additional building or structure height over thirty-five (35) feet. 
(a)  Size of yards. The size of yards in the university district "UD" shall be as follows: 
(1)  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a minimum depth of thirty (30) feet. No parking, storage or similar use shall be allowed in required front yards in district "UD," except that automobile parking will be permitted in such yards in accordance with off-street parking requirements. 
(2)  Side yard. A side yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet in width shall be provided on the side of a lot adjoining a side street. A side yard of not less than ten (10) feet in width shall be provided on the side of a lot adjoining any "R" zoned residential district. Otherwise, no side yard is required. No parking, storage, or similar use shall be allowed in any required side yard or in any required side street yard adjoining any "R" zoned residential district, except automobile parking in accordance with off-street parking requirements. 
(3)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a minimum depth of ten (10) feet. No parking, storage or similar use shall be allowed in required rear yards in district "UD." 
(b)  Size of lot. There are no limitations to the size of lots in the district "UD" professional business district. 
(Ord. No. 06-48, § II, 5-9-06; Ord. No. 12-033, § I, 7-10-12; Ord. No. 16-028 , § I, 6-28-16)  
Sec. 31-443. - Parking, screening device, signs, and lighting requirements. 
(a)  Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in the university district "UD" in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in article V, division 3 of this chapter. 
(b)  The screening device requirements in the university district "UD" shall be the same as required in the "B-1" district except that screening shall be required before the use of any commercial structure when such property abuts a residential zoned property or property used solely for residential purposes. 
(c)  No off-premises signs, neon signs or electronic message display signs shall be permitted in this district. Signage in this district shall follow the standards outlined below: 
(1)  On-premises signs are restricted to one (1) sign per lot, except that premises which have more than three hundred (300) feet of combined frontage along a public way or street, other than an alley, may have not more than one (1) additional sign for each additional three hundred (300) feet of frontage or fraction thereof. The permitted sign shall be set back ten (10) feet from the property line, shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height, the face shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet and the sign shall be constructed of masonry material to match the building facade. 
(2)  Window signs shall not cover more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total glass area of the window on which they are placed. The size is determined by an imaginary square or rectangle that encompasses the window sign graphics. A glass door shall be considered a separate window for the purpose of this section. 
(3)  The maximum size for signage on the front of a building is based on the following guideline: For every one (1) linear foot of building primary or entry frontage one (1) square foot of sign area is allowed. For multi-tenant buildings one and one-half (1.5) square feet of sign area is allowed for every one (1) linear foot of building primary or entry frontage. Signs on secondary or side-street frontages should not exceed the size of sign on the primary or entrance frontage. 
(4)  Sign maintenance: 
(A)  Signs and sign supports shall be kept in good repair and preserved. 
(B)  Display surfaces of signs shall be kept neatly painted at all times. 
(C)  Painted signs shall be repainted routinely so as to prevent peeling paint. 
(D)  Electrical components of signs must be protected from exposure to weather at all times unless they are designed for such exposure. 
(E)  Electrical circuits to signs that are no longer in use shall be disconnected at the electrical panel and shall be removed. 
(d)  Any person wishing to install or use exterior lighting for non-residential, mixed-use, and multi-family structures shall first request a site plan review and obtain approval for such lighting by the building official. The site plan shall fully comply with the general regulations of this section and shall specify the location, height and type of all exterior lighting. 
(1)  The height of exterior lighting, except streetlights in public rights-of-way, shall not exceed twenty (20) feet. 
(2)  Light trespass, defined as unwanted light shining on adjacent property or public rights-of-way, has a negative impact on the enjoyment and value of the affected adjacent property, and declared to be unlawful. All exterior lighting in the university district shall be shielded or oriented in a manner that ensures that all illumination is contained on the source property. All exterior lighting shall be directed away from adjoining streets and residential properties in such a manner that the light emission shall not cause light trespass observable from adjoining streets and other properties. 
(3)  Exterior lighting situated in such a manner as to be mistaken for traffic signals or presenting any hazard to safe driving is prohibited. 
(4)  Up-lighting is prohibited, except: 
(A)  Up-lighting, defined as the practice of installing, maintaining or operating exterior lighting in such a way that the lighting fixtures direct the illumination upward, may be installed adjacent to flagpoles to illuminate a flag if the lighting is installed and directed in such a manner that the illumination is targeted directly at the flag and does not otherwise cause a light trespass or a driving hazard. 
(B)  Up-lighting of sculptures, structures and landscape features for ornamental purposes that enhance the character of the area is permitted provided that the lighting does not create light trespass or a hazard to safe driving. 
(5)  Canopy lighting shall be fully shielded or recessed so that the lenses of the lights are, at a minimum, flush with the bottom surface of the canopy. 
(6)  This section shall not apply to the following types of lighting if the use thereof is approved in writing by the building official: 
(A)  Unshielded lighting may be used if it can be shown that the luminary will not cause a light trespass or a driving hazard. 
(B)  Lighting for special activities where the lighting need is temporary rather than lighting utilized continuously. 
(e)  Parking lot islands with a canopy tree in each should be at the end of each parking row. An additional parking lot island with a canopy tree shall be added to each parking row for every fifteen (15) spaces or fraction thereof. Canopy trees shall be in accordance with the landscaping requirements set forth in section 31-445. The islands shall have raised curbing not less than six (6) inches in height and an area of not less than one hundred eighty (180) square feet for single parking row end islands or three hundred sixty (360) square feet for double row parking end islands. 
(f)  Bay dividers shall be provided in order to prevent uncontrolled movement across parking areas, to separate the parking areas from the adjacent property, and to increase the safety of individuals using the parking lot. Dividers shall be provided on every other parking row and conform to one (1) of the following standards: 
(1)  Raised dividers shall have raised six-inch curbing and be a minimum of six (6) feet in width measured from face of curb to face of curb and tie in with the end island to provide safety for pedestrians. 
(2)  Raised dividers that are landscaped shall have raised six-inch curbing and be a minimum of seven (7) feet in width and tie in to the end island. 
(g)  Parking slots in the numbers provided in the table below shall be reserved for each of the following groups per parking lot: Purple Heart recipients, Gold Star recipients. All spaces shall be located adjacent to required handicapped parking space(s). Purple Heart and Gold Star signs should conform to criteria promulgated by the executive director of planning and development services or designee. 
3 to 50 slots: 1 
51 to 75 slots: 2 
76 to 100 slots: 3 
100 and above: 4 
(Ord. No. 06-48, § II, 5-9-06; Ord. No. 12-033, § I, 7-10-12; Ord. No. 16-028 , § I, 6-28-16)  
Sec. 31-444. - Architectural design standards and requirements. 
(a)  Big box buildings, such as department stores, variety stores, warehouse retail centers, grocery stores, furniture warehouse stores and similar buildings thirty thousand (30,000) square feet and larger shall be designed such that the exterior façade has the appearance of several smaller, human scale, buildings through the use of vertical treatments and a mix of design elements that may include windows, canopies, decorative lighting, stepped building faces, etc. 
(b)  Windows and/or glass walls shall be provided on commercial building walls when visible from public rights-of-way. Windows shall makeup no less than ten (10) percent of the entire building facade. At a minimum, false windows may be used on rear and side walls visible from public streets. 
(c)  Exterior walls exceeding fifty (50) feet in length facing public streets shall be articulated to reduce the mass and scale of a uniform impersonal appearance of large buildings and to provide visual interest. No uninterrupted length shall exceed fifty (50) feet and architectural features shall be provided with a minimum of four (4) of the following elements: 
(1)  Variation in color and materials. 
(2)  Wall plane projections or recesses having a depth of at least one (1) foot and extending at least three (3) feet. Colonnades may be used instead of the projections, or pilasters. 
(3)  Projecting entrances, having clearly defined, highly visible, overhangs, canopies, peaked roof forms, raised corniced parapets over the door, or arches, or any combination of these. 
(4)  Canopies projecting a minimum of four (4) feet from the plane of the primary façade walls. The minimum combined lengths of the canopies shall be at least fifty (50) percent of the length of the walls visible from public rights-of-way. 
(5)  Banding shall be complimentary to scale with the building (as approved by the executive director of planning and development services). 
(6)  Repetitive ornamentation including decorated wall-mounted light fixtures. Such ornamentation shall be located with a maximum spacing of forty (40) feet. 
(7)  Stepped building faces (offsets in from elevation). 
(d)  Where the exterior wall is on a side street faux architectural detailing and windows shall be created to simulate three (3) dimensional relief. 
(e)  Roof designs must conform to one (1) of the following options: 
(1)  Roof line with architectural focal point(s) (refers to a prominent rooftop features(s) such as a peak, tower, gable, dome, barrel vault or roof line trellis structure). 
(2)  Where overhanging eaves are used they shall be two (2) or more feet beyond supporting wall with a minimum fascia width of eight (8) inches. 
(3)  Roof line variations may include: 
a.  Projecting cornice. Roof line articulated through a variation or step in cornice height of detail. Cornices must be located at or near the top of the wall or parapet. 
b.  Pitched roof or full mansard. A roof with angled edges and extended eaves no less than eight (8) feet in height. 
c.  Three (3) roofline variations with a minimum of three (3) feet in height of parapet variation. Variation to parapet height may include pilasters and projecting raised entrance features; with peaked roof forms or similar treatments. 
(f)  Equipment placed on the roof of buildings shall be screened from view of the public. 
(g)  The executive director of planning and development services or designee may grant an administrative approval to use design elements not listed when the intent of the regulations is met, or when special situations arise regarding the rear and sides of buildings. 
(Ord. No. 16-028 , § I, 6-28-16; Ord. No. 19-040 , § I, 9-10-19)  
Sec. 31-445. - Landscaping requirements. 
(a)  Landscaping required. Minimum required landscaping shall be determined by this section. At a minimum, fifty (50) percent of the required landscaping should be located in the front of the building and/or on sides of the building that front public rights-of-way; however, any reasonable distribution of landscaping in proportion to street frontage may be approved by the building official. 
(b)  Trees. The following requirements shall apply to tree landscaping: 
(1)  The minimum number of required trees shall be calculated by dividing the lot or parcel frontage (i.e., the length in feet of lot lines abutting street frontages) by twenty (20). The resulting quotient, with any remainder rounded up to the next nearest whole number, shall be the total number of trees required. The length of the lot lines for irregular lots shall be the average width or length of the lot. A reduction in the required number of trees shall apply to lots with more than one (1) street frontage by dividing the total lot frontages by thirty (30) instead of twenty (20). 
(2)  Not less than fifty (50) percent of the required trees planted in the area to be landscaped shall be canopy trees. 
(3)  Newly planted trees shall measure at least three-inch caliper and six (6) feet high at the time of planting, and shall be planted in a permeable area not less than three (3) feet in diameter. 
(4)  Existing trees to be used for landscape credit shall be in a healthy physical state, shall measure at least four-inch caliper and shall be maintained in an undisturbed area within the drip line of the tree. 
(5)  Should an existing tree used for landscape credit die, it shall be replaced with new landscaping according to the requirements of this section. 
(6)  Recommended plantings include the quality tree species listed in art. VI, section 8-530, subdivision A. 
(c)  Shrubbery. The following requirements shall apply to shrubbery landscaping: 
(1)  The number of required shrubs shall be calculated by dividing the lot or parcel frontage (i.e., the length in feet of lot lines abutting street frontages) by two and one-half (2.5). The resulting quotient, with any remainder rounded up to the next nearest whole number, shall be the total number of shrubs required. 
(2)  Each canopy tree maintained in excess of the total number of trees required by this section may reduce the number of shrubs required by ten (10). Each non-canopy tree maintained in excess of the total number of trees required by this section may reduce the number of shrubs required by six (6). In like manner, ten (10) shrubs can be substituted for one (1) canopy tree and six (6) shrubs can be substituted for a non-canopy tree. 
(3)  Each two (2) square feet of planting bed used and maintained for the purpose of rotating live decorative planting materials may reduce the number of shrubs required by one (1). 
(4)  Shrubs shall not be less than three (3) gallons in size. 
(5)  The placement of shrubbery shall take into consideration the plant size at maturity and shall be located so as not to conflict with vehicular or pedestrian traffic visibility. 
(d)  Ground cover. The following requirements shall apply to ground cover landscaping: 
(1)  Ground cover or grass shall be planted in the remaining area of the lot or parcel not planted in trees, shrubbery, planting beds, or covered by structures, pavement or other impervious surfaces. 
(2)  Approved non-vegetative ground cover materials (such as washed gravel, bark mulch, lava rock, sand, rock, or other decorative covers generally used in landscaping) may be used to meet the provisions of this section. Where approved, non-vegetative ground cover shall be porous and form a uniform appearance free from weeds and grasses. 
(e)  Irrigation. All landscaping required by this section shall be irrigated by either an automated system, or a bib hose attachment within one hundred fifty (150) feet of all landscaping. Automated underground irrigation systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with the requirements of other provisions of this code. The building official may waive irrigation requirements where xeriscaping or a substitute landscaping plan is used. 
(Ord. No. 16-028 , § I, 6-28-16)  
Sec. 31-446. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 22. - DISTRICT "CD" CEMETERY DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 31-447. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the cemetery district is to preserve and enhance surrounding property values, prevent overcrowding of land and undue concentration of population, and to promote land use consistent with neighboring properties. 
(Ord. No. 16-027 , § I, 6-28-16)  
Sec. 31-448. - Cemetery district boundary. 
The cemetery district regulations apply to all property located in the current or future corporate city limits for a depth of one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet at the following locations: east of the State Highway 195 right-of-way for a distance of approximately forty-nine hundred (4,900) feet north of the intersection of State Highway 195 and Chaparral Road; and, east of the State Highway 195 right-of-way for a distance of approximately one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet south of the intersection of State Highway 195 and Chaparral Road. The first nine hundred fifty (950) feet of depth within the district, as measured from State Highway 195, shall be designated for commercial use. The remaining five hundred fifty (550) feet of depth of this segment shall be designated for mixed-use development, or residential use via a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 06-48, § III, 5-9-06; Ord. No. 12-034, § I, 7-10-12)  
Sec. 31-449. - Use regulations. 
(a)  Building on premises in "CD" district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Offices of practitioners of the recognized professions, as herein defined: 
a.  Professional building. Any structure used solely for the housing of professional offices of recognized professions. 
b.  Professions, recognized. Members of a recognized profession include those persons and customary staff normally considered as professional, and shall be deemed to include doctors, dentists, lawyers, architects, certified public accountants, registered engineers and related professions. 
(2)  Uses customarily incidental to the primary use, as hereinafter provided, subject to the special conditions contained in subsection 31-276(3). 
a.  Physical therapy clinic. 
b.  Chemical or X-ray laboratory. 
c.  Dispensing optician. 
d.  Dental laboratory. 
(3)  Buildings may be used for one (1) or more of the uses prescribed in subsection (2) only under the following conditions: 
a.  Public access to such incidental uses shall be from the interior of the building. 
b.  No parking space shall occupy any part of the required front yard, except as provided in article V, division 3. 
c.  Sign standards for this district shall apply to both primary and incidental uses. 
d.  No building in this district shall be constructed or altered to produce a storefront, show, window or display window, and there shall be no merchandise visible from the exterior of the building. 
e.  No outside storage shall be permitted in this district. 
(4)  Office, general business. 
(5)  Business day care 
(6)  Bakery shop (retail sales only). 
(7)  Personal services. 
(8)  Construction field office and yard: on the job site; for duration of construction only. 
(9)  Mortuary or funeral chapel. 
(10)  Drugstore or pharmacy. 
(11)  Florist (retail) retail sales of flowers and small plants. No flowers or plant raising or outside display or storage. 
(12)  Cafeteria or catering service. 
(13)  Restaurant or café (dine-in service). 
(14)  Tennis, swim club, health club or gym. 
(15)  Art gallery, bookstore or library. 
(16)  Mixed-use development, being located nine hundred fifty (950) feet to one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet east of the east right-of-way of State Highway 195, for the commercial and residential use of a building, set of buildings, or neighborhood, where the first floor is designed, constructed and used for commercial use only while allowing access to residential uses. 
(b)  Any conflict between this district and the districts incorporated herein, or the regulations provided by the other districts, shall be resolved so that the most stringent provision shall control. 
(Ord. No. 06-48, § III, 5-9-06; Ord. No. 12-034, § I, 7-10-12; Ord. No. 16-027 , § I, 6-28-16; Ord. No. 20-024 , § I, 5-26-20)  
Sec. 31-450. - Conditional use permit. 
The city council by an affirmative majority vote may by ordinance grant a conditional use permit as provided in section 31-456 of this chapter for any residential or business land use for a specific parcel in the overlay district and may impose appropriate conditions and safeguards to assure that these land uses are compatible with and appropriate for locations adjacent to the Veterans Cemetery. Conditional use permits granted shall be considered permanent provided the property owner remains in continuous compliance with any conditions or safeguards imposed. 
(Ord. No. 06-48, § III, 5-9-06; Ord. No. 10-058, § III, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 12-034, § I, 7-10-12)  
Sec. 31-451. - Height and area regulations. 
No building or structure in district "CD" cemetery district shall exceed forty-five (45) feet in height. The height of any building or structure in this district that exceeds thirty-five (35) feet shall provide an additional one (1) foot to every applicable setback distance for each one (1) foot of additional building or structure height over thirty-five (35) feet. 
(a)  Size of yards. The size of yards in the district "CD" cemetery district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a minimum depth of thirty (30) feet. No parking, storage or similar use shall be allowed in required front yards in district "CD," except that automobile parking will be permitted in such yards in accordance with off-street parking requirements. 
(2)  Side yard. A side yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet in width shall be provided on the side of a lot adjoining a side street. A side yard of not less than ten (10) feet in width shall be provided on the side of a lot adjoining any "R" zoned residential district. Otherwise, no side yard is required. No parking, storage, or similar use shall be allowed in any required side yard or in any required side street yard adjoining any "R" zoned residential district, except automobile parking in accordance with off-street parking requirements. 
(3)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a minimum depth of ten (10) feet. No parking, storage or similar use shall be allowed in required rear yards in district "CD." 
(b)  Size of lot. There are no limitations to the size of lots in the district "CD" professional business district. 
(Ord. No. 06-48, § III, 5-9-06; Ord. No. 12-034, § I, 7-10-12; Ord. No. 16-027 , § I, 6-28-16)  
Sec. 31-452. - Parking, screening device, signs, and exterior lighting requirements. 
(a)  Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in the "CD" cemetery district in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in article V, division 3 of this chapter. 
(b)  The screening device requirements in the district "CD" cemetery district shall be the same as required in the "B-1" district except that screening shall be required before the use of any commercial structure when such property abuts a residential zoned property or property used solely for residential purposes. 
(c)  No off-premises signs, neon signs or EVMS signs shall be permitted in this district. Signage in this district shall follow the standards outlined below: 
(1)  On-premises signs are restricted to one (1) sign per lot, except that premises which have more than three hundred (300) feet of combined frontage along a public way or street, other than an alley, may have not more than one (1) additional sign for each additional three hundred (300) feet of frontage or fraction thereof. The permitted sign shall be set back ten (10) feet from the property line, shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height, the face shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet and the sign shall be constructed of masonry material to match the building facade. 
(2)  Window signs shall not cover more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total glass area of the window on which they are placed. The size is determined by an imaginary square or rectangle that encompasses the window sign graphics. A glass door shall be considered a separate window for the purpose of this section. 
(3)  The maximum size for signage on the front of a building is based on the following guideline: For every one (1) linear foot of building primary or entry frontage one (1) square foot of sign area is allowed. For multi-tenant buildings one and one-half (1.5) square feet of sign area is allowed for every one (1) linear foot of building primary or entry frontage. Signs on secondary or side-street frontages should not exceed the size of sign on the primary or entrance frontage. 
(4)  Sign Maintenance: 
(A)  Signs and sign supports shall be kept in good repair and preserved. 
(B)  Display surfaces of signs shall be kept neatly painted at all times. 
(C)  Painted signs shall be repainted routinely so as to prevent peeling paint. 
(D)  Electrical components of signs must be protected from exposure to weather at all times unless they are designed for such exposure. 
(E)  Electrical circuits to signs that are no longer in use shall be disconnected at the electrical panel and shall be removed. 
(d)  Any person wishing to install or use exterior lighting for non-residential, mixed-use, and multi-family structures shall first request a site plan review and obtain approval for such lighting by the building official. The site plan shall fully comply with the general regulations of this section and shall specify the location, height and type of all exterior lighting. 
(1)  The height of exterior lighting, except streetlights in public rights-of-way, shall not exceed twenty (20) feet. 
(2)  Light trespass, defined as unwanted light shining on adjacent property or public rights-of-way, has a negative impact on the enjoyment and value of the affected adjacent property, is declared to be unlawful. All exterior lighting in the cemetery district shall be shielded or oriented in a manner that ensures that all illumination is contained on the source property. All exterior lighting shall be directed away from adjoining streets and residential properties in such a manner that the light emission shall not cause light trespass observable from adjoining streets and other properties. 
(3)  Exterior lighting situated in such a manner as to be mistaken for traffic signals or presenting any hazard to safe driving is prohibited. 
(4)  Up-lighting is prohibited, except: 
(A)  Up-lighting, defined as the practice of installing, maintaining or operating exterior lighting in such a way that the lighting fixtures direct the illumination upward, may be installed adjacent to flagpoles to illuminate a flag if the lighting is installed and directed in such a manner that the illumination is targeted directly at the flag and does not otherwise cause a light trespass or a driving hazard. 
(B)  Up-lighting of sculptures, structures and landscape features for ornamental purposes that enhance the character of the area is permitted provided that the lighting does not create light trespass or a hazard to safe driving. 
(5)  Canopy lighting shall be fully shielded or recessed so that the lenses of the lights are, at a minimum, flush with the bottom surface of the canopy. 
(6)  This section shall not apply to the following types of lighting if the use thereof is approved in writing by the building official: 
(A)  Unshielded lighting may be used if it can be shown that the luminary will not cause a light trespass or a driving hazard. 
(B)  Lighting for special activities where the lighting need is temporary rather than lighting utilized continuously. 
(e)  Parking lot islands with a canopy tree in each should be at the end of each parking row. An additional parking lot island with a canopy tree shall be added to each parking row for every fifteen (15) spaces or fraction thereof. Canopy trees shall be in accordance with the landscaping requirements set forth in section 31-454. The islands shall have raised curbing not less than six (6) inches in height and an area of not less than one hundred eighty (180) square feet for single parking row end islands or three hundred sixty (360) square feet for double row parking end islands. 
(f)  Bay dividers shall be provided in order to prevent uncontrolled movement across parking areas, to separate the parking areas from the adjacent property, and to increase the safety of individuals using the parking lot. Dividers shall be provided on every other parking row and conform to one (1) of the following standards: 
(1)  Raised dividers shall have raised six-inch curbing and be a minimum of six (6) feet in width measured from face of curb to face of curb and tie in with the end island to provide safety for pedestrians. 
(2)  Raised dividers that are landscaped shall have raised six-inch curbing and be a minimum of seven (7) feet in width and tie in to the end island. 
(g)  Parking slots in the numbers provided in the table below shall be reserved for each of the following groups per parking lot: Purple Heart recipients, Gold Star recipients. All spaces shall be located adjacent to required handicapped parking space(s). Purple Heart and Gold Star signs should conform to criteria promulgated by the executive director of planning and development services or designee. 
3 to 50 slots: 1 
51 to 75 slots: 2 
76 to 100 slots: 3 
100 and above: 4 
(Ord. No. 06-48, § III, 5-9-06; Ord. No. 12-034, § I, 7-10-12; Ord. No. 16-027 , § I, 6-28-16)  
Sec. 31-453. - Architectural design standards and requirements. 
(a)  Big box buildings, such as department stores, variety stores, warehouse retail centers, grocery stores, furniture warehouse stores and similar buildings thirty thousand (30,000) square feet and larger shall be designed such that the exterior façade has the appearance of several smaller, human scale, buildings through the use of vertical treatments and a mix of design elements that may include windows, canopies, decorative lighting, stepped building faces, etc. 
(b)  Windows and/or glass walls shall be provided on commercial building walls when visible from public rights-of-way. Windows shall makeup no less than ten (10) percent of the entire building facade. At a minimum, false windows may be used on rear and side walls visible from public streets. 
(c)  Exterior walls exceeding fifty (50) feet in length facing public streets shall be articulated to reduce the mass and scale of a uniform impersonal appearance of large buildings and to provide visual interest. No uninterrupted length shall exceed fifty (50) feet and architectural features shall be provided with a minimum of four (4) of the following elements: 
(1)  Variation in color and materials. 
(2)  Wall plane projections or recesses having a depth of at least one (1) foot and extending at least three (3) feet. Colonnades may be used instead of the projections, or pilasters. 
(3)  Projecting entrances, having clearly defined, highly visible, overhangs, canopies, peaked roof forms, raised corniced parapets over the door, or arches, or any combination of these. 
(4)  Canopies projecting a minimum of four (4) feet from the plane of the primary façade walls. The minimum combined lengths of the canopies shall be at least fifty (50) percent of the length of the walls visible from public rights-of-way. 
(5)  Banding shall be complimentary to scale with the building (as approved by the executive director of planning and development services). 
(6)  Repetitive ornamentation including decorated wall-mounted light fixtures. Such ornamentation shall be located with a maximum spacing of forty (40) feet. 
(7)  Stepped building faces (offsets in from elevation). 
(d)  Where the exterior wall is on a side street faux architectural detailing and windows shall be created to simulate three-dimensional relief. 
(e)  Roof designs must conform to one (1) of the following options: 
(1)  Roof line with architectural focal point(s) (refers to a prominent rooftop features(s) such as a peak, tower, gable, dome, barrel vault or roof line trellis structure). 
(2)  Where overhanging eaves are used they shall be two (2) or more feet beyond supporting wall with a minimum fascia width of eight (8) inches. 
(3)  Roof line variations may include: 
(A)  Projecting cornice. Roof line articulated through a variation or step in cornice height of detail. Cornices must be located at or near the top of the wall or parapet. 
(B)  Pitched roof or full mansard. A roof with angled edges and extended eaves no less than eight (8) feet in height. 
(C)  Three (3) roofline variations with a minimum of three (3) feet in height of parapet variation. Variation to parapet height may include pilasters and projecting raised entrance features; with peaked roof forms or similar treatments. 
(f)  Equipment placed on the roof of buildings shall be screened from view of the public. 
(g)  The executive director of planning and development services or designee may grant an administrative approval to use design elements not listed when the intent of the regulations is met, or when special situations arise regarding the rear and sides of buildings. 
(Ord. No. 16-027 , § I, 6-28-16; Ord. No. 19-040 , § I, 9-10-19)  
Sec. 31-454. - Landscaping requirements. 
(a)  Landscaping required. Minimum required landscaping shall be determined by this section. At a minimum, fifty (50) percent of the required landscaping should be located in the front of the building and/or on sides of the building that front public rights-of-way; however, any reasonable distribution of landscaping in proportion to street frontage may be approved by the building official. 
(b)  Trees. The following requirements shall apply to tree landscaping: 
(1)  The minimum number of required trees shall be calculated by dividing the lot or parcel frontage (i.e., the length in feet of lot lines abutting street frontages) by twenty (20). The resulting quotient, with any remainder rounded up to the next nearest whole number, shall be the total number of trees required. The length of the lot lines for irregular lots shall be the average width or length of the lot. A reduction in the required number of trees shall apply to lots with more than one (1) street frontage by dividing the total lot frontages by thirty (30) instead of twenty (20). 
(2)  Not less than fifty (50) percent of the required trees planted in the area to be landscaped shall be canopy trees. 
(3)  Newly planted trees shall measure at least three-inch caliper and six (6) feet high at the time of planting, and shall be planted in a permeable area not less than three (3) feet in diameter. 
(4)  Existing trees to be used for landscape credit shall be in a healthy physical state, shall measure at least four-inch caliper and shall be maintained in an undisturbed area within the drip line of the tree. 
(5)  Should an existing tree used for landscape credit die, it shall be replaced with new landscaping according to the requirements of this section. 
(6)  Recommended plantings include the quality tree species listed in chapter 8, art. VI, subdivision A. 
(c)  Shrubbery. The following requirements shall apply to shrubbery landscaping: 
(1)  The number of required shrubs shall be calculated by dividing the lot or parcel frontage (i.e., the length in feet of lot lines abutting street frontages) by two and one-half (2.5). The resulting quotient, with any remainder rounded up to the next nearest whole number, shall be the total number of shrubs required. 
(2)  Each canopy tree maintained in excess of the total number of trees required by this section may reduce the number of shrubs required by ten (10). Each non-canopy tree maintained in excess of the total number of trees required by this section may reduce the number of shrubs required by six (6). In like manner, ten (10) shrubs can be substituted for one (1) canopy tree and six (6) shrubs can be substituted for a non-canopy tree. 
(3)  Each two (2) square feet of planting bed used and maintained for the purpose of rotating live decorative planting materials may reduce the number of shrubs required by one (1). 
(4)  Shrubs shall not be less than three (3) gallons in size. 
(5)  The placement of shrubbery shall take into consideration the plant size at maturity and shall be located so as not to conflict with vehicular or pedestrian traffic visibility. 
(d)  Ground cover. The following requirements shall apply to ground cover landscaping: 
(1)  Ground cover or grass shall be planted in the remaining area of the lot or parcel not planted in trees, shrubbery, planting beds, or covered by structures, pavement or other impervious surfaces. 
(2)  Approved non-vegetative ground cover materials (such as washed gravel, bark mulch, lava rock, sand, rock, or other decorative covers generally used in landscaping) may be used to meet the provisions of this section. Where approved, non-vegetative ground cover shall be porous and form a uniform appearance free from weeds and grasses. 
(e)  Irrigation. All landscaping required by this section shall be irrigated by either an automated system, or a bib hose attachment within one hundred fifty (150) feet of all landscaping. Automated underground irrigation systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with the requirements of other provisions of this Code. The building official may waive irrigation requirements where xeriscaping or a substitute landscaping plan is used. 
(Ord. No. 16-027 , § I, 6-28-16)  
Sec. 31-455. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 31-456. - Conditional use permit. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the conditional use permit process is to identify those land uses that may be appropriate within a zoning district but, due to their location, function or operation, could have a harmful impact on adjacent properties or the surrounding area, and to provide a procedure whereby such uses may be permitted by further restricting or conditioning the same so as to mitigate or eliminate such potential adverse impacts. The conditional use permit runs with the land, regardless of ownership, until termination of the permit. 
(b)  Planning and zoning commission consideration. 
(1)  Application. Only the landowner may apply for a conditional use permit. The application for a conditional use permit shall be submitted on a form provided by the planning and development director and shall be accompanied by a site plan in the form provided under paragraph (2) of this subsection. The application shall be filed with the planning and zoning commission, together with the application fee and all required attachments, not less than thirty (30) days prior to the meeting at which the applicant wishes to have his or her request considered. 
(2)  Site plan. The application for a conditional use permit shall be accompanied by four (4) copies of a site plan, if a site plan is required by the director of planning and development department. The plan and analysis information shall be on a single sheet; additional sheets may be used for details and prospective views. The site plan shall conform to the following: 
(A)  The site plan shall be a line drawing clearly describing the project, and shall include adequate labeling and dimensioning of all fundamental features of the project. An appropriate title shall identify the project and its nature and the site plan shall include the legal description of the property together with the north point and date, and shall be drawn to a scale of not less than 1" = 100'. 
(B)  Typical features that shall be included are: property lines; rights-of-way for streets, alleys, and easements; building lines; building setback lines; curb lines; parkways and sidewalks; driveway openings; buildings and/or structures; open space; the number and size of parking spaces; streets; street names; section lines; building heights in feet and stories; size and height of signs; service areas; lighting and landscaping. 
(C)  A site plan shall be accompanied by a narrative description of the use being requested to include, without limitation, a description of activity to be conducted on the site, the projected number of employees, the hours of operation, estimated number of trips generated to and from the site each day, and the establishment's maximum capacity. 
(3)  Notice and hearing. For purposes of giving notice and conducting a public hearing, applications for conditional use permits shall be treated as a rezoning request under section 31-39 of this chapter. 
(4)  Report by planning and zoning commission. Following proper application, notice to affected landowners and a public hearing, the planning and zoning commission shall make a report and recommendation to the city council. The report shall specify such restrictions or conditions for approval as the planning and zoning commission may deem appropriate to comply with the criteria listed below. If a site plan is conditionally approved by the planning and zoning commission, a corrected site plan shall be filed with the planning and development department no later than five (5) business days after the commission's action. 
(5)  Criteria for approval. The planning and zoning commission may recommend approval of a conditional use permit by majority vote, but shall recommend disapproval of an application if it finds one or more of the following, or other valid justifications, to be true: 
(A)  The proposed use will be incompatible with existing or permitted uses on surrounding sites because of use, building height, bulk and scale, setbacks and open spaces, coverage, landscaping and screening, drainage, or access and circulation features; 
(B)  The proposed use is not suitable to the premises or structure(s) in which it will be conducted; 
(C)  The proposed use will be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or will negatively affect the property or improvements in the vicinity; 
(D)  The proposed use fails to reasonably protect persons and property from erosion, flood or water damage, fire, noise, glare, odors, or similar hazards or impacts; 
(E)  The proposed use will materially and adversely affect traffic control or adjacent properties by inappropriate location, lighting or types of signs; 
(F)  The proposed use fails to provide adequate and convenient off-street parking and loading facilities; or 
(G)  The proposed use will incorporate the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption except where the applicant seeks a temporary permit, not to exceed two (2) months in duration, to allow for the on-premises sale, distribution or consumption of alcoholic beverages for temporary events in compliance with a Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission issued permit and the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended. 
(c)  City council consideration. 
(1)  Generally. The city council shall consider the application at the next available meeting scheduled after it has received the final report and recommendation of the planning and zoning commission and a corrected site plan, if applicable. The city council may approve the application with or without conditions, deny the application, postpone the matter for future consideration, or refer the application back to the planning and zoning commission for further study and recommendation. 
(2)  Protest. Protests shall be received and processed in accordance with subsection 31-39(d) of this chapter. 
(3)  Conditions of approval. Regardless of whether such conditions have been recommended by the planning and zoning commission, the city council may establish such conditions of approval as are reasonably necessary to insure compatibility with surrounding uses and to preserve the public health, safety and welfare. Such conditions may include, without limitation, a limited term or duration of the permit; requirements for special yards, lot sizes, open spaces, buffers, fences, walls or screening; requirements for the installation and maintenance of landscaping or erosion control measures; requirements for street improvements, regulation of vehicular ingress or egress and traffic circulation, regulation of signs; regulation of hours or other characteristics of operation; establishment of development schedules for performance or completion; and such other reasonable conditions as the city council may deem necessary to preserve the health, safety, and welfare of the applicant and the public. 
(4)  Ordinance required. If the application is approved by the city council, an ordinance authorizing its issuance and setting forth the conditions of approval shall be executed by the mayor. 
(5)  Submission of application following disapproval. No application for a conditional use permit which has failed to be approved by the city council shall be again considered either by the city council or the planning and zoning commission before the expiration of one (1) year from the date of the original rejection. City council's failure to approve an application shall be considered the same as disapproval for purposes of this paragraph. 
(d)  Record of permits. The planning and development department shall maintain a record of all conditional use permits granted by the city. 
(e)  Term. 
(1)  A conditional use permit shall continue in full force and effect until the earliest occurrence of any of the following events of termination, at which time it shall be void and shall have no further effect: 
(A)  The building or premises is not put to the permitted use for a period of one (1) year or more from the effective date of the ordinance authorizing issuance of the permit or the permitted use ceases for any one (1) year period; 
(B)  The permit expires by its own terms; 
(C)  The property is rezoned; 
(D)  Another conditional use permit is approved for the site; 
(E)  The building or premises is substantially enlarged or extended; 
(F)  The use of the building or premises is materially expanded or increased; or 
(G)  The violation of any one or more of the conditions of approval. 
(2)  For purposes of this section the planning and development director shall have the authority, subject to review by the city council, to determine whether an event of termination has occurred in relation to the events of termination listed under 31-456 (e)(1)(A), (E), (F) and (G) above. Whenever the planning and development director makes a formal determination as to whether an event of termination has occurred, he/she shall promptly make and forward a written report to the city council describing the facts surrounding such determination and the reasons for such determination. Written notice of this determination, the reasons therefore and the landowner's right to appeal this determination shall also be forwarded via certified mail, return receipt requested, to the landowner of record. Notice is presumed to have been received five (5) days after the mailing of such notice. Notice shall not be provided following the occurrence of an event of termination listed under 31-456(e)(1)(B), (C) or (D) above. 
(3)  Appeal. Upon receipt of written notice of a termination under this section a landowner shall have thirty (30) days to duly file a written request to appeal the planning and development director's determination to the city council. Such written request shall be filed with the planning and development department and shall be scheduled for the next available city council meeting. City council's determination shall be final. Notwithstanding the landowner's right to appeal, city council, upon receipt of the written report from the planning and development director may unilaterally reconsider the determination. All city actions relating to the termination of a conditional use permit shall be stayed following filing of the written request for appeal, or following notice of city council's determination to unilaterally reconsider the determination, until city council consideration is final. No appeal shall be available following the occurrence of an event of termination listed under 31-456(e)(1)(B), (C) or (D) of this section. 
(f)  Violations of conditional use permit. Violations of any conditions imposed by an issued conditional use permit or continuing a use following termination of a conditional use permit authorizing the same shall be enforced in accordance with section 31-7 of this chapter and section 1-8 of this code. 
(g)  Existing special or specific use permits. All properties with a specific or special use permit in effect prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this paragraph is derived shall continue to be allowed to be used for the uses that are permitted under, and according to, the terms of the permit and the previous regulations of the specific or special use permit provisions that existed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this paragraph is derived until such time as the permit expires or is otherwise terminated or revoked by the city. Additionally, all holders of existing special or specific use permits as of the date of the ordinance from which this paragraph is derived shall be entitled to apply for the same type of permit currently held once within one (1) year of the expiration thereof. This right to apply shall not be construed as limiting the city council's discretion or right to deny such application upon presentation. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 15-1; Ord. No. 88-114, § IV, 12-13-88; Ord. No. 88-115, § IV, 12-13-88; Ord. No. 93-102, § V, 11-9-93; Ord. No. 97-62, § I, 11-25-97; Ord. No. 99-47, § III, 6-8-99; Ord. No. 00-52, § I, 6-27-00; Ord. No. 04-87, §§ VI, VII, 10-19-04; Ord. No. 05-40, § III, 5-24-05; Ord. No. 10-059, § II, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 31-457. - Garden apartment projects. 
(a)  The owner or owners of a tract of land in district "R-3", "R-3F," or "R-3A" may submit to the city planning and zoning commission a plan for the use and development of the tract of land for residential purposes. If the commission approves the development plan, the plan, together with the recommendations of the commission, shall then be submitted to the city council for consideration and approval. The recommendations of the commission shall be accompanied by a report stating the reasons for approval of the application and that the plan conforms to the requirements of district "R-3," "R-3F," or "R-3A" as to: 
(1)  Height and yard requirements for buildings along boundary streets. 
(2)  Lot area per family, exclusive of streets. 
(b)  Subject to the above, variations in yard requirements and in the number of main buildings per lot may be permitted. If the council approves the plan, building permits may be issued, even though the location of buildings to be erected in the area and the yard and open spaces contemplated by the plan do not conform in all respects to the district regulations of the district in which it is located. The purpose of this provision is to make possible the development of garden-type multifamily projects, in accordance with the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 15-3; Ord. No. 05-101, § II, 10-25-05; Ord. No. 10-003, § VII, 2-9-10)  
Secs. 31-458—31-470. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - HEIGHT AND AREA EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS 
 
Sec. 31-471. - Height. 
(a)  The height regulations prescribed herein shall not apply to television and radio towers, church spires, belfries, monuments, tanks, water and fire towers, stage towers or scenery lofts, cooling towers, ornamental towers and spires, chimneys, elevator bulkheads, smokestacks, conveyors, flagpoles, electric display signs and necessary mechanical appurtenances. 
(b)  Public or semi-public service buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools, where permitted, may be erected to a height not exceeding sixty (60) feet and churches and other places of worship may be erected to a height not exceeding seventy-five (75) feet when each of the required yards are increased by one (1) foot for each foot of additional building height above the height regulations for the district in which the building is located. 
(c)  No structure may be erected to a height in excess of that permitted by the regulations of such airfield zoning ordinance as may exist at the time and whose regulations apply to the area in which the structure is being erected. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 14-1)  
Sec. 31-472. - Front yards. 
(a)  Where twenty-five (25) percent or more of the frontage upon the same side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets is occupied or partially occupied by a building or buildings with front yards of less depth than required by this chapter, or where the configuration of the ground is such that conformity with the front yard provisions of this chapter would create a hardship, the board of adjustment may permit modifications of the front yard requirements. 
(b)  In districts "R-1," "SF-2," "R-2," or "R-3," "R-3F," or "R-3A" where twenty-five (25) percent or more of the frontage upon the same side of a street between intersecting streets is occupied or partially occupied by a building or buildings having front yards of greater depth than is required by this chapter, no other lot upon the same side of such street between such intersecting streets shall be occupied by a building with a front yard of less than the least depth of any such existing front yards, unless by permission of the board of adjustment. 
(c)  Regarding the main building, open and unenclosed terraces or porches and eaves and roof extensions may project into the required front yard for a distance not to exceed four (4) feet; provided, however that no supporting structure other than columns up to twelve (12) inches square/radius for such extensions may be located within the required front yard. An unenclosed canopy for a gasoline filling station may extend beyond the building line but shall never be closer to the property line than twelve (12) feet. 
(d)  Where an official line has been established for future widening or opening of a street upon which a lot abuts, then the width of a front or side yard shall be measured from such official line to the nearest line of the building. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 14-2; Ord. No. 93-102, § VI, 11-9-93; Ord. No. 10-003, § VII, 2-9-10; Ord. No. 19-007 , § I, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 31-473. - Side yards. 
(a)  On a corner lot the width of the yard along the side street shall not be less than any required front yard on the same side of such street between intersecting streets; provided, however, that the buildable width of a lot of record shall not be reduced to less than thirty (30) feet. 
(b)  No accessory building shall project beyond a required yard line along any side street except for residentially used or zoned property, a storage shed with a maximum overall height of eight (8) feet, may be placed five (5) feet from a side street property line. 
(c)  For the purpose of side yard regulations, a two-family dwelling or multifamily dwelling shall be considered as one (1) building occupying one (1) lot. 
(d)  Where a lot of record at the time of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived is less than fifty (50) feet in width the required side yard may be reduced to provide a minimum buildable width of thirty (30) feet; provided, however, that no side yard shall be less than five (5) feet. 
(e)  The area required in a yard shall be open to the sky, unobstructed except for the ordinary projections of windowsills, belt courses, cornices or other ornamental features and item (b) above. 
(f)  A roof overhang, an open fire escape or an outside stairway may project not more than three (3) feet into a required side yard, but no closer than three (3) feet to a property line. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 14-3; Ord. No. 19-007 , § I, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 31-474. - Rear yards. 
Accessory buildings or structures to residential uses shall be limited to twenty (20) feet in height and in sum shall not occupy more than twenty-five (25) percent of the area when located in a required rear yard, however no accessory building or structure shall be closer than five (5) feet to the main building, nor closer than five (5) feet to any rear lot line or five (5) feet to any interior side lot lines. In-ground swimming pools and above ground swimming pools shall be located only within the side yard or rear yard and shall not be placed in the front yard or the side street yard, exclusive of any publically dedicated utility or drainage easements, and shall be no closer than five (5) feet from any side lot line and ten (10) feet from any rear lot line. 
Regarding the main building, open and unenclosed terraces or porches and eaves and roof extensions may project into the required front yard for a distance not to exceed four (4) feet; provided, however that no supporting structure other than columns up to twelve (12) inches square/diameter for such extensions may be located within the required front yard. An unenclosed canopy for a gasoline filling station may extend beyond the building line but shall never be closer to the property line than twelve (12) feet. Regarding sheds and accessory buildings, caves and roof extensions may project up to one (1) foot into the zoning setbacks above. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 14-4; Ord. No. 83-37, § 1, 6-28-83; Ord. No. 16-001 , § I, 1-12-16; Ord. No. 19-007 , § I, 2-26-19)  
Secs. 31-475—31-485. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 
 
Sec. 31-486. - Purposes. 
To secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to lessen congestion in the streets; to facilitate the adequate provisions of transportation; to conserve the value of buildings; and to encourage the most appropriate use of land, minimum off-street parking and loading areas shall be provided as set forth in the following schedules and provisions. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 13-1)  
Sec. 31-487. - General provisions. 
(a)  Parking spaces and loading berths required in this division, together with aisles and maneuvering area, shall have an all-weather surfacing, enclosed or unenclosed, and shall be connected by an all-weather surfaced driveway to a street or alley. 
(b)  In determining the required number of parking spaces, fractional spaces shall be counted to the nearest whole space. Parking spaces located in buildings used for repair garages or auto laundries shall not be counted as meeting the required minimum parking. 
(c)  The floor area of structures devoted to off-street parking of vehicles shall be excluded in computing the floor area for off-street parking requirements. 
(d)  Where a lot or tract of land is used for a combination of uses, the off-street parking requirements shall be the composite or sum of the requirements for each type of use and no off-street parking space provided for one (1) type of use or building shall be included in calculation of the off-street parking requirements for any other use or building. 
(e)  Off-street parking. The following provisions shall apply to all parking adjacent to a public thoroughfare: 
(1)  Parking spaces so situated that the maneuverings of a vehicle in entering or leaving such spaces is done on a public street shall not be classified as off-street parking in computing any parking requirements herein, except in "R-1," "SF-2," "RM-1," "R-2," "RT-1," "R-MP," and "R-MS" uses. 
(2)  The construction of parking as described in (1) above shall be prohibited hereafter. All such parking facilities in existence at the time of the enactment of this section are hereby declared to be a nonconforming use of land subject to the provisions of section 16 of the 1963 zoning ordinance, which are hereby declared a part of this section as if contained herein. 
(f)  No off-street parking space shall be located, either in whole or in part, in a public street or sidewalk, parkway, alley or other public right-of-way. Maneuvering areas located adjacent to a public street shall be computed from the curb line of the street. Sidewalk areas shall be a minimum of four (4) feet wide and shall be permanently designated. All sidewalks shall be located on public property. 
(g)  No off-street parking or loading space shall be located, either in whole or in part, within any fire lane required by ordinance of the city or within aisles, driveways or maneuvering areas necessary to provide reasonable access to any parking space, except in "R-1" and "R-2" districts. 
(h)  No required off-street parking or loading space shall be used for sales, nonvehicular storage, repair or service activities. 
(i)  Lighting facilities, when provided for the purposes of providing safety and convenience for the patrons and employees of the businesses requiring lighting, shall be so arranged as to be reflected away from property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(j)  On required parking lots provided for thirty (30) cars or more, excluding section 31-489, subsection (1)a. through g., there shall be provided, for an uncovered parking area, sufficient lighting to provide a minimum of one (1) footcandle of light on the surface of the parking lot at any location, and a minimum of five (5) footcandles of lighting on the parking surface of a covered parking facility. (Reference: Illuminating Engineering Society Handbook, section 14) 
(k)  The minimum time of operation of the required lighting shall be between the hours of sundown and one (1) hour past the posted hours of operation of the business. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 13-2 [Ord. No. 70-69, 12-14-70]; Ord. No. 92-81, § I, 11-10-92; Ord. No. 93-102, § VII, 11-9-93; Ord. No. 96-63, § IV, 8-13-96; Ord. No. 06-48, § IV, 5-9-06)  
Sec. 31-488. - Minimum off-street parking standards. 
In all districts there shall be provided, in connection with appropriate permitted uses, off-street vehicle parking spaces in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  In any district, there shall be provided on each single-family residential lot two (2) vehicle parking spaces of not less than one hundred eighty (180) square feet each, open or enclosed. 
(2)  In all districts where such use is permitted, there shall be provided on any lot devoted to multifamily residential use parking spaces of not less than one hundred eighty (180) square feet, as provided in section 31-489. 
(3)  Required off-street parking for residential uses shall be provided on the lot or tract occupied by the principal use, except in townhouse subdivisions ("RT-1"), where one (1) of the required spaces may be within one hundred (100) feet of each lot or tract. 
(4)  Required off-street parking for permitted nonresidential uses in the "R" district and for permitted uses in all other districts shall be provided on the lot or tract occupied by the principal use or upon a lot or tract under the same ownership in fee simple or under a perpetual easement which commits the land for parking for the use, building or structure. Such off-premises parking shall be consolidated under a single certificate of occupancy with the principal use. Such parking facility shall be located in the same zoning district as the principal use; provided, that the zoning board of adjustment may permit a parking facility, as a special exception, under such regulations and conditions as the board may deem advisable, when: 
a.  The proposed parking facility is on a site within three hundred (300) feet of the principal use property; and 
b.  The principal use is located in an "R" district and the proposed parking facility is located in one (1) of such districts; or 
c.  The principal use is located in a "B-3" or less restrictive district and the proposed parking facility is located in one (1) of such districts. 
In the granting of such special exception, the board shall approve the location of entrances and exits to parking areas, and may require screening devices along parking area boundaries. 
(5)  In all districts where such use is permitted, there shall be provided for nonresidential use, parking spaces of not less than one hundred eighty (180) square feet, as provided in section 31-489, except on property zoned "BL-1" parking spaces shall be two hundred forty (240) square feet or twenty (20) feet by twelve (12) feet. Such parking spaces shall be striped or otherwise clearly designated on the parking surface, and shall not include any fire lane or other area necessary for aisles or maneuvering of vehicles. 
(6)  No publicly owned property may be considered by the owner of any private property in determining whether or not his property meets the parking and loading requirements of this chapter. 
(7)  No entrance or exit to any parking facility for any property in zoning district "BL-1" shall be located within fifty (50) feet of any intersection of any public streets. 
(8)  Special parking district "A" is hereby created and is described as an area bounded by the innermost rights-of-way or straight line extensions of the rights-of-way of Avenue G, Park Street, Green Avenue and 12 th Street. No off-street parking shall be required within special parking district "A." 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 13-3 [Ord. No. 76-46, § 11, 8-10-76; Ord. No. 82-76, 12-28-82; Ord. No. 87-71, § 1, 9-22-87]; Ord. No. 93-53, § I, 6-22-93)  
Sec. 31-489. - Schedule of off-street parking standards. 
Uses 	Number of Parking Spaces 	Required for Each 	Additional Requirements 
(1) 	RESIDENTIAL 
	a. 	Townhouse or rowhouse 	2 	Dwelling unit 	
	b. 	Apartment 	1-2/3 	Dwelling unit 	
	c. 	Boarding or rooming house 	1 	Rooming unit 	
	d. 	Hotel, motel or tourist court 	1 	Guest room or residence unit 	
	e. 	Manufactured housing or mobile home 			
		1. 	Manufactured home or mobile home 	2 	lot, plot, tract or stand 	
		2. 	Travel trailer 	1 	Lot, plot, tract or stand 	
	f. 	Private dormitory 	1 	Two (2) occupants per designed occupancy 	
	g. 	Duplexes 	2 	Dwelling unit 	
	h. 	Three-plex (1 bedroom per dwelling unit) 	4 	Building 	
	i. 	Three-plex (2 bedrooms per dwelling unit) 	6 	Building 	
	j. 	Three-plex (3 or 4 bedrooms per dwelling unit) 	8 	Building 	
	k. 	Four-plex (1 or 2 bedrooms per dwelling unit) 	8 	Building 	
	l. 	Four-plex (3 or 4 bedrooms per dwelling unit) 	10 	Building 	
(2) 	INSTITUTIONAL AND SPECIAL 
	a. 	Community or welfare center 1 200 sq. ft. of floor area 			
	b. 	School-private or public 			
		1. 	Elementary 	1 	25 students 	
		2. 	Junior high 	1 	18 students 	
		3. 	Senior high 	1 	5 students 	
	c. 	Place of public assembly 	1 	4 seats 	
	d. 	College or university 	1 	4 day students 	
	e. 	Church 	1 	4 seats in sanctuary or auditorium 	
	f. 	Kindergarten, day nursery, day care 	1 	8 pupils 	
	g. 	Hospital-chronic care 	1 	6 beds 	
	h. 	Hospital-acute care 	1 	Bed 	
	i. 	Home for the aged 	1 	Dwelling unit 	
	j. 	Library 	1 	350 square feet of public area 	
	k. 	Fraternity or sorority 	1 	2 members or residents 	
	l. 	Student religious center 	1 	250 square feet of floor area 	
	m. 	Mortuary, funeral chapel 	1 	4 seats in chapel 	
(3) 	RECREATION, SPECIAL AND ENTERTAINMENT 
	a. 	Theater 	1 	4 seats 	
	b. 	Bowling alley 	6 	Lane 	
	c. 	Tavern, nightclub, private club 	1 	30 square feet of floor area 	
	d. 	Commercial amusements (outdoor) 	1 	600 square feet of site area exclusive of buildings 	
	e. 	Ballpark, stadium 	1 	8 seats 	
	f. 	Lodge, fraternal organization 	1 	200 square feet of floor area 	
(4) 	PERSONAL SERVICE AND RETAIL 
	a. 	Personal service shop 1 200 square feet of floor area 			
	b. 	Retail stores or shops (inside) 1 400 square feet of floor area 			
	c. 	Furniture store 1 800 square feet of floor area 			
	d. 	Open retail sales 1 600 square feet of site area exclusive of buildings 			
(5) 	FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICES 
	a. 	Eating or drinking place (service to auto) 	1 	100 square feet of floor area 	Minimum of 12 spaces 
	b. 	Eating or drinking place (inside only) 	1 	150 square feet of floor area 	
(6) 	BUSINESS SERVICES 
	a. 	Bank 	1 	300 square feet of floor area 	
	b. 	Savings and loan or similar institution 	1 	400 square feet of floor area 	
	c. 	Medical, dental, clinic or office 	1 	150 square feet of floor area 	
	d. 	Other office, business or professional 	1 	300 square feet of floor area 	
(7) 	AUTOMOTIVE AND EQUIPMENT 
	a. 	Service station 	1 	200 square feet of floor area 	Minimum of 4 spaces 
	b. 	Auto repair, garage or shop (indoor) 	1 	500 square feet of floor area 	Minimum of 5 spaces 
	c. 	Auto parts and accessories- sales 	1 	800 square feet of floor area 	
	d. 	Vehicle or machinery sales (indoor) 	1 	500 square feet of floor area 	Minimum of 5 spaces 
	e. 	Vehicle or machinery sales (outdoor) 	1 	1,000 square feet of floor area 	
	f. 	Car wash 	3 	Service lane 	
(8) 	STORAGE, WHOLESALE AND MANUFACTURING 
	a. 	Brick or lumber yard or similar area 	1 	4,000 square feet of site area 	
	b. 	Open storage of sand, gravel, petroleum 	1 	4,000 square feet of site area 	
	c. 	Warehouse and enclosed storage, wholesale or manufacture operation 	1 	4,000 square feet of floor area 	
	d. 	Wholesale or manufacture operation 	1 	1,000 square feet of floor area 	
	e. 	Freight docks 	1 	1,000 square feet of floor area 	
 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 13-3; Ord. No. 96-63, § IV, 8-13-96; Ord. No. 02-48, § IV, V, VI, VII, 9-24-02; Ord. No. 10-003, § V, 2-9-10)  
Sec. 31-490. - Dimensions for off-street parking. 
(a)  Ninety-degree-angle parking. Each ninety-degree-angle parking space shall be not less than nine (9) feet wide nor less than twenty (20) feet in length. Maneuvering space shall be in addition to parking space and shall be not less than twenty-four (24) feet perpendicular to the building or parking line. Maneuvering space adjacent to a public street shall be computed from curb line of the street and shall be not less than twenty-four (24) feet perpendicular to the building or parking line. 
(b)  Sixty-degree-angle parking. Each sixty-degree-angle parking space shall be not less than nine (9) feet wide perpendicular to the parking angle nor less than nineteen (19) feet in length when measured at right angles to the building or parking line. Maneuvering space shall be in addition to parking space and shall be not less than twenty (20) feet perpendicular to the building or parking line. Maneuvering space adjacent to a public street shall be computed from curb line of the street and shall be not less than twenty (20) feet perpendicular to the building or parking line. 
(c)  Forty-five-degree-angle parking. Each forty-five-degree-angle parking space shall be not less than eight (8) feet wide perpendicular to the parking angle nor less than eighteen (18) feet in length when measured at right angles to the building or parking line. Maneuvering space shall be in addition to parking space and shall be not less than eighteen (18) feet perpendicular to the building or parking line. Maneuvering space adjacent to a public street shall be computed from curb line of the street and shall be not less than eighteen (18) feet perpendicular to the building or parking line. 
(d)  When off-street parking facilities are located adjacent to a public alley, the width of the alley may be assumed to be a portion of the maneuvering space requirement. When maneuvering space is located adjacent to a public street and no curb line exists or no curb is required, the future curb line shall be located by the city engineer. 
(e)  Where off-street parking facilities are provided in excess of the minimum amounts herein specified, or when off-street parking facilities are provided but not required by this chapter, off-street parking facilities shall comply with minimum requirements for parking and maneuvering space herein specified. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 13-4)  
Sec. 31-491. - Off-street loading space. 
Every building or part thereof erected or occupied for retail business, service, manufacturing, storage, warehousing, hotel, mortuary, or any other use similarly involving the receipt or distribution by vehicles or materials or merchandise, shall provide and maintain on the same premises loading space in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  In districts "M-1" and "M-2," one (1) loading space for each ten thousand (10,000) feet or fraction thereof, floor area in the building. 
(2)  In districts "B-1," "B-2," "B-3," "B-4" and "B-5," one (1) loading space for the first five thousand (5,000) to fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet of floor area in the building and one (1) additional loading space for each fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet, or fraction thereof, of floor area in excess of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. 
(3)  Each required loading space shall have a minimum size of ten (10) feet by twenty-five (25) feet. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 13-5 [Ord. No. 70-52, § 3, 8-28-70; Ord. No. 76-15, §§ 3,4, 3-23-76])  
Secs. 31-492—31-500. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - SIGNS AND OUTDOOR DISPLAYS 
 
Sec. 31-501. - Statement of purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to permit such signs that will not by their reason, size, location, construction, or manner of display, endanger the public safety, confuse, mislead or obstruct the vision necessary for traffic safety or otherwise endanger public health, safety and morals, and to permit and regulate signs in such a way as to support and complement land use objectives set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 36-1 [Ord. No. 83-73, § 1, 12-13-83])  
Sec. 31-502. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned sign shall mean any lawfully erected on-premises sign where the business or activity has ceased to operate on the premises where the sign or sign structure is located for more than one (1) year on non-leased property or for more than two (2) years on leased property, or a lawfully erected temporary or portable sign where the time period allowed for display of the sign has expired. 
Banner sign shall mean any non-permanent sign usually made from cloth, vinyl or similar material denoting a business related advertisement, name, message, design, emblem, symbol or color that is suspended or displayed for advertisement, or to attract attention. 
Bench sign shall mean a sign located on any part of the surface of a bench or seat placed on or adjacent to a public right-of-way. 
Changeable electronic variable message sign (CEVMS) shall mean an off-premises sign which permits light to be turned on or off periodically or which is operated in a way whereby light is turned on or off periodically, including any illuminated sign in which such illumination is not kept stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times when such sign is in use, including an LED (light emitting diode) or digital sign that varies in intensity or color. A CEVMS sign does not include a sign located within the right-of-way that functions as a traffic control device and that is described and identified in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), as amended and approved by the Federal Highway Administration as the National Standard. 
Dilapidated or deteriorated shall mean any sign: 
a.  Where elements of the sign surface or background have portions of the finished material missing, broken or otherwise existing in a condition that they are illegible; 
b.  Where the structural support or frame members are visibly bent, broken, dented, torn or loose; 
c.  Where the exterior of the support, frame members or sign have rust, corrosion or missing protective coating; 
d.  Where the sign panel is visibly cracked, faded or, in the case of wood and similar products, splintered in such a way as to constitute an unsightly or harmful condition; 
e.  Where the sign or its elements are twisted, leaning or are at angles other than angles that the sign was originally erected (i.e.: a sign that is out of vertical or horizontal alignment as a result of, for example, being blown over or due to the failure of a structural support); or 
f.  Where the sign or its elements are not in compliance with the requirements of the adopted electrical code and/or the building code. 
Electronic message display sign (EMD) shall mean an on-premises sign capable of displaying words, symbols, figures or images that can be electronically or mechanically changed by remote or automatic means. 
Flag shall mean a piece of material designed to wave, usually rectangular, and secured by one side only. 
Ground sign shall mean any permanent sign supported by uprights, braces, or poles and attached to the ground. 
Illegal sign shall mean a sign that does not meet the requirements of this division or an ordinance in effect at the time the sign was erected, as applicable. 
Illuminated sign shall mean any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs, or outlines illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes whether such sources of illumination are a part of a sign or not. 
Inflatable sign shall mean an individual inflatable device, with or without a specific message, figure or design attached to its surface, that is used or intended to be used to attract attention. For the purpose of this division, an inflatable sign shall be considered a temporary sign. 
Maintenance shall mean the cleaning, painting and/or repairing of sign parts, or replacement of defective parts of a sign in a manner that does not alter the basic copy, design, or structure of the sign. Maintenance does not include changing the design of the sign's support construction, changing the type of component materials, or increasing the illumination. 
Monument sign shall mean a permanent ground sign where the entire bottom of the sign is affixed directly to the ground, but not affixed to a building, pole, or any other structure. 
Multi-tenant ground sign shall mean a permanent ground sign located on premises where two (2) or more separate tenancies share the same parcel and/or building. 
Mural shall mean any visual depiction or work of art including mosaic, painting or graphic art technique applied, painted, implanted or placed directly onto the exterior of any wall of a building. Such depictions shall not contain words, logos, emblems, trademarks or other similar devices which identify or advertise any product, service or business. Provided, however, such depictions may include a signature or sponsor's identification area within the depiction so long as such area does not exceed ten (10%) percent of the total size of the depiction, or two and one-half (2½%) percent of the surface area of the wall that the mural is attached to or painted upon, whichever is less. A mural shall not be considered a sign. 
Nonconforming sign shall mean a lawfully erected sign that does not comply with the provisions of this division or other rule enacted at a later date, or that later fails to comply with a law or rule due to changed conditions. 
Off-premises sign shall mean a sign visible from any public traveled road or street displaying advertising or other copy that pertains to any business, person, organization, activity, event, place, service or product not manufactured, sold or provided on the same premises on which the sign is located. 
On-premises sign shall mean a sign displaying advertising or other copy that pertains only to a business, person, organization, activity, event, place, service, or product manufactured, sold or provided on the same premises on which the sign is located. On-premises signs may include information pertaining to civic and registered non-profit organizations. An existing on-premises sign cannot be converted to a nonconforming off-premises sign subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
Outdated copy face shall mean copy mounted on an off-premise sign face that advertises any activity or event that occurred more than 60 days prior to the current date. This definition shall include, but is not limited to any advertisement of a business, a product manufactured, sold or provided, or any type of service provided by any profit or non-profit entity that is no longer available and has not been available for 60 days. 
Pennants and streamers shall mean any attention attracting devices consisting of pennants, streamers, tinsel, ribbons, reflectors, fringes, or similar objects strung together on a common line, string or wire that are attached to poles, buildings, or structures. 
Portable sign shall mean a sign that is designed to be portable and that may be attached to a transporting mechanism. Should a question arise if a sign is portable, the building official shall determine whether a sign is portable. 
Premises shall mean a single, legally recorded, undivided tract of real property controlled exclusively by the proprietor, as identified on a recorded certificate of occupancy, of the establishment on the undivided tract. 
Projecting wall sign shall mean any sign that projects from and has one (1) end attached to a building, and that does not employ ground support in any manner. 
Sign shall mean any identification, description, illustration, object or device, whether illuminated or non-illuminated, that is visible from any public place or is located on private property and exposed to the public and that directs attention to a product, service, place, activity, person, institution, business or solicitation, including any permanently installed or situated merchandise, or any logo, painting, banner, pennant, streamer, placard or temporary sign designated to advertise, identify or convey information, with the exception of window displays and flags. "Signs" shall also include the sign structure. The term "sign" does not include an official traffic-control sign, an official governmental marker, a national, state, city, or educational institution flag, or governmental signs. 
Sign area shall mean that area being the total square footage of the combined message or display surface. This area does not include structural supports for a sign, whether they be columns, pylons, or a building, or a part thereof. On a multisided sign, only one (1) face is counted in computing the sign's area. 
Sign structure shall mean anything built or constructed, whether or not permanently attached to a building, structure, the ground or other surface, which supports, or is capable of supporting a sign, and includes, without limitation, the pole, cabinet and decorative cover. 
Street shall mean a public highway, road or thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to adjacent lots. Street classifications utilized in this division shall be as defined in the city's adopted thoroughfare plan, as amended (i.e.; collector, minor or principal arterial, etc.). 
Strobe shall mean a sign where the message or lighting flashes on and off more often than once every second. 
Temporary sign shall mean any non-permanent sign or advertising device. 
Visible shall mean capable of being seen, whether legible or not, without visual aid by a person with normal visual acuity. 
Wall sign shall mean any permanent sign affixed to or painted on the wall or surface of any building or structure that projects no more than twelve (12") inches from the building or structure. For the purposes of this division, a roof sign erected upon, against or directly above the roof of any building or structure shall be regulated and considered the same as a wall sign. 
Window display shall mean the interior display of any item, including merchandise, that can be viewed through a window or other glass surface located on a building's exterior wall, provided that such items are located no closer than twenty-four (24") inches from the inside of the window or other glass surface. 
Window sign shall mean any sign painted on, affixed to, or attached to a building's exterior wall window(s) or other glass surface(s), or located twenty-four (24") inches or less from the interior side of a building's exterior wall window(s) or glass surface(s). For the purposes of this division, such a sign shall be regulated and considered the same as if it were a wall sign. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 36-2 [Ord. No. 83-73, § 1, 12-13-83]; Ord. No. 97-22, § I, 3-25-97; Ord. No. 05-43, § I, 6-14-05; Ord. No. 06-78, § II, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 08-051, § 1, 7-8-08; Ord. No. 08-059, § I, 7-22-08; Ord. No. 10-080, § I, 12-28-10; Ord. No. 12-050, § I, 8-28-12; Ord. No. 17-010 , § I, 2-14-17) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 31-503. - Allowed without permit. 
The following signs are permitted in any zoning district without a permit: 
(1)  When premises is for sale, lease or rent, any sign that neither exceeds six (6) square feet in area on residential tracts of one (1) acre or less, nor thirty-two (32) square feet on residential tracts greater than one (1) acre or on commercial tracts and complies with section 31-507. 
(2)  A maximum of two signs per lease or business space denoting the name and address of the occupants of the premises, which signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area. 
(3)  One sign per entrance door (illuminated or non-illuminated) shall be limited to two (2) square feet in size and located within five (5) feet of the entrance door. 
(4)  One sign per drive entrance limited to maximum of two (2) square feet each. 
(5)  Flags as defined in section 31-502 shall be spaced at least twenty-five (25) feet apart as measured as a radial distance from the sign's base; however, the flag, in its entirety, must be contained within the owner's property. Flags must be attached to poles of sufficient strength to safely support the flag and materials used. Flags that become tattered or faded must be removed or replaced within 10 days of notice. 
(6)  Bench signs, provided the sign face does not extend beyond any bench surface. 
(7)  Signs placed on premises where construction, repair, or renovation is in progress. Such signs shall neither exceed six (6) square feet in area on residential tracts of one (1) acre or less nor thirty-two (32) square feet on residential tracts greater than one (1) acre or on commercial tracts. 
(8)  After a subdivision has been released for construction, one sign per subdivision entrance which shall not exceed sixty-four (64) square feet in area, twelve (12') feet in overall height or sixteen (16') feet in overall width. A sign permitted under this subsection must be removed when development of lots and buildings have ceased. The property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance, removal and compliance requirements of such signs. 
(9)  Signs or commemorative plaques of a public or noncommercial nature, which shall include community service information signs, public transit service signs, public utility information signs, safety signs, danger signs, trespassing signs, memorial signs placed by historical agencies recognized by the city, county, or state, signs indicating scenic or historic points of interest, and all signs erected by a public officer in performance of a public duty. 
(10)  Signs for a period of time no earlier than ninety (90) days before or ten (10) days after a federal, state, or local election that neither exceeds six (6) square feet in area on residential tracts of one (1) acre or less, nor thirty-six (36) square feet on residential tracts greater than one (1) acre or on commercial tracts and otherwise complies with section 31-507 provided the sign: 
i.  has an effective area no greater than 36 square feet; 
ii.  is no more than 8 feet in height; 
iii.  is not illuminated; 
iv.  has no moving element(s); and 
v.  is located on private real property with the property owner's consent. For purposes of this provision, "private real property" does not include real property subject to an easement or other encumbrance that allows a municipality to use the property for a public purpose. 
(11)  Parking lot pole-mounted banner signs. Pole-mounted banner signs shall be mounted to permanent poles two inches in diameter or larger. Such banners may contain the emblems, names, colors, products sold or services provided of business firms, religious, charitable, public or nonprofit organizations. Pole-mounted banners shall be limited to a maximum of one banner or a pair of banners per pole and each pole shall be spaced a minimum of fifty (50) linear feet apart along the street frontage. Banners shall not exceed a total of sixteen (16) square feet for each pole fronting collector, marginal access or local streets as shown on the city's thoroughfare master plan, or a total of forty-eight (48) square feet for each pole fronting principal arterial or minor arterial roadways as shown on the city's thoroughfare master plan. Banners shall be framed on at least two sides and it must be contained entirely on the property it advertises. Additional banners may be located within the interior of the lot at the same separation and size limits. 
(12)  Signs located within or on the grounds of public facilities such as baseball fields, stadiums, community centers, and other public facilities. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 36-3.1 [Ord. No. 83-73, § 1, 12-13-83]; Ord. No. 08-051, § 1, 7-8-08; Ord. No. 10-080, § I, 12-28-10; Ord. No. 12-050, § I, 8-28-12; Ord. No. 17-010, § I, 2-14-17)  
Sec. 31-504. - Signs requiring permits. 
All signs require a permit prior to installation with the exception of the sign types listed in section 31-503 above. Signs containing non-commercial speech are permitted anywhere that advertising or business signs are permitted, subject to the same regulations applicable to such signs. The following signs may be permitted in any zoning district: 
(1)  Temporary off-premises signs. When a premises is for sale and displays a sign allowed under subsection 31-503(1), the owner may also obtain a permit for temporary off-premises signs in compliance with the following criteria: 
a.  Application for a permit to display temporary off-premises signs will be submitted to the building and inspections department. Upon payment of applicable permit and sticker fees, approved permits will be granted a sticker that must be attached to the sign. 
b.  Signs shall be no larger than 24" x 36". 
c.  The height of any temporary off-premises sign shall be no greater than forty-eight (48) inches. 
d.  Signs shall only be located on private property with the consent of the property owner and the distance between the temporary off-premises sign and the closest temporary sign or any small or medium off-premises sign shall be greater than thirty (30) feet measured as a radial distance from the existing sign's base. 
e.  Temporary off-premises signs shall be constructed of durable waterproof materials. 
f.  Temporary off-premises signs shall only be displayed on the following days of the week: Friday, Saturday, Sunday, and Monday. 
(2)  Temporary on-premises signs shall be allowed as follows: 
a.  A permit is required prior to installation of temporary signs. The permit fee shall be five dollars ($5.00) for the first five (5) day period and an additional five dollars ($5.00) for each subsequent five (5) day increment. 
b.  Except as provided below, only one (1) temporary wall sign and one (1) temporary ground sign are allowed per street frontage for each lease or business space at any given time. Each sign must be permitted separately. 
c.  A business with frontage in excess of three hundred (300) feet may place additional temporary signs for each three hundred (300) feet of street frontage or fraction thereof with a permit for each additional sign. 
d.  Except for an inflatable sign, a temporary sign shall be limited to thirty-two (32) square feet. 
e.  Temporary sign placement is limited to the owner's premises. 
f.  Temporary sign permits shall be issued in increments of five (5) days. Permits shall not be issued to a lease space or business space for more than one hundred and twenty days (120) per calendar year. 
g.  Each temporary sign permit shall expire on the date shown on the permit. 
(3)  Wall and window signs meeting the requirements of section 31-506. 
(4)  Ground signs meeting the requirements of section 31-507. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 36-3.2 [Ord. No. 83-73, § 1, 12-13-83]; Ord. No. 06-78, § III, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 06-134, § I, 12-19-06; Ord. No. 08-095, § I, 11-18-08; Ord. No. 10-080, § I, 12-28-10; Ord. No. 12-050, § I, 8-28-12; Ord. No. 17-010 , § I, 2-14-17)  
Sec. 31-505. - Prohibited signs. 
It shall be unlawful to erect, maintain, or allow to remain: 
(1)  Any sign except as allowed by this division. 
(2)  Signs located on public right-of-way or within the visibility triangle at all intersections, which shall include that portion of public right-of-way and any corner lot within the adjacent curb lines, and a diagonal line intersecting such curb lines at points thirty-five (35) feet back from their intersection (such curb lines being extended if necessary to determine the intersection point). Signs shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet from the edge of the street or curb. Signs shall not be within twenty (20) feet of the intersection of a street curb and the edge of a driveway. Signs permitted in sections 31-506(1) and (2) are excepted from this restriction, provided that the sign does not encroach into the right-of-way or street. 
Signs may be placed in the visibility triangle only if the signs have a height of no greater than two (2) feet as measured from the top of the curb of the adjacent streets within the visibility triangle. 
(3)  Any flashing sign, strobe, or lights unless specifically allowed in this division. 
(4)  Signs which have a luminance greater than any traffic signal within two hundred (200) feet of the sign as measured by any light metering device for which a National Bureau of Standards test procedure exists. 
(5)  Signs that occupy a parking space required by the minimum standards provided under article V, division 3 of this chapter. 
(6)  Signs attached to any fence or property boundary walls except for signs denoted in section 31-503(9) and signs denoted in section 31-503(10). 
(7)  Any banners, pennants, streamers, tinsel, staked signs, stringed signs or temporary signs, unless specifically allowed in another section of this division. 
(8)  Signs located in the right-of-way of a public street, alley or thoroughfare; a sign located in the visibility triangle, as defined in chapter 28 of this code; or an illegal sign, unanchored sign or a sign that has been damaged in such a manner that the sign's condition constitutes a threat to the health, safety, and welfare of the public. All such signs are hereby declared to be public nuisances that endanger public health, safety and welfare, and upon discovery, may be abated in accordance with section 31-524 of this division. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 36-3.3 [Ord. No. 83-73, § 1, 12-13-83; Ord. No. 87-10, §§ 3,4, 2-24-87]; Ord. No. 97-22, § I, 3-25-97; Ord. No. 97-63, § I, 11-25-97; Ord. No. 08-095, § I, 11-18-08 Ord. No. 10-080, § I, 12-28-10; Ord. No. 12-050, § I, 8-28-12; Ord. No. 17-010 , § I, 2-14-17)  
Sec. 31-506. - Wall and window signs. 
Wall signs shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  An allowable wall sign may not extend more than twelve (12) inches from the facade of a building except as provided in (2) below. 
(2)  When the premises does not maintain the maximum ground signs allowed, one (1) projecting wall sign is allowed and may project no closer than two (2) feet to a street curb. Such alternate sign may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area and no part of the sign may descend closer to grade than nine (9) feet. 
(3)  The total cumulative size of wall signs shall not exceed twenty (20%) percent wall area, which includes windows and doors, to sign face ratio (maximum size 672 square feet for each sign). 
(4)  An EMD wall sign shall be allowed subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  Allowed only in "B-1" or less restrictive zoning districts; 
b.  In B-1, B-2, or NBD zoning districts, an EMD wall sign face shall not exceed fifty (50%) percent of the allowable sign face area and must comply with requirements of section 31-507(B)(11) subsections a. and b.; 
c.  In B-3 or less restrictive zoning districts, an EMD wall sign face shall not exceed fifty (50%) percent of the allowable sign face area unless it is in compliance with requirements of section 31-507(B)(11) subsections a. and b.; 
d.  Permissible installation of an EMD wall sign shall be limited to property fronting principal arterial, minor arterial, or collector roadway frontages. If an EMD wall sign is installed on property fronting a collector, the sign shall not be located within three hundred (300) feet of a residential district unless the property operates as an allowable non-residential use; 
e.  An owner shall be able to control the illumination intensity of any EMD sign; and 
f.  An EMD wall sign allowed under this section shall comply with the CEVMS requirements of subsection 31-507(B)(11), subsections c. through i. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 36-4.1 [Ord. No. 83-73, § 1, 12-13-83]; Ord. No. 10-003, § VII, 2-9-10; Ord. No. 10-080, § 1, 12-28-10; Ord. No. 12-050, § I, 8-28-12; Ord. No. 17-010 , § I, 2-14-17)  
Sec. 31-507. - Ground signs. 
Ground signs shall not be subject to building lines. Ground signs shall not encroach into public rights-of-way or easements, but shall be located entirely within the premises. 
(A)  On-premises ground signs in "R-MP," "R-3," "R-3F," or "R-3A," "B-1" or less restrictive districts shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Only one (1) permanent ground sign structure consisting of one (1) or more sign cabinets, may be erected on any premises zoned "B-1" or less restrictive, except that premises which have more than three hundred (300') feet of combined frontage along a public way or street, other than an alley, may have one (1) additional ground sign for each additional three hundred (300') feet of frontage or fraction thereof. Such signs shall not exceed the area, height, or setback as listed in Table 507(A)(1) below: 
Table 507(A)(1) 
Sign Type 	Maximum Overall Height 	Maximum Square footage 	Minimum 
Setback 
Single or multi-tenant monument sign 	6 	50 	0 
Single-tenant ground or pole sign 	35 	300 	10 
Multi-tenant ground or pole sign 	40 	450 	10 
 
Ground signs fronting Central Texas Expressway (the frontage road of US Highway 190) may have an overall maximum height of forty-two and one-half (42.5) feet measured from the highest point of the sign to the grade level of Central Texas Expressway. 
(2)  In connection with mobile home parks (R-MP) (mobile home park district) or apartment complexes zoned "R-3," "R-3F," or "R-3A," no sign intended to be read from any public way or street adjoining the district shall be permitted except for one (1) ground sign, not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area, for each principal entrance. 
Such signs shall set back a minimum of ten (10') feet from any street frontage and/or property line. 
(3)  For allowable non-residential uses located in residentially-zoned districts, on-premises ground signs that front principal arterial or minor arterial roadways as shown on the city's adopted thoroughfare master plan shall comply with section 31-507(A). On-premises ground signs that front collector, marginal access or local streets as shown on the city's adopted thoroughfare master plan shall comply with the following: 
(a)  Shall be limited to one sign per street frontage; 
(b)  Sign shall not exceed a total of fifty (50) square feet in face area; 
(c)  Shall set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from any street frontage property line and shall be limited to twenty (20) feet overall height; 
(d)  May be either static display or fully EMD; 
(e)  If an EMD sign, sign illumination shall cease between the hours 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.; and 
(f)  If an EMD sign, the sign shall comply with the CEVMS requirements of section 31-507(B)(11), subsections c. through i. 
(4)  Illuminated ground signs shall not be located within one hundred (100) feet of a residential district unless the property operates as an allowable non-residential use. 
(5)  Non-illuminated ground signs shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height if located within fifty (50) feet of a residential district unless the property operates as an allowable non-residential use. 
(6)  In addition to the number of ground signs otherwise allowed in this chapter, a business with a drive-through or walk up service shall be allowed up to two additional ground signs limited to forty (40) square feet each. 
(7)  Portable signs: 
a.  It shall be unlawful to locate a portable sign on any site until the building official has determined that it is in compliance with the provisions of this division, and was issued a permit for such sign has been obtained. All portable signs shall be secured to resist wind loads. 
b.  A permit for a portable sign will expire at the end of the calendar year. 
c.  An adequate site plan must be submitted with the application to locate the sign. 
d.  The portable sign may not be located in a parking space that is required by division 3 of this article. 
e.  The size of the portable sign face shall not exceed five (5) feet high and twelve (12) feet wide. 
f.  A property may not have more than one (1) portable sign at a time. A portable ground sign may only be used in place of an allowable ground sign not used per section 31-507(A)(1) above. 
(8)  An EMD ground sign shall be allowed as an on-premises ground sign subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  Allowed only in "B-1" or less restrictive zoning districts; 
b.  In B-1, B-2, or NBD zoning districts, an EMD ground sign face shall not exceed fifty (50%) percent of the allowable sign face area and must comply with requirements of section 31-507(B)(11) subsections a. and b.; 
c.  In B-3 or less restrictive zoning districts, an EMD ground sign face shall not exceed fifty (50%) percent of the allowable sign face area unless it is in compliance with requirements of section 31-507(B)(11) subsections a. and b.; 
d.  Permissible installation of an EMD wall sign shall be limited to property fronting Principal arterial, Minor Arterial, or Collector roadway frontages. If an EMD wall sign is installed on property fronting a Collector, the sign shall not be located within three hundred (300) feet of a residential district unless the property operates as an allowable non-residential use; 
e.  An owner shall be able to control the illumination intensity of any EMD sign; and 
f.  An on-premises EMD sign allowed under this section shall comply with the CEVMS requirements of section 31-507(B)(11), subsections c. through i. 
(B)  Off-premises ground signs are subject to compliance with all the regulatory provisions contained herein, as amended. These regulations apply to all off-premises signs located within the city limits of the City of Killeen and the city's extra territorial jurisdiction (ETJ) as established by state law. Should any restrictions be in conflict, the more stringent shall control. 
(1)  All new or existing off-premises signs shall be registered with the City of Killeen building and inspections department. 
a.  Registration shall be required within 180 days from the effective date of this ordinance and annually each year. The registration shall identify the size of the off-premises sign to be registered and provide a detailed description of its location measured to the closest intersection. In addition, registration is required within ninety (90) days upon any subsequent annexation within the then expanded ETJ. 
b.  Registration shall expire December 31 of each calendar year. Registration shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee of $40.00 for each off-premises sign to be registered. 
c.  Sign registration is not transferable and in event of sale of the sign, the buyer and seller shall be jointly responsible to assure re-registration within 15 days of the sale. 
d.  Any off-premises sign removed, structurally altered or repaired shall be reported to the building and inspections department within 15 days of removal or work. 
e.  It shall be an offense for any person to maintain an off-premises sign not lawfully registered as listed above or to allow a registration to lapse for more than 30 days. 
f.  New and existing registered off-premises signs shall permanently affix the sign tag or plate issued by the city visible from the closest roadway. No new off-premises sign may advertise until final approval inspection has been obtained and no new or existing off-premises sign may advertise or continue to advertise without a current sign tag properly affixed. 
g.  Off-premises signs may not be combined with on-premises advertisement. 
(2)  A permit shall be obtained prior to the erection, repair, alteration or relocation of any off-premises sign except for routine maintenance or repair and/or replacement of sign face copy. 
a.  No off-premises sign may be installed by anyone not registered to perform such work in the City of Killeen. 
b.  Off-premises signs requiring an electrical permit or incorporating any electrical lighting or wiring must have such work performed by a person licensed and registered with the City of Killeen building and inspections department. 
c.  Sign registration is not transferable and in the event of sale of the sign, the buyer and seller shall be jointly responsible to assure re-registration within 15 days of the sale. 
d.  Off-premises signs shall be constructed in accordance with local and state building and electrical codes. Stamped structural engineering plans shall accompany the sign permit applications and shall be subject to wind speed requirements as set forth in the International Building Code, as amended. 
(3)  Off-premises signs may be illuminated except for signs that contain, include, or are illuminated by: 
a.  Any flashing, intermittent or moving light or lights, including any type of screen using animated or scrolling displays other than those providing public service information such as time, date, temperature or weather; 
b.  Unshielded lights that direct beams or rays of light at any portion of the traveled way; 
c.  Lights of such intensity as to cause glare or vision impairment of the driver of a motor vehicle; 
d.  Lights that interfere with the effectiveness or obscure an official traffic sign, device or signal. 
(4)  An off-premises sign shall not be erected within three hundred (300) feet of the property line of any property which is zoned agricultural or residential, used as a public park, public or private school, church, courthouse, city hall, residence, public museum or any building or premises operated by a public entity. Such measurement shall be from the sign's base to the protected property line in the most direct line. 
(5)  An off-premises sign shall not be installed adjacent to, or within one hundred fifty (150') feet for a small off-premises sign, two hundred (200') feet for a medium off-premises sign or three hundred (300') feet for a large off-premises sign from the base of the sign to the edge of the right-of-way of any intersection 
(6)  No off-premises sign shall be constructed so as to resemble any official marker erected by a government entity, or which by reason of position, shape, or color would conflict with the proper function of any official traffic control information sign posted by government entity. 
(7)  All off-premises signs shall be maintained in a safe and structurally sound condition. Signs shall not remain free of advertising copy face for more than sixty (60) consecutive days and shall be kept clean and free of graffiti or outdated commercial or advertising information. The owner of the property on which a sign that does not comply with safety, cleanliness or aesthetic standards is located shall be equally responsible for the condition of the off-premises sign and for the condition of the area in the vicinity of the sign. 
(8)  Small off-premises signs may be permitted in zoning district B-3, and less restrictive, subject to the following provisions. 
a.  The distance between the requested small off-premises sign site and the closest off-premise sign shall be greater than three hundred (300') feet measured as a radial distance from the sign's base on either side of the street. 
b.  Small off-premises signs shall be set back from the sign's most outer edge a minimum of fifteen (15') feet from the property line or the set back required for a building on the selected site, whichever is greater. 
c.  The overall height of a small off-premises sign shall not exceed thirty (30') feet measured from the highest point of the sign to the grade level of the centerline of the street closest to the sign, at a point perpendicular to the sign location and the face shall not exceed two hundred eighty-seven (287) square feet. 
d.  Unless otherwise restricted, small off-premises signs may only be permitted on streets classified as collectors, minor or principal arterial. 
(9)  Medium off-premises signs may be permitted in zoning district B-4, and less restrictive, subject to the following provisions. 
a.  The distance between the requested medium off-premises sign site and the closest off-premises sign shall be greater than seven hundred fifty (750') feet measured as a radial distance from the sign's base on either side of the street. 
b.  Medium off-premises signs shall be set back from the sign's most outer edge a minimum of fifteen (15') feet from the property line or the set back required for a building on the selected site, whichever is greater. 
c.  The overall height of a medium off-premises sign shall not exceed thirty-five (35') feet measured from the highest point of the sign to the grade level of the centerline of the street closest to the sign, at a point perpendicular to the sign location and the face shall not exceed three hundred seventy-eight (378) square feet. 
d.  Unless otherwise restricted, medium off-premises signs may only be permitted on streets classified as collectors, minor or principal arterials. 
(10)  Large off-premises signs may be permitted in zoning district B-5, and less restrictive subject to the following provisions: 
a.  The distance between the requested large off-premises sign site and the closest off-premises sign shall be greater than one thousand five hundred (1500') feet measured as a radial distance from the sign's base on either side of the street. On S.H. 195 and 201, however, the distance shall be greater than three thousand (3000') feet measured as a radial distance from the sign's base on either side of the street. 
b.  Large off-premises signs shall be set back from the sign's most outer edge a minimum of twenty five (25') feet from the property line or the set back distance required for a building on the selected site, whichever is greater. 
c.  The overall height of a large off-premises sign shall not exceed forty two and one-half (42.5') feet measured from highest point of sign to the grade level of the street closest to the sign and the face shall not exceed six hundred seventy-two (672) square feet with a face height not to exceed twenty five (25') feet and a face length not to exceed sixty (60') feet. 
d.  Unless otherwise restricted, large off-premises signs may only be permitted only on streets classified as principal arterials. 
(11)  Sign operators installing, testing or maintaining off-premises CEVMS shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Each message shall be displayed for at least ten (10) seconds. 
b.  A change of message shall be accomplished within two (2) seconds or less, and a change of message must occur simultaneously on the entire sign face. 
c.  Signs must contain a default mechanism that freezes the sign in one position if a malfunction occurs. 
d.  Signs may not display light of such intensity or brilliance to cause glare or otherwise impair the vision of a driver, or results in a nuisance to a driver. 
e.  CEVMS sign light intensity exceeding the following intensity levels (NITS) constitutes "excessive intensity or brilliance:" 
Intensity Levels (NITS) 
Color 	Daytime 	Nighttime 
Red only 	3,150 	1,125 
Green only 	6,300 	2,250 
Amber only 	4,690 	1,675 
Full Color 	7,000 	2,500 
 
f.  Prior to issuance of a sign registration, the applicant shall provide written certification from the sign manufacturer that the light intensity has been factory pre-set not to exceed seven thousand (7,000) NITS and that the intensity level is protected from end-user manipulation by password-protected software or other method as deemed appropriate by the building official. 
g.  Signs may not be configured to resemble a warning or danger signal or to cause a driver to mistake the digital sign for a warning or danger signal. 
h.  Signs may not resemble or simulate any lights or official signage used to control traffic in accordance with the 2003 MUTCD, with Revision No. 1 published by the Federal Highway Administration, as amended. 
i.  Signs must be equipped with both a dimmer control and a photocell, which automatically adjusts the display's intensity according to natural ambient light conditions. 
j.  The city may exercise its police powers to protect public health, safety and welfare by requiring emergency information to be displayed. Upon notification, the sign operator shall display in appropriate sign rotations: emergency information regarding Amber Alerts, terrorist attacks, or natural disasters. Emergency information messages shall remain in rotation according to the designated issuing agency's protocols. 
k.  For purposes of this division, changing an existing off-premises sign to a CEVMS off-premises sign shall be considered new development and such alteration shall meet all the provisions for installing a new off-premises sign. 
Exception: An existing, nonconforming, off-premises sign shall be allowed to be converted to a CEVMS off-premises sign with the removal of existing off-premises signs at four (4) times the square footage of the new CEVMS off-premises sign. In addition, the following requirements below shall apply: 
1.  The new CEVMS off-premises sign shall not exceed the overall height and face limits of the existing off-premises sign's classification (Small, Medium or Large) that the new sign is replacing. 
2.  The proposed CEVMS off-premises sign shall be separated from other CEVMS off-premises signs at the same minimum radial spacing distances required in sections 31-507(B)(8)a, (9)a, and (10)a for small, medium and large off-premises signs, respectively. 
3.  A demolition permit and final inspection is required to establish credit for the removed sign(s). 
4.  The sign(s) to be removed must be registered per section 31-507(B)(1) of this division. 
5.  This exception does not apply in the University District (UD), the Cemetery District (CD) or the Historical Overlay District (HOD). 
(12)  Any off-premises sign lawfully erected and in existence on the effective date of this ordinance, which does not meet the requirements of this ordinance, may be maintained as a matter of right as a legal nonconforming use subject to compliance with the provisions required by section 31-521. For purposes of this section the owners of any nonconforming off-premises sign that cannot be altered to conform to all the applicable provisions of this division shall submit a written declaration of nonconforming sign report not later than 90 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 36-4.2 [Ord. No. 83-73, § 1, 12-13-83]; Ord. No. 96-63, § IV, 8-13-96; Ord. No. 05-43, § II, 6-14-05; Ord. No. 08-059, § I, 7-22-08; Ord. No. 10-003, § VII, 2-9-10; Ord. No. 10-080, § I, 12-28-10; Ord. No. 12-050, § I, 8-28-12; Ord. No. 17-010 , § I, 2-14-17)  
Sec. 31-508. - Compliance with building codes. 
Only materials and methods as permitted by the city's adopted building code in chapter 8 of the Killeen code of ordinances shall govern the structural requirements and materials used in the manufacture, erection, and maintenance of signs. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 36-5.1 [Ord. No. 83-73, § 1, 12-13-83]; Ord. No. 10-080, § I, 12-28-10)  
Sec. 31-509. - Electrical installation. 
No electrical sign shall be erected or maintained which does not comply with the adopted electrical code in chapter 8. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 36-5.2 [Ord. No. 83-73, § 1, 12-13-83]; Ord. No. 10-080, § I, 12-28-10)  
Sec. 31-510. - Obstruction to exits. 
No sign shall be erected so as to obstruct any fire escape, required exit, window or door opening intended as a means of egress. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 36-5.3 [Ord. No. 83-73, § 1, 12-13-83])  
Sec. 31-511. - Obstruction to ventilation. 
No sign shall be erected which interferes with any opening required for ventilation. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 36-5.4 [Ord. No. 83-73, § 1, 12-13-83])  
Sec. 31-512. - Clearance from surface and underground facilities. 
Signs and their supporting structures shall maintain clearance and noninterference with all surface and underground facilities and conduits for water, sewage, gas, electricity, or communications equipment or lines. Placement of signs shall not interfere with natural or artificial drainage or surface or underground water. No sign shall be located within any public use easement as measured from a vertical plane which extends infinitely upward from the edge of the easement nearest the sign, except as permitted under provisions of section 31-506(2), (3). 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 36-5.5 [Ord. No. 83-73, § 1, 12-13-83])  
Sec. 31-513. - Clearance from electrical power lines and communications lines. 
Signs shall maintain all clearances from electrical conductors in accordance with the city electrical code and from all communications equipment or lines located within the city. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 36-5.6 [Ord. No. 83-73, § 1, 12-13-83])  
Sec. 31-514. - Interference with radio or television. 
No electrical equipment or electrical apparatus of any kind which causes interference with radio or television reception shall be used in the operation of illuminated signs. Whenever interference is caused by an unfiltered, improperly filtered or otherwise defective sign, or by any other electrical device or apparatus connected to the sign, the building official shall order the sign disconnected until repairs are made. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 36-5.7 [Ord. No. 83-73, § 1, 12-13-83])  
Sec. 31-515. - Application for permit. 
A.  The application for a sign permit shall be accompanied by following plans and other information: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number of the owner or persons entitled to possession of the sign and the sign contractor or erector. 
(2)  The location by street address of the proposed sign structure. 
(3)  Complete information as required on application forms provided by the building and inspections division including a site plan and elevation drawings of the proposed sign, caption of the proposed sign, and such other data as are pertinent to the application. 
(4)  Plans indicating the scope and structural detail of the work to be done, including details of all connections, guide lines, supports and footings, and materials to be used. Structural details and material specifications shall be prepared and sealed by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Texas for any sign installed 20 feet or more in height and/or having a sign area (including the sign cabinet or frame) of 200 square feet or more and as provided in 31-507(B)(2). 
(5)  Application for, and required information for such application, an electrical permit for all electric signs if the person building the sign is to make the electrical connection. 
(6)  A statement of valuation of each sign. 
B.  Each ground sign shall be permitted separately. Wall signs shall be permitted as a group per each side of the building. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 36-6.1 [Ord. No. 83-73, § 1, 12-13-83]; Ord. No. 10-080, § I, 12-28-10; Ord. No. 12-050, § I, 8-28-12; Ord. No. 17-010 , § I, 2-14-17)  
Sec. 31-516. - Review. 
Whenever a proposed sign is included in the presentation of a new or amended site plan application, for a development which requires planning and zoning commission approval, the sign permit application shall be reviewed and approved by the executive director of planning and development prior to the issuance of a permit. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 36-6.2 [Ord. No. 83-73, § 1, 12-13-83]; Ord. No. 12-050, § I, 8-28-12)  
Sec. 31-517. - Plans review fee. 
Except for portable and temporary signs, a plan review fee shall be paid for each sign permit application submitted for review. The plan review fees shall be as follows: 
Wall sign .....$25.00 each 
On-premises ground sign .....$25.00 each 
Off-premises ground sign .....per section 8-11(d)
of this code
[see Fee Schedule] 
All plan review fees are to be paid at the time of application to the city and such fees are non-refundable. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 36-6.3 [Ord. No. 83-73, § 1, 12-13-83]; Ord. No. 10-080, § I, 12-28-10; Ord. No. 17-010 , § I, 2-14-17)  
Sec. 31-518. - Expired permit application. 
Sign permit applications shall expire forty-five (45) calendar days from the date such permit has been approved and applicable fees remain unpaid, or remains disapproved for more than forty-five (45) calendar days. The building official may grant an additional thirty (30) day extension upon written evidence from the applicant justifying the delay to complete the permit issuance. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 36-6.4 [Ord. No. 83-73, § 1, 12-13-83]; Ord. No. 12-050, § I, 8-28-12)  
Sec. 31-519. - Permit fees and penalties. 
Sign permit fees, related electrical permit fees and related penalties shall be in accordance with section 8-11 of this code of ordinances. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 36-6.5 [Ord. No. 83-73, § 1, 12-13-83]; Ord. No. 10-080, § I, 12-28-10)  
Sec. 31-520. - Failed inspection charges. 
A failed inspection charge will be assessed upon each failed inspection. The failed inspection charge shall be in accordance with re-inspection fees located in section 8-11of this code of ordinances. 
(Code 1963, Ch. 9, art. 2, § 36-6.6 [Ord. No. 83-73, § 1, 12-13-83]; Ord. No. 10-080, § I, 12-28-10)  
Sec. 31-521. - Removal of abandoned on-premises sign; immediate removal of sign erected without a permit; EMD sign previously erected; and modification of operational standards for EMD signs. 
(A)  Any on-premises sign that was lawful when erected, but does not currently conform to the regulations set forth in this division, may continue to exist unless such sign is abandoned. In the event of such abandonment, the sign shall be immediately removed unless it is brought into conformance with the provisions of this division and all other applicable regulations within thirty (30) days from the date that the sign is determined to be abandoned in accordance with this division. 
(B)  Any sign erected without a required permit shall be subject to immediate removal as determined by the building official. 
(C)  EMD signs that have permits authorizing use of that method of display issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section was established may continue to be used provided the sign meets the operational standards set forth herein within thirty (30) days from the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. Operational standards shall include illumination levels as set forth in this division. 
(Ord. No. 10-080, § I, 12-28-10; Ord. No. 12-050, § I, 8-28-12)  
Sec. 31-522. - Sign certification tag required. 
Upon final inspection and approval of the permitted sign, the owner or his authorized agent shall affix a city-issued certification tag to the sign within twenty-four (24) hours of issuance. The certification tag shall be placed either on the face, cabinet, frame or pole of a sign and must be visible from the ground. In situations where the sign elements are not accessible, the tag may be placed on or near the front door of the business. It shall be the responsibility of the sign owner and/or property owner to maintain the certification tag. Upon request, the city shall issue replacement certification tags at a cost of fifteen dollars ($15.00) each. 
(Ord. No. 10-080, § I, 12-28-10; Ord. No. 12-050, § I, 8-28-12)  
Sec. 31-523. - Sign maintenance regulations. 
(A)  Purpose. 
(1)  The purpose of this section is to establish maintenance regulations for signs so that the signs are maintained in a reasonably safe condition and continue to conform to the aesthetic standards established in this division. This section shall apply to all signs that are allowed in this division 4. 
(2)  Signs which do not conform to all applicable provisions of this section shall be made to conform by means of alteration, repainting, reinforcing, repairing or any other such operation short of relocation, reconstruction or removal within one hundred eighty (180) days from the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(B)  Declaration of nuisance. An abandoned sign or a sign determined to be in a dilapidated or deteriorated condition is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the public, tending to reduce the value of surrounding property and contributing to urban blight, and is hereby found to be adverse to the vitality, maintenance and continuing development of the city and is hereby found and declared to be a public nuisance. 
(C)  Maintenance of signs. 
(1)  Maintenance. All portions of a sign, including the display surface, shall be kept in good repair at all times so that the entire sign is clearly legible and free of damage, deterioration and/or defacement. Each sign shall be maintained in a safe and presentable manner, including the replacement of defective parts and other acts required for the maintenance of such sign, without altering the basic copy, design or structure of the sign. 
(2)  Dilapidated, deteriorated or abandoned signs. No person shall maintain or allow to be maintained on any premises owned or controlled by him or her any sign which is in a dilapidated, deteriorated or abandoned condition as defined herein. Upon notice of violation, any such sign shall be promptly removed or repaired by the owner of the sign or the owner of the premises where the sign is located in accordance with such notice. 
(3)  Sign face required. No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any premises owned or controlled by him or her any sign that has had the sign face removed. Such sign shall have a blank face installed. 
(4)  Violations. 
(a)  A person, for purposes of this section, shall mean the owner, agent, or any other individual or legal entity having the beneficial use of a sign and/or the owner or lessee of the land or structure where the sign is located. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon or fail to maintain, or otherwise allow the continued existence of any sign that is in violation of section 31-523 of this division. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any term or provision of this division. 
(Ord. No. 10-080, § I, 12-28-10; Ord. No. 12-050, § I, 8-28-12; Ord. No. 17-010 , § I, 2-14-17)  
Sec. 31-524. - Enforcement and appeals. 
(A)  Authority. The building official is hereby authorized to enforce any violation of this division to include, without limitation, ordering the repair of any dilapidated or deteriorated sign or the removal of any abandoned or illegal sign from property within the corporate city limits of the city of Killeen or its ETJ, in accordance with the enforcement mechanisms set forth in this section or as otherwise provided by this code of ordinances. 
(B)  Nuisance abatement. The city may, in conjunction with the enforcement remedies provided in this division or as a separate action, abate a nuisance as follows: 
(1)  Notice of violation (NOV): nuisance. 
(a)  Any owner of any lot, parcel of land, or premises within the city limits having on it a nuisance described in this division shall be required to remove, abate, or cure such nuisance within fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of receipt of a NOV declaring the same from the director. Receipt is presumed to occur five (5) calendar days following the date the NOV is mailed. 
(b)  Any owner of any lot, parcel of land, or premises who receives the NOV described in this subsection (B) who cannot remove, abate or cure the nuisance due to weather conditions or who requires additional time to arrange a contractor to remove, abate or cure the nuisance may request and, at the building official's discretion, may be granted an extension of time, not to exceed fourteen (14) calendar days. 
(c)  A NOV issued under this subsection (B) shall be given to the owner as follows: 
(i)  personally, in writing; or 
(ii)  by letter (regular mail) addressed to the owner at the owner's address as recorded in the tax appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the property is located; or 
(iii)  if personal service cannot be obtained: 
a.  by publication at least once; or 
b.  by posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the premises to which the violation relates; or 
c.  by posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the premises to which the violation relates, if the premises contains no buildings. 
(d)  A NOV issued under this subsection (B) may also be sent by letter (regular mail) to any operator, lessee, occupant or person in control of the property known to the director, as applicable. 
(e)  If the director mails a NOV to an owner in accordance with this subsection (B), and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as "refused" or "unclaimed," the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered as delivered. 
(2)  City authorized to abate. If the owner fails to comply with the NOV issued under this subsection (B), within the period prescribed, the city may enter the premises and remove, abate, or cure such nuisance. 
(3)  Emergency removal of sign or removal of sign in right-of-way. The city may immediately remove a sign, without prior notice, which the building official finds to be an immediate and imminent threat to the public safety because of its location or dilapidated, deteriorated or structural condition, or a sign that is located in publicly-held right-of-way, and may dispose of the same. Such removal and disposal shall be at the owner's sole expense, in accordance with this section. 
(4)  Lien on property. If the city abates a nuisance under this subsection (B), the owner of such premises shall be notified by regular mail of the expenses incurred therefrom and the administrative fee provided in paragraph (5) of this subsection (B). If such charges are not paid within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of such notice, the director shall cause to be filed with the county clerk documentation of such expenses sufficient to establish a lien against the premises on which the nuisance was abated. 
(5)  Remedies, expenses, and citation. Any owner who violates this division shall be subject to abatement restitution, penal fine(s) or both, revocation of permit, or any other relief provided by law. A person who fails to abate such nuisance within the time provided shall be required to pay an administrative fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) in addition to the expenses incurred by the city to abate the nuisance. 
(C)  Enforcement remedies. 
a.  Criminal penalties. Any person, firm, corporation or other entity violating any of the provisions or terms of this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $100 and not exceeding $2,000 for each offense, and each and every day or portion thereof that such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
b.  Civil remedies. The city may file a civil action in state district court to enforce the requirements of this ordinance, seeking injunctive relief and/or civil penalties up to $1,000 per day for each offense as authorized by subchapter B of chapter 54 of the Texas local government code, as amended, or any other applicable law. 
c.  Remedies cumulative. All remedies authorized under this division are cumulative of all others unless otherwise expressly provided. Accordingly, the filing of a criminal action shall not preclude the pursuit of a civil or administrative action for violation of this section nor shall the filing of a civil action preclude the pursuit of any other action or remedy, administrative or criminal. 
(D)  Appeals. 
a.  Decisions of the building official may be appealed in writing to city manager or his designee within ten (10) business days of the decision of the building official. The city manager shall issue a written decision within five (5) business days of receiving the appeal. If the city manager does not issue a decision within five (5) business days, the appeal shall be considered denied. 
b.  Decisions of the building official or denial of an appeal to the city manager may be submitted to the board of adjustment as provided in article II, division 3 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10-080, § I, 12-28-10; Ord. No. 12-050, § I, 8-28-12; Ord. No. 17-010 , § I, 2-14-17)  
Secs. 31-525—31-549. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESSES 
 
Sec. 31-550. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose of this article to regulate adult oriented businesses in order to protect and promote the health, safety and welfare by preventing the decline of residential and business neighborhoods, and further by preventing the growth of criminal activity found to be associated with adult oriented businesses. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communication materials, including adult oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to adult oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of adult oriented entertainment to their intended market. 
(Ord. No. 96-80, § II, 11-12-96)  
Sec. 31-551. - Definitions. 
In this article: 
(1)  Adult oriented business: 
A.  Means a commercial enterprise the major business of which is the offering of a service or the selling, renting, or exhibiting of devices or any other items intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to a customer. It includes, but is not limited to, such establishments and activities as: 
1.  An adult bookstore or adult video store - an establishment or other commercial enterprise the primary business of which is the renting, selling or exhibiting of (a) instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities, or (b) films, motion pictures, slides, videos, tapes, cassettes, photographs, CD-ROM disks, floppy disks or diskettes, or other visual recordings (regardless of media or format), representations, or books, magazines, periodicals or other media matter distinguished or characterized by: depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or otherwise intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customer; 
2.  An adult cabaret - an establishment the business of which regularly offers to customers live entertainment including but not limited to employees, agents or contractors who dance, pose, model, wrestle, massage, or otherwise interact with or entertain customers, which entertainment or interaction is primarily characterized by actual or simulated specified sexual activities or exposing specified anatomical areas with the intent to sexually stimulate or sexually gratify a customer; 
3.  An adult encounter parlor - an establishment the business of which consists of offering a service whereby customers either congregate, associate, or consort with employees, agents, contractors, or agents or employees of contractors, who engage in actual or simulated specified sexual activities with or in the presence of customers, or who display specified anatomical areas in the presence of customers, with the intent to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to customers. 
4.  An adult hotel - a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment which: 
a.  offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; and provides customers with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video tapes, slides or other photographic reproductions regardless of media or format which are characterized by the depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for the purpose of sexual stimulation, arousal, or satisfaction of the viewer; and has a sign visible from a public street or highway which advertises the availability of this adult-type reproductions; or 
b.  offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time of less than 10 hours; or 
c.  allows a tenant or occupant of a room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than 10 hours. 
5.  An adult lounge - an adult cabaret which is permitted or licensed pursuant to the Alcoholic Beverage Code to serve or sell alcoholic beverages. 
6.  An adult motion picture theater or adult arcade - an establishment or other commercial enterprise which has within its structure any electronic, electrical or mechanical device (including coin or token-operated devices), which projects, displays, or presents any slide, film, video tape, CD-ROM disk, floppy disk or diskette, or other visual reproduction (regardless of media or format) into a viewing area, and where the images so displayed are primarily distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of actual or simulated specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by a customer or customers therein for their sexual stimulation or sexual gratification. 
B.  An adult oriented business does not include: 
1.  A business operated by and employing or contracting with a licensed psychologist, licensed physical therapist, licensed athletic trainer, licensed cosmetologist, or licensed barber engaged in performing functions authorized under a state license; or, 
2.  A business operated by and employing or contracting with a licensed tattooist or tanning shop operator engaged in performing functions authorized under a state license for a tattoo parlor or tanning salon; or, 
3.  A business operated by and employing or contracting with a state licensed physician or licensed chiropractor engaged in practicing the healing arts; or, 
4.  A business operated by and employing or contracting with a state licensed massage therapist who practices or offers massage engaged in performing the functions authorized by the license; or, 
5.  A school which is accredited or certified by a national academic accreditation organization and which maintains an educational program training persons the necessary skills and knowledge to obtain a state issued license as a psychologist, physical therapist, athletic trainer, cosmetologist, tattooist, artist, barber, physician, chiropractor, or massage therapist; or, 
6.  A person appearing nude in a modeling class (i) operated by a proprietary school licensed by the state of Texas; a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or by a private college or university or junior college which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits earned are transferrable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; (ii) in a structure which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure advertising that a nude person is available for viewing; (iii) in order to participate in the class a student must enroll at least three days prior to the class; and (iv) where there is no more than one nude model on the premises at any one time; or, 
7.  Any activity, business, presentation, expression, material, film, video tape, photographic slide, CD-ROM disk, floppy diskette, book, or device, which when taken as a whole has or contains serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value. 
C.  For the purposes of determining whether a commercial activity is an "adult oriented business" under this division 5, the relevant inquiry shall be as to the nature of the primary activity at the premises. Therefore, it is immaterial and irrelevant that: 
1.  Some ancillary activity may occur as an incident to the otherwise adult activity, such as but not limited to tanning, garment modeling, exercise, massage, or other, simultaneously or in conjunction with one of the activities expressly identified hereinabove as constituting an "adult oriented business" if the activity taken as a whole appeals to the prurient interest in sex and is intended to sexually stimulate or sexually gratify any person, notwithstanding the presence of the ancillary activity; or, 
2.  Any particular word or term is or is not associated with or utilized in the name or description of an enterprise or establishment, including but not limited to the words: spa, sauna, center, studio, parlor, theater, cabaret, club, review, shop, gymnasium, pool, hall, salon, store, lounge, arcade, service, agency, or company. 
(2)  Establishment means and includes any of the following: 
A.  The opening or commencement of a new business as an adult oriented business; 
B.  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult oriented business, to any adult oriented business; 
C.  The addition of another adult oriented business to any other existing adult oriented business; or 
D.  The relocation of any adult oriented business. 
(3)  Intended operator means the person principally in charge of the day to day operation of the establishment. 
(4)  Nude or nudity means exposing the specified anatomical areas identified in (8)A, below. 
(5)  Operates or causes to be operated means to cause to function or to put or keep in operation. A person may be found to be operating, or causing to be operated, an adult oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner or permittee of the establishment. 
(6)  Permittee means a person in whose name a permit to operate an adult oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual or entity listed as an applicant on the application for a license. 
(7)  Person means an individual human, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity, as well as any combination or number of such. 
(8)  Specified anatomical areas means: 
A.  Less than completely and opaquely covered: (i) human genitals, pubic region, (ii) human buttock or anus and (iii) female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; 
B.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or 
C.  Any combination of the above. 
(9)  Specified sexual activities means actual or simulated: 
A.  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; or 
B.  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, cunnilingus, fellatio, sodomy, or sexual bestiality; or 
C.  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breasts; or 
D.  Any combination of the above. 
(10)  Transfer means the sale, lease, rent, subrent, or sublease of the business; or transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or the establishment of a trust, gift, or similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Ord. No. 96-80, § II, 11-12-96)  
Sec. 31-552. - Permit required. 
It is an offense for one to operate or cause to be operated an adult oriented business without a valid permit authorizing the operation of such establishment. 
(Ord. No. 96-80, § II, 11-12-96)  
Sec. 31-553. - Application and fee. 
Applications for a permit, whether an original or a subsequent one, must be made to the planning and development department by the owner or intended operator of the establishment. The applicant shall be required to submit the following: 
(1)  A sworn written application setting forth the following: 
A.  The name of each applicant and whether the applicant is an individual, partnership, corporation, other entity, or a combination of these; 
B.  The name under which the business is to be operated and a description of the adult oriented business to be conducted; 
C.  The name, address, date of birth, social security number, and telephone number of each applicant, owner(s), and the intended operator, if different from the owner; 
D.  The street address and legal description of the parcel of land on which the business is to be located, and the telephone number of the enterprise at that address; 
E.  A written declaration, sworn to under oath, that the information contained in the application is true and correct; 
F.  If an applicant is any type of corporation or association, then the application must also state the name, address, date of birth and social security number of all incorporators, current and past officers, directors, and shareholders. If an applicant is any type of partnership, then the application shall also state the names and addresses of all partners and identify the nature of each partner's participation (e.g., limited, active, etc.); and 
G.  If the applicant is an individual, the application shall be signed and verified by the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall be signed and verified by all of the partners thereof. If the applicant is a corporation or other entity, the application shall be signed and verified by the president and treasurer of said corporation or entity. If the application is made by a combination of individuals or entities, it shall be signed and verified by each component of the combination in a manner consistent with this subsection. 
(2)  A site plan setting out the dimensions and location of such adult oriented business. The applicant shall sign a notarized statement attached to the site plan stating that the proposed adult oriented business complies with the requirements set forth herein. It shall be the duty of the applicant to prepare the site plan. 
(3)  A non-refundable fee as provided in the adopted fee schedule shall be charged for each permit application and shall be paid to the planning and development department at the time the application and site plan are submitted for processing. 
(Ord. No. 96-80, § II, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 19-047 , § XV, 9-17-19)  
Sec. 31-554. - Inspections. 
(1)  Initial: Upon receipt of all the items specified in sec. 31-553 above, the planning and development department shall, within three (3) working days of the receipt, request that the health department, fire department, police department and building official inspect the premises and review the qualifications of the applicants for determination of compliance with applicable state and federal laws and city ordinances. All such inspections and reviews shall be completed within twenty-five (25) days of the request from planning and development for inspections and reviews. 
(2)  Subsequent: A representative of the health department, fire department, police department, building official, or code inspector shall be allowed to inspect the premises at any time it is occupied or open for business, to verify compliance with all applicable local ordinances, codes and state laws. 
(3)  It is an offense for the owner, applicant, intended operator, permittee, other person, or an agent or contractor of any of them to refuse to allow a lawful inspection of the premises by a representative of the health department, fire department, police department, building inspections, or code inspector during either the initial 25 day inspection period or thereafter at any subsequent time it is occupied or open for business. 
(Ord. No. 96-80, § II, 11-12-96)  
Sec. 31-555. - Issuance of permit. 
(1)  The director of planning and development shall either approve or deny the issuance of a permit within thirty (30) days after receipt of an application and give written notice of the decision to the applicant. The director of planning and development shall approve said application and issue a permit to an applicant, unless the director of planning and development finds one or more of the following to be true: 
A.  An applicant, intended operator, permittee, or owner is under 18 years of age; 
B.  An applicant, intended operator, permittee, or owner is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed or imposed against any one of them; 
C.  An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the permit or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form; 
D.  An applicant's permit for the same adult oriented business for which the application in question is being made has been denied within the preceding 12 months; 
E.  The premises to be used for the adult oriented business has not been approved by the health department, fire department or the building official or code inspector as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances; 
F.  The owner, applicant or their agent has refused to allow a lawful inspection of the premises by the health department, fire department, police, building official, or code inspector, during the initial inspection period described above, or at any subsequent time the establishment was occupied or open for business; 
G.  The permit fee required by this ordinance or fees required by other ordinances relating to the enterprise has not been paid; 
H.  The proposed premises is located somewhere other than a properly designated B-5 zoning use district which is: 
1.  Within a rectangular parcel of approximately 93.146 acres: (a) being no closer than 750 feet or more than 1,750 feet east of the east right-of-way of Roy Reynolds Drive; and, (b) from the northern right-of-way of the A.T. & S.F.R.R. at Roy Reynolds Drive, northward approximately 4,100 feet; or, within an adjacent rectangular parcel of approximately 17.62 acres, east of and contiguous to the foregoing described tract, along the north right-of-way of the A.T. & S.F.R.R. 
2.  Within a rectangular parcel of approximately 39.388 acres: (a) from the south right-of-way of Elms Road southward approximately 464 feet along the east right-of-way of State Highway 195 (Ft. Hood Street); and, (b) eastward along the south right-of-way of Elms Road, approximately 1,200 feet from State Highway 195; and (c) from that point on Elms Road, southward approximately 1,600 feet; (d) then, westward approximately 1,050 feet to the east right-of-way of State Highway 195, and northward to the starting point. 
(All locations are described more particularly in the metes and bounds descriptions which are attached to ordinance no. 96-80 and which are incorporated by reference, and in the event of a conflict with the above general descriptions, the metes and bounds descriptions shall prevail. Compliance with these location requirements shall not exempt the business from compliance with all other setback and legal requirements generally applicable to locating and constructing structures in the city.) 
I.  The structure does not meet all architectural requirements of this ordinance; 
J.  An applicant or applicant's spouse has been convicted of or is under indictment or misdemeanor information for any of the offenses listed below, and (i) less than two years have elapsed since the later of the date of conviction or date of release from confinement, probation, community supervision, or deferred adjudication, if the offense was a misdemeanor; or (ii) less than five years have elapsed since the later of the date of conviction or date of release from confinement, parole, mandatory supervision, or deferred adjudication, if the offense was a felony. (For purposes of this subsection only, the term "applicant" also includes and means the partners of a partnership if a partnership is an applicant; and the officers, directors, and shareholders of a closely held corporation if a corporation is an applicant): 
1.  Offenses described in either Texas Penal Code chapter 43 or 21, as amended (prostitution; promotion of prostitution; aggravated promotion of prostitution; compelling prostitution; obscenity; sale, distribution, or display of material harmful to a minor; sexual performance by a child; possession of child pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child). 
2.  Engaging in organized criminal activity as described in Texas Penal Code chapter 71, as amended. 
3.  Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as described in Texas Penal Code chapter 22, as amended. 
4.  Incest, solicitation of a child, or harboring a runaway child, as described in Texas Penal Code chapter 25, as amended. 
5.  A violation of the Texas Controlled Substances Act or Dangerous Drug Act punishable as a felony. 
6.  Any offense under the laws of another state or the United States without regard to its title, but which corresponds to the elements of any Texas offense described or referred to in subsections (1)-(5), just above. 
7.  The fact that a conviction is under appeal shall have no effect on the disqualification of this subsection. An applicant who has been convicted or whose spouse has been convicted for one of the above listed offenses, for which the required time period has elapsed, may qualify for an adult oriented business permit only if the police chief advises the director of planning and development that the previously convicted applicant or spouse is fit for the permit. In determining present fitness the chief shall consider the following factors concerning the convicted person: (i) the extent and nature of past criminal activity limited to the offenses listed above; (ii) age at the time of the commission of the crime; (iii) conduct and work both prior to and following the criminal activity; (iv) the amount of time which has elapsed since the last criminal activity; (v) other evidence of present fitness, such as letters from prosecutors, prison officials, law enforcement officers, or others who know the person and have knowledge of rehabilitation of the person. 
K.  An applicant or applicant's spouse (or if a partnership, corporation, or association, then any officer, partner, director, or shareholder) has been an intended operator, owner, or permittee for an adult oriented business which permit was suspended or revoked at any time during the 2 years preceding the date of this application. 
(2)  The permit, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person(s) to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the exact address of the adult oriented business. 
(Ord. No. 96-80, § II, 11-12-96)  
Sec. 31-556. - Other regulations. 
These regulations are in addition to all other application procedures, qualifications, fees, rules, and other requirements contained herein or otherwise prescribed by state law or local ordinances. The failure or refusal to comply with these other regulations are grounds for denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit. 
(1)  Architectural: A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult oriented business, other than an adult hotel, who (i) exhibits in a viewing room, booth, cubicle, closet, stall, or other room of less than 150 square feet of floor space each, (ii) a live model, dancer, or other employee, agent, or contractor who exposes specified anatomical areas, or a movie, film, video tape, CD-ROM, floppy diskette or disk which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following: 
A.  The application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager stations; the locations of all overhead light fixtures; designating the location, configuration, and size of all viewing rooms, booths, stalls, closets, cubicles, or other rooms; and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be allowed. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's drawing or blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The director of planning and development may waive the diagram for subsequent applications if the applicant adopts a previously submitted diagram and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
B.  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a way that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any customer is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms shall not contain video reproduction or display or play back equipment. 
C.  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station shall be made without the approval of the director of planning and development or his designee. 
(2)  Personnel: 
A.  It is the joint and several duty of the owner, permittee, and intended operator of an adult oriented business to insure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any customer is present inside the premises. It is an offense for a person to fail or refuse to discharge the duty prescribed by this paragraph. 
B.  At all times an adult oriented business premises is open to the public, there shall be a legible roster of the name, race, sex, date of birth, and social security number of every worker, employee, agent, or contractor or there privies present at the premises. This roster shall be kept in a bound book of pages; the binding may be of glue, cloth, staples, wire spiral, or loose leaf pages in a ring binder. The roster shall be available for inspection by representatives of the health, fire, police, and code or building inspections departments in the course of any inspection of the premises. It is an offense to fail or refuse to have and maintain an accurate roster, or to fail or refuse to produce it for inspection upon verbal request by one authorized to inspect the premises. 
C.  It shall be the joint and several duty of the owner, intended operator, manager, employees, contractors, and agents of any of them present in the premises to insure that the view area specified in (1)B above remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, curtains, merchandise, display racks or other non-transparent obstacles. It is an offense for a person to knowingly fail or refuse to discharge the duty prescribed by this paragraph. 
(3)  Adult hotels: 
A.  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than 10 hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult hotel as defined in this ordinance. 
B.  A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment (that does not have an adult oriented business permit), does rent or subrent a room to a person and, within 10 hours from the time the room is rented, the same room is rented or subrented again. For purposes of this subsection, "rent" and "subrent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(4)  Signage: 
A.  Except as provided within this section, all on-premises signage is prohibited. 
B.  Not more than two (2) wall signs, as defined in chapter 31, Killeen city code and chapter 2301, Standard Building Code, 1988 edition, as amended, shall be permitted, in compliance with said chapters. Further, the wall signs shall: 
1.  not exceed a total of twenty-four (24) square feet in area per premises, nor six (6) feet in height, nor shall the top of any sign be more than fifteen (15) feet above the natural ground surface beneath it; and 
2.  not use or be illuminated by any type of artificial light source in combination with a chaser or flasher feature; and 
3.  not use or be illuminated by any incandescent light source greater than 60 watts per bulb, with a minimum of one (1) foot distance between each bulb; and 
4.  not use or be illuminated by any type of fluorescent lighting other than cool white highwatt output type, with a minimum of one (1) foot distance between each tube or bulb. 
(Ord. No. 96-80, § II, 11-12-96)  
Sec. 31-557. - Permit not transferable to other persons, locations or businesses. 
A permittee shall not transfer the permit or business to another person or entity, nor operate a different adult oriented business, nor operate an adult oriented business under the authority of said permit at any place other than the address designated on the permit. 
(Ord. No. 96-80, § II, 11-12-96)  
Sec. 31-558. - Permit display. 
A permit issued under this division 5 shall be displayed at all times in an open and conspicuous place, on the premises of the adult oriented business for which it was issued. 
(Ord. No. 96-80, § II, 11-12-96)  
Sec. 31-559. - Expiration of initial permit and issuance of subsequent permits. 
All permits issued under this division 5 shall expire two years from the date of issuance. A subsequent permit may be obtained only by making application as provided in this subsection. 
(1)  Adult oriented business permits are not renewed. It is the duty of a permittee, who desires to obtain a subsequent permit by filing a new application no later than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date of an existing permit. The expiration date of the existing permit will not be affected by the fact of a pending application for a subsequent permit. 
(2)  To obtain a subsequent permit, a permittee shall: 
A.  Complete the application process, pay the fee, and comply with all requirements, qualifications, and regulations prescribed in sections 31-553 to 31-556, inclusive; and, 
B.  If any owner, applicant, permittee, or intended operator is a corporation, association, or partnership, then also submit in writing: 
1.  The name, address, social security number, and date of birth for each person who, since the date of the original application has been, and those who currently are, a director, officer, shareholder (or partner, as appropriate); 
2.  The physical street location address (not a postal box) of the principal office of the entity; 
3.  The state in which the entity was formed, chartered, or registered, along with the charter number or other official number assigned by the government agency which recorded such registration. 
(Ord. No. 96-80, § II, 11-12-96)  
Sec. 31-560. - Amortization of nonconforming uses. 
(1)  Any person who, at the time of adoption of this ordinance, is lawfully operating an adult oriented business, shall have thirty (30) days after the effective date of this ordinance within which to apply for a permit. 
(2)  A person or establishment is not exempt from the requirements of obtaining a permit under this division 5 because it holds a permit or license under the Alcoholic Beverage Code, or for coin operated machines, or another permit or license for regulated activities on the premises. 
(3)  If, at either the time of adoption of this ordinance, or upon annexation into the city, an existing adult oriented business is located at a site which would preclude issuance of a permit under this division 5, then the adult oriented business shall be deemed a nonconforming use. Such nonconforming use must otherwise be in compliance with all non-locational provisions of this division 5, as well as all other local ordinances and state laws, and the issuance of a permit hereunder shall not affect the amortization of nonconforming uses as provided herein. 
(4)  A.  An existing nonconforming adult oriented business use at the time this ordinance is adopted shall be allowed to continue at the same location, so long as such business is continuously operated by the original permittee and owned by the original owner at time of issuing the permit, until December 31, 2001 unless sooner terminated for any reason or the adult oriented business use is discontinued for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or more. A nonconforming use shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming non-adult oriented business use. If the permittee discontinues the nonconforming adult oriented business use for thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or more, the premises may not be reopened as a nonconforming adult oriented business use and must be made to conform to the then existing zoning designation for the property. 
B.  In the event an adult oriented business is annexed into the city, after the adoption of this ordinance, then that business shall be allowed to continue to operate, subject to all conditions, requirements and limits contained in this section. Such business shall have thirty (30) days from the effective date of annexation in which to apply for a permit, and its five (5) year amortization period shall commence on the effective date of annexation, without regard to the references therein to December 31, 2001. 
(5)  The owner of a nonconforming adult oriented business who reasonably believes it will be unable to recoup the investment in said existing business by December 31, 2001 may request an extension of the amortization period. Said written application must be filed with the director of planning and development no later than one hundred eighty (180) days after applying for an original permit under this division 5, and no application for extension received after that date shall be considered. Said written application shall set forth the following information: 
A.  The amount of the owner's investment in the existing enterprise through the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the adult oriented business; 
B.  The amount of such investment that will be realized through December 31, 2001; 
C.  The life expectancy of the existing enterprise; and 
D.  The existence or nonexistence of lease obligations, as well as any contingency clauses therein permitting termination of such lease. 
E.  The information submitted for A-D shall be supported by attaching true, complete, and legible copies of relevant documentary evidence such as financial statements and tax records, with all attachments, schedules, and exhibits referenced in the financial statement or tax records. 
(6)  The director of planning and development shall notify the applicant of the time and place of the hearing to be held on request for amortization extension. Said hearing shall be held before the director of planning and development. After such hearing the director of planning and development shall issue a written order on said request for extension. 
(7)  The director of planning and development shall grant an amortization extension for a period of time not to exceed one (1) calendar year upon making the following determinations and findings: 
A.  The owner has made every effort to recoup the investment in said adult oriented business prior to the amortization deadline; 
B.  The owner will be unable to recoup the investment in said adult oriented business on or before December 31, 2001; and 
C.  That all other applicable provisions of this ordinance are being and shall continued to be observed. 
D.  The decision of the director of planning and development on amortization extensions are final. 
(8)  If an initial extension is granted and the permittee believes said extension is insufficient, the permittee may request an additional grant or grants of time extensions not to exceed one (1) year each, in order to recoup the investment in said adult oriented business. Additional applications shall be filed with the director of planning and development no sooner than ninety (90) days nor later than sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the current amortization extension. 
(9)  Extensions that are granted shall specify a date certain for closure and shall not be valid for operation at any other location or for any other adult oriented business at the same location. 
(10)  Any amortization extension granted is deemed immediately revoked by operation of this law if the ownership, control, permit, or business is transferred (except upon death bequest or bankruptcy); and, upon such transfer, the adult oriented business at the location shall immediately cease to operate. 
(Ord. No. 96-80, § II, 11-12-96)  
Sec. 31-561. - Suspension. 
The director of planning and development shall suspend a permit authorized by this ordinance for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if the director of planning and development determines that: 
(1)  The permittee, owner, intended operator, or contractor or agent of any of them refuses to allow a lawful inspection of the premises of an adult oriented business by a representative of the police department, health department, fire department, building official, code inspector, or the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission at any time said business is occupied or open for business; or 
(2)  The permittee, owner, or other person seeking an amortization extension fails or refuses to provide the required supporting materials described above; or 
(3)  The permittee, owner, intended operator, or an employee, contractor or agent of any of them violates any other provision or regulation prescribed in this division 5. 
(4)  The suspension of any permit shall not toll, abate, or otherwise extend or suspend the operation of any prescribed time period which would prompt a loss of nonconforming use, or regarding the deadline for applying for a subsequent permit, or for an amortization extension. 
(Ord. No. 96-80, § II, 11-12-96)  
Sec. 31-562. - Revocation. 
(1)  The director of planning and development shall revoke a permit authorized by this division if the director of planning and development determines: 
A.  That a permit is currently under suspension or has previously been suspended within the preceding 12 months, and another occurrence giving cause for suspension now exists; 
B.  A permittee, owner, or intended operator gave false or misleading information to the planning and development department during the application process for the permit in question, when applying for a nonconforming use permit, or for an extension of the amortization schedule; 
C.  A permittee, owner, intended operator, contractor, or an agent of any of them operated or caused to be operated the adult oriented business during a period of time when the permit was suspended; 
D.  A permittee, owner, intended operator, employee, contractor, or the agent of any of them has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse; sodomy; oral copulation; masturbation; sexual contact; sexual bestiality; obscenity, sale, distribution, or display of material harmful to a minor; employment harmful to children; possession or promotion of child pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; sexual assault; harboring a runaway child; or an aggravated form of any of these offenses; criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any offense listed above, to occur in or on the premises; 
E.  A permittee, owner, or the agent or contractor of either of them is delinquent in payment to the city of Killeen, the Killeen Independent School District, Bell County, or the state of Texas, for ad valorem taxes, sales taxes, or administrative fees, assessments, penalties, interest, or fines related to either the adult oriented business or the premises at which it is located; 
F.  A permittee, owner, intended operator, employee, contractor, or the agent of any of them has knowingly allowed the possession, sale, or use of controlled substances in or on the premises; or 
G.  On two (2) or more occasions within a 12 month period, a person or persons committed a criminal offense in or on the premises of the adult oriented business, listed in section 31-562D, for which a conviction has been obtained, and a person or persons involved in the crime was a permittee, owner, intended operator, or an employee, contractor, or agent of any of them. 
(2)  A revocation shall continue for one year after its imposition, and the permittee shall not be issued an adult oriented business permit for any adult oriented business at any location for one year from the date the revocation was imposed. 
(3)  The revocation of a permit shall not toll, abate, or otherwise extend or suspend the operation of any prescribed time period prompting a loss of nonconforming use, or regarding the deadline for applying for a subsequent permit, or for an amortization extension. 
(Ord. No. 96-80, § II, 11-12-96)  
Sec. 31-563. - Appeal of denial, suspension, or revocation. 
(1)  If the director of planning and development denies the issuance of a permit, or suspends or revokes a permit issued hereunder, the director of planning and development shall, the next business day after said action, send to the applicant or permittee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the denial, suspension or revocation, stating the reason(s) therefore and the right to judicial appeal. Further, the director of planning and development shall also physically post a complete and legible copy of said notice to the front public door of the premises of the adult oriented business by using either tacks, tape, or nails, and shall document the exact date and time of posting of this notice in the official permit file regarding that adult oriented business. 
(2)  Upon receipt of written notice of the denial, suspension, or revocation, the applicant or permittee shall have the right to appeal to the state district court. An appeal to the state district court must be filed within thirty (30) days after receipt of notice of the decision of the director of planning and development. The applicant or permittee shall bear the burden of proof in court as to all issues. 
(Ord. No. 96-80, § II, 11-12-96)  
Sec. 31-564. - Effect on other laws. 
Nothing in this division 5 is intended to legalize anything prohibited under the Texas Penal Code or any other federal or state law or city ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 96-80, § II, 11-12-96)  
Sec. 31-565. - Enforcement. 
(1)  In addition to the administrative remedies provided (denial, suspension, or revocation of permits or applications), any person convicted of violating any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor, as described by section 12.21 of the Texas Penal Code and as authorized by section 243.010(b) of the Texas Local Government Code. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 
(2)  In addition to any other remedy provided by law, the city and its officers shall have the right to enjoin any violation of this ordinance by civil injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction and recover costs and attorney fees. 
(Ord. No. 96-80, § II, 11-12-96)  
Secs. 31-566—31-599. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - TOWER REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 31-600. - Purposes. 
The purpose of this division is to promote the health, safety, welfare, and aesthetics of the community by providing appropriate regulations for commercial and personal towers, minimizing the visual impact of towers through design, screening and landscaping, and protecting property by assuring proper engineering and siting of tower structures. 
(Ord. No. 97-62, § II, 11-25-97)  
Sec. 31-601. - Definitions. 
Only for the purpose of this division of the zoning ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them as follows: 
Alteration means any modification, replacement, or reconstruction that materially increases the height or the dimension of a tower structure. 
Antenna means any device used to collect or radiate radio waves, microwaves, or electromagnetic spectrum waves. An antenna could include directional or panel antennas, ancillary antenna, parabolic or panel dishes, omni-directional antennas such as whips, and other similar transmitting or receiving equipment intended for personal or communications use. 
Back haul means to transmit data/signals through a wire line, microwave, or other connection from the antenna to the wire-line local exchange telephone loop. 
Collocation means the use of a single support structure by more than one person, entity, or communication service provider. 
Communication Facility (CF) means a facility for the transmission or reception of radio, microwave, or electromagnetic spectrum signals used for communication by a service provider. CFs are composed of one or more of the following components: 
(a)  Antenna; 
(b)  Equipment enclosure; 
(c)  Security barrier; and/or 
(d)  Communication tower. 
Director shall mean the director of planning for the City of Killeen, or his or her designated representative. 
Electric substation and electric substation structure means all enclosed property and structures within any electric public utility substation. 
Equipment enclosure is defined as a small structure, shelter, cabinet, or vault used to house and protect the electronic equipment necessary for processing communication or other signals received by an antenna or tower. Associated equipment may include air conditioning and emergency generators. 
Existing nonresidential structure is any existing nonresidential structure, such as a water tower, commercial building, or electric utility tower to which an antenna may be attached. 
Height means the vertical distance between the finished grade at the base of the tower or nonresidential structure, or the lowest point of contact with the building, and the highest point of the structure, including the antennas. 
Historic district, structure or site is defined as any district, structure, or site designated as historic by any lawfully authorized local, state, or federal historical preservation entity or governmental entity, including the city. 
Monopoles are self-supporting structures consisting of a single pole sunk into the ground and/or attached to a permanent foundation. 
Residential structure means any structure that is at least 50% built, designed, or altered to provide living accommodations and at least 50% of the building's intended use is residential. 
Residentially zoned property is any real estate located within any of the following districts: agricultural, agricultural single-family residential, single-family residential, single-family garden home residential, residential modular home single-family, residential townhouse single-family, two-family residential, multi-family residential, mobile home, and manufactured housing districts. 
Service providers means any company, corporation, alliance, individual, or other legal entity that provides a broadcast or communication service available to the public, or to a select segment of the public, such as the entity's own employees. Services include, but not limited to, portable phones, car phones, pagers, digital data transmission, two-way radio, radio, or television communication. 
Tower means any fixed, free standing, uninhabitable, tall/slender structure, not a shelter, used for observation, signaling, communication, and includes any appurtenances and support antennas or other associated hardware. This definition shall include alternative tower structures such as man-made trees, clock towers, bell steeples, flag poles, utility facilities, and other similar structures designed to camouflage or conceal the presence of towers. 
(Ord. No. 97-62, § II, 11-25-97)  
Sec. 31-602. - Locations and limitations for towers and antennas without conditional use permits. 
(a)  Towers and antennas meeting applicable setback requirements in section 31-605 may locate without a conditional use permit as follows: 
(1)  Within agricultural ('A') and manufacturing districts (M-1 and M-2) if the tower height does not exceed one hundred twenty (120) feet or encroach into any restricted airspaces or zones and is located no closer than one hundred twenty (120) feet from any property used or zoned for residential use. A guy wire or guy anchor and equipment enclosures for a facility must not be closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any property used or zoned for residential use. 
(2)  On the roof of any nonresidential and non-historic structure, within any zoning district, provided the tower does not raise the height of the building or structure more than ten (10) feet or does not measure more than ten (10) feet above any roof parapet wall and does not encroach into any airspaces or zones. 
(3)  On the vertical exterior of any nonresidential and non-historic structure, within any zoning district, provided the antenna or antenna support structure or equipment: 
a.  Is mounted flush with the exterior of the structure or projects no more than twenty-four (24) inches from the surface of the structure to which it is attached and does not raise the height of the structure more than ten (10) feet and that said projection is at least fifteen (15) feet above grade; and 
b.  Is textured and colored so as to blend with the surrounding surface of the structure. 
(4)  On city-owned properties and structures by city council approval. Location, design and other restrictions applicable to a tower on municipal property or facility are subject to approval by the city council, subject to the height restrictions within this section. 
(b)  Citizen band and amateur radio towers may be constructed in any zoning district provided they do not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height and comply with all city codes and ordinances 
(Ord. No. 97-62, § II, 11-25-97; Ord. No. 00-52, § II, 6-27-00; Ord. No. 10-059, § III, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 17-035 , § I, 6-13-17)  
Sec. 31-603. - Location and limitations for towers with a conditional use permit. 
(a)  Any tower that does not comply with both subsections 31-602 and 31-605 may be constructed only upon approval of a conditional use permit as provided in section 31-456 of this chapter. 
(b)  Conditional use permits must be approved by the majority of the planning and zoning commission and then by the city council with a three-fourths affirmative vote. The city council may impose reasonable conditions and safeguards deemed appropriate to that application in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public and protect property and property values. 
(Ord. No. 97-62, § II, 11-25-97; Ord. No. 10-059, § III, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 17-035 , § I, 6-13-17)  
Sec. 31-604. - Collocation. 
(a)  To minimize the number of CFs to be sited, applicants shall cooperate with other service providers in collocating additional antennas on existing towers and/or structures to the extent that collocation is reasonably economically feasible. An applicant shall exercise good faith in collocating with other providers and sharing the permitted site. Such good faith shall include sharing technical information to evaluate the feasibility of collocation. The burden is on the owner of an existing CF to prove it is not technically or economically feasible for the applicant to collocate. 
(b)  Service providers shall, to the maximum extent feasible, promote collocation of antennas by multiple providers through the use of nonexclusive agreements for antenna sites, relocation and reconfiguration of antennas to accommodate additional users, utilization of current technology to maximize antenna separation and minimize antenna/tower height and obtrusiveness, and ensure building support structures are of sufficient strength and do not jeopardize public safety. 
(c)  As a condition to erecting a CF within the city, a party agrees to: 
(1)  Design and construct a CF in a way that the structure can support additional antenna systems having the same or similar wind and weight loading characteristics that are proposed by the applicant. 
(2)  Provide tower space on a reasonable, proportioned cost basis to other service providers who seek use of the structure, unless it would result in the creation of a level of radio frequency interference which would degrade applicants' services. 
(3)  Appear and participate in all contested hearings conducted by the planning and zoning commission and/or the city council which pertain to an applicant's request to collocate on the party's CF. Failure to participate in good faith shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance which may be remedied by the revocation of special use permit and/or removal of the party's CF. 
(d)  In addition to efforts to collocate antennas, prior to submitting a request for a special use or building permit to construct a tower, the applicant shall identify vertical structures in the applicant's identified target area and assess the capability of one of those sites to accommodate their needs. Modifications to existing structures to accommodate additional antennas may be administratively approved by the building official if the height of the existing structure is not increased by more than fifteen feet and the structure meets original setback requirements. 
(e)  This subsection shall not apply to citizen band or amateur radio towers and equipment. 
(Ord. No. 97-62, § II, 11-25-97)  
Sec. 31-605. - Setback distance requirements of towers. 
(a)  All towers shall be located in such a manner that if the tower should fall along its longest dimension it will remain within the premises of the property owner and will avoid public streets and utility lines. 
(b)  In addition to the provisions of (a) above, a guy wire or guy anchor for a facility must not be closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any property used or zoned for residential use. 
(c)  Property uses and distances referred to in this section shall be determined as of the date and time the tower permit application is approved. 
(d)  Equipment enclosures shall be set back from property lines as prescribed for the district in which the enclosure is located or ten (10) feet, whichever is greater. 
(e)  The setback required by this section for a telecommunication facility tower that is not adjacent to property used or zoned for residential use shall be reduced to a minimum of fifty (50) feet if the tower will be designed with stress points within the structure and will fall within the reduced setback in case of major windloads, ice loads or a sustained windspeed of one hundred thirty (130) mph, as determined by a licensed design engineer. The design engineer shall also certify that the tower will avoid public streets and utility lines. 
(Ord. No. 97-62, § II, 11-25-97; Ord. No. 17-035 , § I, 6-13-17)  
Sec. 31-606. - Screening device requirements. 
(a)  A CF must be completely enclosed by a fence, wall, or barrier which limits climbing access to such tower and any supporting systems, lines, wires, buildings, or other structures. The facility must be fully screened from view from property used or zoned for residential use and public roadways, as described in section 31-280. 
(b)  The screen shall be consistent in color and character to surrounding structures and properties. 
(c)  The screen shall have no openings, holes, or gaps larger than four (4) inches measured in any direction. 
(d)  The screen may contain gates or doors allowing access to the CF. Such gates or doors shall be kept completely closed and locked except for maintenance purposes and shall be located so that all gates and doors do not intrude into a public street when open. 
(Ord. No. 97-62, § II, 11-25-97)  
Sec. 31-607. - Maintenance and inspection. 
(a)  The owner or operator of a tower shall be responsible for the maintenance of the tower and shall maintain all buildings, structures, supporting structures, wires, fences, or ground areas used in connection with the tower in a safe condition and in good repair and in compliance with the city building, fire, and other applicable codes, regulations, or ordinances. Maintenance shall include, but shall not be limited to, maintenance of the paint, landscaping, screening, equipment enclosure, and structural integrity. If the city building official finds that the tower is not being properly maintained, he shall declare it to be a public nuisance and notify the owner of the tower and of the land if different. If the owner fails to correct the problem within the time allotted by the city, the city may undertake any or all of the following actions: maintenance at the expense of the owner, revoke the special use permit, or require removal of the tower. 
(b)  By applying for a building permit for a tower, the applicant specifically grants permission to the city, its duly authorized agents, officials, and employees, to enter upon the property after first making a reasonable attempt to notify a person designated by the applicant, except in the event of an emergency, for the purpose of making all inspections to assure compliance with all city codes and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 97-62, § II, 11-25-97)  
Sec. 31-608. - Frequency emission standards. 
(a)  The applicant and any subsequent operator or owner shall comply with federal standards for electromagnetic spectrum emissions and must annually submit a signed statement that the proposed site fully complies with federal standards for radio frequency emissions. The city reserves the right to request that the applicant submit to the city a report sealed by a registered electrical engineer which provides the estimated cumulative field measurements of electromagnetic spectrum emissions of all emitters installed at the subject site and compares the results with established federal standards. If on review the city finds that the proposed or established CF does not meet federal emission standards, the city may take any or all of the following actions: deny or revoke the special use or building permit, require a work stoppage if under construction, require cessation of operations until remedied, or require removal of the CF. Unless the non-compliant condition presents an immediate threat to health and safety, before applying these remedies the city shall provide a sixty (60) calendar day correction period. 
(b)  The applicant shall ensure that the facility will not cause localized interference with the reception of area television or radio broadcasts, or other legally existing communications facilities. If on review, the city finds that the facility will interfere with such reception, it may use any remedy identified in subsection (a). 
(Ord. No. 97-62, § II, 11-25-97)  
Sec. 31-609. - General site development standard and submittal requirements. 
(a)  All towers and communications facilities (excluding citizen band and amateur radio) shall conform to the following development standards: 
(1)  All towers must be a monopole construction. An alternative tower design structure, as defined in section 31-601, may be approved by the building official. 
(2)  To minimize potential safety hazards, towers shall be set back as required in section 31-605. 
(3)  All lots on which towers and communications facilities are located must have all-weather access to a public street. 
(4)  Towers shall be constructed in accordance with the city building codes, be certified by a professional engineer as to structural integrity of the tower and its appurtenances and shall be in compliance with the City of Killeen Code of Ordinances. 
(5)  Towers shall be designed and placed on the site in a manner that takes maximum advantage of existing trees, mature vegetation, and structures so as to: 
a.  Disguise as much of the tower as possible from the public view; 
b.  Use site features as a background so that the tower blends into the background with increased sight distances; and 
c.  To the degree technically feasible, locate on a portion of the site that is effectively isolated from view of residential areas by structures or terrain features unless the tower and facility are integrated or act as an architectural element of the structure such as a flag pole or parking lot light or are effectively screened through installed landscaping or other acceptable screening. 
(6)  Communications facilities shall landscape screening. Further, the use of existing vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable and may be used as a substitute for or in supplement towards meeting landscaping requirements. The installed landscaping requirements include: 
a.  A row of shade trees a minimum of one inch (1") diameter shall be planted around the CF screen (required in section 31-606) with a maximum spacing of twenty-five (25) feet. 
b.  A continuous hedge of one gallon sized (minimal) evergreen ground cover shall be planted along communications facility screen. 
c.  All landscaping shall be drought-resistant or irrigated and properly maintained to ensure good health and viability. 
d.  The city may waive landscaping requirements if the design of the tower is such that landscaping would cause the tower to be more obtrusive, or the tower is integrated or acts as an architectural element of a structure such as a flag pole, parking lot light, bell tower, or other similar structure and/or the city determines landscaping to be unnecessary. 
(7)  All signs, flags, lights, and attachments (other than those required for communications operations, structural stability, or as required for flight visibility by the Federal Aviation Administration [FAA] and Federal Communications Commission [FCC]) shall be prohibited on any tower. 
(8)  Communication towers shall be lighted with low intensity lights to provide added visibility for aviation navigation. 
(b)  Service providers wishing to construct a tower shall ensure and submit documentation demonstrating: 
(1)  That the tower will be erected and operated in compliance with current FCC and FAA rules and regulations and other applicable federal, state, and local standards and particularly those applicable to civil or military airports, airfields, or heliports. 
(2)  That all back haul providers are identified and have all the necessary approvals to operate as such, including holding necessary franchises, permits, and certificates. 
(3)  A notarized statement signed by the CF operator, owner, and the landowner that indicates: 
a.  All agree to allow collocation of additional equipment by other service providers on the applicant's structure or within the same site location, provided that such space is available on a reasonable and non-discriminatory basis and will provide an estimated cost schedule for such collocation services. 
b.  An understanding of section 31-607 relating to maintenance and inspections. 
c.  An agreement to inform the city of any intent to abandon or cease using an antenna or tower within thirty (30) days of the date the use ceases. The agreement must state a willingness to remove the tower and accessory buildings and equipment upon six (6) consecutive calendar months of discontinued use. The six (6) month period may be administratively extended to provide a period of up to one year from the date of operation cessation to market the antenna or tower to other carriers. The responsibility for removal falls upon the landowner. In the event the tower and accessory buildings and equipment are not removed when so ordered, the city may remove the tower and accessory buildings and equipment and recover the costs associated with such removal from the landowner and place a lien upon the property until such costs are paid. 
(4)  A report certified and sealed by a registered professional engineer stating that all structural components of the tower comply with all applicable codes and regulations. In the case of communication facilities, the report should further note the extent to which the tower is designed and/or built to accommodate collocation. In addition, a sealed report from a registered electrical engineer certifying that electromagnetic spectrum emissions are in compliance with applicable federal standards must be submitted. 
(5)  An agreement to reimburse the city for actual costs incurred by the city to review and process the application. Should the city question either the certifications submitted with the application or the level or emissions during subsequent operations, the city may request an independent evaluation. If the submission or level of emission is found to be in error, the actual cost incurred by the city for this evaluation will be billed to the service provider or added to the application fee. 
(6)  To enhance the city's ability to plan for collocation, a service provider shall provide a master antenna plan, including maps: 
a.  showing the projected locations and characteristics of all proposed future sites in the city and in its extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ); 
b.  indicating coverage areas of the proposed and existing sites within the city and its ETJ. 
Updates or revisions of the above documents shall be filed with the city within thirty (30) days of completion. Applicants may identify such information as "confidential and proprietary." Information so marked will not be released to any third party unless the city of Killeen is directed to do so by the state attorney general's office. 
(7)  Site and landscaping plans indicating: 
a.  the specific placement of the tower and all related structures on the site; 
b.  the location of existing trees and other significant site features; 
c.  the type and location of landscaping proposed for screening; 
d.  the color(s) for the tower; and 
e.  architectural drawings for the proposed site. 
(Ord. No. 97-62, § II, 11-25-97; Ord. No. 05-69, § VIII, 9-13-05)  
Sec. 31-610. - Permit limitations. 
(a)  Any city permit, including the special use permit, shall become null and void if the permitted tower and communication facility is not constructed within six (6) months of the date of issuance, provided that the special use permit may be extended one time for six (6) months if foundation inspection has been completed before the expiration of the initial six months. 
(b)  The applicant/permittee of a tower or antenna constructed on city-owned property shall expressly indemnify, protect, and hold the city harmless to the maximum extent allowed by law. No exceptions to this requirement shall be allowed. 
(c)  Any city permit, including a special use permit, for a tower shall expire and the applicant must remove the tower if it is not put into use within one hundred twenty (120) days after construction or if use is discontinued for a period in excess of six (6) consecutive calendar months. If the tower is not so removed, the city may cause the tower and accessory buildings and equipment to be removed, and all expenses of removal shall be paid by the owner of the land where the tower is located. 
(d)  The applicant/permittee shall notify the director of all changes in ownership or operation of the tower within thirty (30) days of the change. 
(e)  Any other limitations imposed by the city council as a condition of a special use permit. 
(Ord. No. 97-62, § II, 11-25-97)  
Sec. 31-611. - Pre-existing towers. 
A tower which was legally in existence on the date of final passage of this division of the zoning ordinance shall not be required to be removed or relocated in order to meet minimum distance requirements. However, any alteration of the physical dimensions (excluding collocation) or renovation due to any cause which exceeds 50% of the value or physical modification which exceeds 50% of the area of existing towers or facilities shall require compliance with the applicable provisions of this division of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 97-62, § II, 11-25-97)  
Secs. 31-612—31-699. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - HOME BASED CHILD CARE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 31-700. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to promote the health, safety, welfare, and aesthetics of residential communities by providing appropriate regulations for home based child care facilities to minimize the impact of such land uses may have on neighboring properties. 
(Ord. No. 99-47, § IV, 6-8-99)  
Sec. 31-701. - Standards and definitions. 
(a)  To assure the health, safety, and well being of the children of the City of Killeen who receive care outside their homes, the Texas Department of Protective and Regulatory Services minimum standards for registered family homes, group day care homes, and regulation of certain facilities, homes and agencies that provide childcare services (chapter 42—Human Resources Code), as adopted and amended are hereby incorporated by reference for all intents and purposes. In the event of a conflict between the above referenced standards and city ordinances, the most restrictive standard shall control. 
(b)  Definition: As used in this chapter, "home based child care facility" shall include any facility registered or licensed by the Department of Protective and Regulatory Services. 
(c)  All references to the city manager or the building official also includes a designee named by either official. 
(Ord. No. 99-47, § IV, 6-8-99)  
Sec. 31-702. - City of Killeen certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  Prior to accepting children for care, a home based child care facility must secure a certificate of occupancy issued by the city building official. A copy of the appropriate Texas Department of Protective and Regulatory Services certification (registration or license) must be attached to the request for the certificate of occupancy inspection. The applicable minimum standards, referenced above, and applicable fire, safety, health, and building regulations and codes shall serve as a guideline in the decision whether to issue said certificate. Any variance allowed by the applicable minimum standards shall be accepted as a valid variance by the city building official, in determining compliance with fire, safety, health, or sanitation requirements. The applicant for such certificates shall reside on the premises as his/her principal dwelling place. 
(b)  The administrative and inspection fee, as set by the city council, must be tendered with the complete application. Should a home not pass inspection, it will receive a second inspection after 10-15 business days. Any further inspection will require an additional tender of the fee per inspection. The fee is not refunded if the premises fails the inspection or application is withdrawn. 
(c)  The city manager may revoke the certificate of occupancy if the person holding the certificate refuses or fails to comply with the requirements of: 
(1)  this chapter; 
(2)  certificate of occupancy; 
(3)  fire codes and regulations; 
(4)  health and safety codes and regulations; 
(5)  building codes and regulations; or 
(6)  any law governing, or any standard pertaining to the operation of a home based child care facility. 
(d)  Appeal provision. If the city manager denies the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or revokes a certificate of occupancy issued hereunder, the city manager shall, the next business day after said action, send to the applicant or holder of the certificate of occupancy a certified letter (return receipt requested) giving notice of the denial or revocation, stating the reason(s) therefore and the right to appeal. Further, the city manager shall physically post a complete and legible copy of said notice to the front public door of the premises of the home based child care facility and shall document the time and date of this posting. The applicant or holder of the certificate of occupancy may appeal the denial or revocation of a certificate of occupancy to the city council subject to the following: 
(1)  The appeal must be in writing and filed with the city manager's office within ten (10) business days after the posting of the written notice of denial or revocation; 
(2)  The appeal must clearly set out the basis of such appeal; 
(3)  A hearing shall be scheduled for the next regular city council meeting no earlier than ten (10) business days after receipt of the appeal; 
(4)  The city council shall formally act upon the appeal at the meeting. During the hearing, the mayor or other presiding officer may receive any information which he or she deems to be relevant and material, but at a minimum shall hear the appealing party and the city manager. If the decision of the city manager is overturned, the certificate of occupancy shall be issued. If the decision of the city manager is upheld, the applicant or permittee shall have the right to appeal to the state district court. An appeal to the state district court must be filed within thirty (30) days after the date of the decision of the city council. The applicant or permittee shall bear the burden of proof in the council hearing and in court as to all issues. 
(Ord. No. 99-47, § IV, 6-8-99)  
Sec. 31-703. - Home based child care use restrictions. 
(a)  Home based child care facilities may be located in any residential area subject to the following: 
(1)  Maximum number of children in care in addition to the children residing at that address may not exceed: 
Type of Residence Number of Children 
Single-family structure 	6 
(includes garden, modular and manufactured homes) 
Duplex 	3 
(includes 2-unit townhouse) 
 
(2)  In no event shall the number of children in care exceed the state published staff-child ratio standards. 
(3)  A certificate of occupancy for the operation of a home based child care facility may not be issued to an applicant with an address on a lot or parcel within or less than a 200-foot radius from a property line of a lot on which an existing home based child care facility is located. 
(b)  Home based child care facilities shall comply with the following conditions: 
(1)  Hours of operation shall be not more than twenty (20) consecutive hours in a twenty-four hour period. However, under extenuating circumstances (e.g., military orders or family medical emergency), a child(ren) may be retained in care for longer than the twenty-hour period. 
(2)  A fence, not less than four (4) feet in height, shall be placed around any outdoor play area. Outdoor play equipment shall not be placed in the front yard. 
(3)  A parking area shall be provided for off-street loading and unloading of children on a concrete or paved surface. No loading or unloading of children on the street shall be allowed. 
(4)  Staffing: 
a.  No persons other than occupants of the premises shall be engaged in the operation of the home based child care facility. 
b.  The preceding subsection (4)a does not preclude the home based child care provider from acquiring the services of an independent contractor to function as a substitute provider to be present in the occasional absence of the home based child care provider. 
(5)  Home based child care facilities shall not involve the use of advertising signs or window displays on the premises or any other local advertising media which call attention to the fact that the home is being used for business purposes. A telephone number may be included in a directory listing or an advertisement; however, no business address may be published or advertised. 
(6)  The outside appearance of the residential dwelling shall not be altered from its residential character in any way. 
(7)  The home based child care use shall not increase the number of vehicles parked on the premises by more than two (2) additional vehicles at any time. All customer/client parking shall be off-street and in a paved area. 
(8)  The home based child care use shall not generate noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference beyond what normally occurs in the applicable zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 99-47, § IV, 6-8-99)  
Sec. 31-704. - Pre-existing home based child care facilities. 
(a)  A home based child care facility that was legally registered or licensed and permitted, as appropriate, on the date of passage of this division of the zoning ordinance may continue to operate in that classification, in compliance with the Texas Department of Protective and Regulatory Services regulations and standards, by the current care giver at the current address. If the current home based child care provider ceases to operate the facility for a period of 90 days (or longer), it is deemed an abandoned use, and any reestablished facility must be in full compliance with this ordinance. 
(b)  Current registered and licensed child care facilities that do not possess a certificate of occupancy shall have thirty (30) days from the effective date of this ordinance to make application for such certificates in order to qualify for protection under these pre-existing provisions. 
(Ord. No. 99-47, § IV, 6-8-99)  
Secs. 31-705—31-799. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 31-800. - Description. 
A planned unit development (PUD) is a land use design incorporating the concepts of density and common open space. Common open space shall include, but is not limited to, community amenities such as parks, gardens, pedestrian trails, recreation areas, and usable undisturbed, natural areas. The PUD designation serves as an "overlay zoning and development classification." In this capacity, the designation permits specific negotiated development regulations to be applied to the base land use zoning district(s) in which the property is located. When a parcel of land receives a PUD designation, the entire parcel must be assigned one or more standard zoning district classifications. However, the added PUD overlay classification enables the developer of the site to request that specific land use development regulations be applied to his development site. Such specific land use and development regulations shall not take effect until they are reviewed, public hearings held and approved by both the planning and zoning commission and the city council. 
(Ord. No. 05-101, § III, 10-25-05; Ord. No. 14-092 , § I, 12-9-14)  
Sec. 31-801. - Purpose. 
The PUD classification is an overlay designation to provide the flexibility to permit development projects which may include multiple land uses. This classification serves the following purposes: 
(a)  Establish a procedure for the development of a parcel of land under unified control to reduce or eliminate the inflexibility that might otherwise result from strict application of land use standards and procedures designed primarily for individual lots; 
(b)  Ensure structured review and approval procedures are applied to unique development projects that intended to take advantage of common open space and promote pedestrian circulation; 
(c)  Allow developers greater freedom to be innovative in selecting the means to provide access, light, open space and amenities; and 
(d)  Provide flexibility from the strict application of existing development regulations and land use standards and allow developers the opportunity to take advantage of special site characteristics and location. 
The regulatory provisions of this classification are intended to achieve the above purposes while maintaining the spirit of the current City of Killeen Development Regulations, as amended. As such, these provisions represent the governing body's minimum quality of life standard and no variance or exception shall be granted thereto. 
(Ord. No. 05-101, § III, 10-25-05)  
Sec. 31-802. - Location, districts, and minimum requirements. 
A PUD may be permitted in any zoning district. No PUD may be located outside of the corporate limits of the City of Killeen or in an area which does not have access to a full compliment of urban infrastructure and includes development plans for water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or other appropriate drainage infrastructure and paved streets. The following minimum requirements shall apply: 
(a)  PUDs shall be located within one-mile radius of an arterial street. 
(b)  PUDs shall conform to City of Killeen ordinances and zoning requirements unless specifically exempted by negotiated development regulations approved for use within the development. 
(c)  In no case shall a PUD be exempted from compliance with existing city land use, utility, or thoroughfare master plans. 
(d)  Generally, the minimum acreage for a planned development shall be five acres. The planning and zoning commission may recommend approval of PUDs on less acreage on a case-by-case basis. 
(e)  Combinations of residential, office and commercial land use activities may be permitted under the PUD classification. The submitted land use plan will be evaluated based on the compatibility of land uses to each other and the degree to which landscaping and screening are used to buffer less compatible land uses. 
(f)  Yard sizes within the PUD should generally follow guidelines for similar districts in the zoning ordinance; however, modifications to the yard sizes and lot areas may be requested when the open space and common area amenities justify the overall deviation. 
(g)  Open space landscaped buffers shall be required to separate land uses within the planned development from land uses adjacent to the planned development unless the planning and zoning commission and the city council conclude that no incompatibility exists between the land uses. No structure, parking lot, equipment pad, or other manmade construction not approved by the city shall be placed in an open space buffer. Generally, the minimum size of an open space buffer shall be twenty-five (25) feet measured from the property line. The planning and zoning commission may recommend approval of PUDs with smaller open space buffers on a case-by-case basis. This buffer may be extended and screening and/or landscaping may be required within the buffer based on the perceived degree of incompatibility between land uses or other criteria such as development density or topography as determined by the planning and zoning commission or the city council. 
(h)  Parking area and number of spaces should generally follow regulations for applicable uses prescribed in this chapter, but may be increased or decreased as deemed necessary by the planning and zoning commission. 
(Ord. No. 05-101, § III, 10-25-05; Ord. No. 14-092 , § I, 12-9-14; Ord. No. 20-024 , § I, 5-26-20)  
Sec. 31-803. - General procedure. 
The procedure for requesting, processing, and approving a PUD classification shall conform to those procedures prescribed for requesting a zoning change. The development regulations which the developer desires to have approved for the proposed PUD will be submitted concurrent with the requested zoning change for a PUD classification. Development plats shall not be submitted until approval action on the PUD classification has been taken by the city council. 
(a)  PUD review. The planning and zoning commission will assess the impacts the proposed PUD will have on planning goals, utilities, emergency services, traffic, and all properties adjoining and likely to be influenced by the proposed PUD development. The city shall comply with the notification, public notice, and public hearing requirements mandated for changes in zoning districts. The planning and zoning commission shall make recommendations regarding approval/denial, development regulations, and any mitigating conditions required of the PUD classification to the city council. The city council may approve/disapprove the PUD classification, modify any requested development regulations, and impose any conditions relative to the development of the PUD. Unless otherwise stipulated, such conditions shall be complied with before any permit shall be issued for the construction of any structure within the PUD. 
(b)  Assessment criteria. Each proposed PUD development shall be reviewed to determine the compatibility of the development with surrounding land uses and the compatibility of the land uses within the development. No PUD shall be approved if it is found that the proposed development: 
(1)  Does not conform with applicable regulations and standards established by this article; 
(2)  Is not compatible with existing or permitted uses on abutting sites, in terms of use, building height, setbacks and open spaces, landscaping, drainage, or access and traffic circulation; 
(3)  Potentially create unfavorable effects or impacts on other existing or permitted uses on abutting sites that cannot mitigated by imposed conditions, screening, or other provision of this section; 
(4)  Adversely affects the safety and convenience of vehicular and pedestrian circulation and parking in the vicinity, including traffic reasonably expected to be generated by the proposed use and other uses anticipated considering existing zoning and land uses in the area; 
(5)  Fails to reasonably protect persons and property from infrastructure failure, erosion, flood or water damage, fire, odors, dust, noise, fumes, vibrations, glare, and similar hazards or impacts; 
(6)  Adversely affects emergency access, traffic control, or adjacent properties by inappropriate infrastructure standards, location, access, lighting, or type of signs; or 
(7)  Will be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, or injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity, for reasons specifically articulated by the planning and zoning commission or the city council. 
(Ord. No. 05-101, § III, 10-25-05)  
Sec. 31-804. - PUD development site concept plan required. 
At the time the PUD classification application is submitted, the applicant shall concurrently submit a proposed development site concept plan drawn at a 1" = 100' scale. If the PUD will include existing structures or improvements, as-built drawings to scale are required. The development site concept plan shall show adjacent land uses and include all proposed land uses by lot and in general terms identify the street layout and the developer's intent with regard to easements. The concept plan shall identify, either illustrated on the plan or with attached narrative, the residential density, lot areas, lot widths, lot depth, yard depths and widths (setbacks), building heights, maximum lot coverage, parking areas, public access, landscaping, screening, signage, lighting, common spaces and amenities. The concept plan shall be accompanied with the topography (2-foot contours), existing and proposed drainage patterns, existing and proposed drainage areas, creek buffer zones and special flood hazard areas. If the project is to be completed in phases, the concept plan shall cover the complete project. The boundaries of each phase will be shown and each phase shall meet the minimum acreage requirement. The final plat for a PUD development shall be submitted only after the city council's approval of the PUD classification request. It shall conform to the City of Killeen development regulations as amended and any mitigating conditions specifically approved in the PUD ordinance. The following examples are techniques that may be used within a PUD concept plan: cluster development with a minimum of 15% common open space: projects including a minimum of 10% of common open space, with at least 50% of any proposed community amenities located outside of any FEMA regulatory floodplain area. 
(Ord. No. 05-101, § III, 10-25-05; Ord. No. 14-092 , § I, 12-9-14)  
Sec. 31-805. - Owners' associations. 
If the PUD includes private infrastructure, common areas or facilities that typically are not accepted by the city for maintenance (i.e., fences, private parks, pools, entrance ways, etc.) and will not be dedicated to the city, an owners' association shall be established and shall own and be responsible to provide for operation, repair and maintenance of all common areas, fences, walls, gate equipment, landscaping, and all other common facilities including but not limited to, streets, drives, sidewalks, service areas, and parking areas and structures and common recreational areas that are a part of the planned unit development. The association's articles of incorporation, bylaws, and any covenants and restrictions must be submitted with the application for the PUD classification and approved by the city as a part of the planned unit development. The association documents shall be filed for record in the official land records of Bell County, Texas, in conjunction with the dedication. The documents shall contain the following provisions which shall not be amended without the written consent of the city, nor shall any variances or exceptions be granted thereto: 
(a)  A provision to establish a self-sustaining reserve fund for the operation, repair and maintenance of all private infrastructure and common use facilities. 
(b)  A provision that requires the association to maintain a current repair and maintenance plan for all private infrastructure and common use facilities demonstrating that the association is self-perpetuating and adequately funded to accomplish its maintenance responsibilities. 
(c)  Lot deeds must convey mandatory membership in the association and provide for the payment of dues and assessments required by the association. 
(d)  Provisions shall extend to the city written permission for practical access to public right-of-way, easements and utilities at any time without liability when on official business. This practical access will also extend to the city, without liability, permission to remove obstructions including, but not limited to, any gate, vehicle or any other type of obstacle that precludes the accomplishment of the official business. The association shall be assessed all costs incident to the removal of such obstacles. 
(e)  The association may not be dissolved without the prior written consent of the city and 75% of the total membership of the association. Plans to dissolve the association must contain provisions for the liquidation of association real estate and other property assets and include a document that provides for the future maintenance of any private infrastructure and common use areas. 
(f)  Association documents shall contain language whereby the association, as owner of private infrastructure and common use facilities, agrees to release, indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the city, any governmental entity, and public utility to the extent provided by law for damages to the private infrastructure and common facilities occasioned by the reasonable use of such private infrastructure and common facilities by the city, governmental entity, or public utility; for damages and injury arising from the condition of said private infrastructure and common use facilities; for damages and injury arising out of the use by the city, governmental entity, or public utility of any restricted access or entrance; and for the damages and injury arising out of any use of the planned unit development by the city, governmental entity, or public utilities for such damages and injuries. Such indemnity shall be limited to damages or injury resulting from the city, governmental entity, or public utility use of private infrastructure or common use facilities while such entity is exercising its authority to gain practical access to public right-of-way, easements or utilities in furtherance of official business. 
(Ord. No. 05-101, § III, 10-25-05; Ord. No. 10-003, § VI, 2-9-10)  
Sec. 31-806. - Planned unit development infrastructure. 
The granting of a PUD classification shall not relieve the developer from the responsibility to comply with all other applicable governmental regulations, instructions, codes, resolutions and ordinances of the city except to the extent expressly specified in the ordinance approving the planned unit development classification and the specific modified regulations to be applied to the approved development. The following infrastructure requirements are applied to PUDs to maintain the city's interest in quality development and assure the health, safety and welfare of the public is protected. To this end, variances and exceptions to these requirements shall not be permitted: 
(a)  Utilities. Water, sewer, drainage facilities, signage, and all utilities provided by public utility companies shall be installed in easements or public rights-of-way. Utilities shall be constructed to city standards and such easements, rights-of-way, and utilities shall be completed and dedicated to the city prior to the approval of any permit for the construction of any residential or commercial use structure within the PUD. The city shall require as-built engineering layouts of any previously installed infrastructure. Private infrastructure and any infrastructure which is not recorded on approved construction plans shall be uncovered and inspected. All city regulations relating to water, sewer and drainage infrastructure financing and city/developer cost participation shall apply to planned unit developments. 
(b)  Private streets. A planned unit development may be planned and developed with private streets only as follows: 
(1)  A PUD containing private streets shall not cross an existing or proposed thoroughfare as shown on the most recent thoroughfare plan, as amended. 
(2)  The city shall not participate for any portion of the cost to engineer, construct or maintain private streets. 
(3)  Private streets shall conform to the same standards regulating the engineering and construction as public streets. Construction plans and city engineer approval is required for public streets. Requirements pertaining to inspection and approval of improvements prior to release of lots for development shall apply. Fees charged for these services shall also apply. The city may periodically inspect private streets and require repairs necessary to assure emergency vehicle access. Standards for street naming and addressing shall apply. The term private street shall include any vehicular access way, and will include but is not limited to, terms such as road, alley, passage way, drive, access, lane, firelane, or any such similar term. 
(4)  Private streets must be constructed within a separate lot owned by an owners' association. The lot must conform to the city's right-of-way standards for public streets. An easement covering the street lot shall be granted to the city providing unrestricted use of the property for utilities and the maintenance of same. This right shall extend to all utility providers. The easement shall also provide the city with the right of access for any purpose related to the exercise of a governmental service or function, including but limited to, fire and police protection, inspection and code enforcement. The easement shall permit the city to remove any vehicle or obstacle within the street lot that impairs emergency access. 
(5)  The planning and zoning commission and/or city council may deny any private streets if in the commission's judgment the private street has the potential to: negatively affect traffic circulation on public streets; impair access to property either on-site or off-site to the PUD; impair access to or from public facilities including schools, parks, or libraries; or delay the response time of emergency vehicles. 
(6)  Any private street which has an access control gate or cross arm must have a minimum uninterrupted pavement width of 36 feet at the location of the access control device. If an overhead barrier is used, it must be a minimum of 14 feet above the road surface. All gates and cross arms must be of break-away design. A turn-around with a 50-foot turning radius must be located in front of a restricted access to allow vehicles denied access to safely exit onto public streets. Lots adjacent to controlled access gates shall not be permitted to construct fences of any material which could obscure traffic visibility. The entrance to all private streets must be marked with a sign stating that it is a private road. Restricted access points must either be staffed 24 hours per day or an alternate means must be established to assure access by emergency response vehicles and city and other utility service providers. 
(7)  Property deeds and property owners' association documents shall note that certain city services shall not be provided on private streets. Among the services which will not be provided are routine police patrols, enforcement of traffic parking ordinances, and preparation of accident reports. The city shall not provide public funds for the maintenance or lighting of private streets. All traffic regulatory signs shall conform to the Texas Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(8)  The City of Killeen may upon written request of the owners' association and with a favorable vote of 75% of the association members consider accepting the dedication of and the assumption of maintenance responsibility for private streets and common use areas. However, in no event shall the city be obligated to accept such dedications. Should the city elect to favorably consider the acceptance of the dedication of common use facilities or private streets, the city will inspect properties offered for dedication and assess each member of the owners' association for the expense of needed repairs concurrent with the city's acceptance of the dedication. The city will be the sole judge of required repairs. The city will also require, at the association's expense, any access controlling gates, devices or infrastructure. 
(Ord. No. 05-101, § III, 10-25-05)  
Sec. 31-807. - Planned unit development maintenance. 
Property deeds and association documentation shall include the following property maintenance provisions and property conveyance records shall indicate that such provisions were briefed to, acknowledged, and accepted by the purchaser during the execution of the property transfer transaction. The landowner shall ensure that all common use areas and facilities are perpetually maintained. As such, the landowner shall reserve or secure perpetual access and maintenance easements to all common use areas and facilities for the purpose of inspection, repair and perpetual maintenance. The landowner may assign the respective maintenance and repair obligations to a home owners association, upon formal written consent of the same, or retain the same. The agreement shall provide for maintenance upon the dissolution of the home owners association. The maintenance easement agreements shall be presented to the city in draft form as a part of the PUD application. Following completion of the PUD, the agreement shall be recorded in the real property records of Bell County at the applicant's expense. 
(a)  In the event an owners' association fails to maintain PUD common use areas or facilities or fails to fulfill other conditions associated with the PUD designation, the city will serve written notice on the association, setting forth the manner in which the association has not fulfilled its obligations. Such notice shall include a demand that the deficiencies be cured within a thirty-calendar day period. If the deficiencies are not cured within this period, the city may enter upon the common use area or facility, maintain it, and perform other related duties until such time as the association resumes its responsibilities. The city shall take such corrective action in order to prevent the common use area and facilities from becoming a public nuisance or a health and safety hazard to the public. All costs incurred by the city in carrying out the obligations of the association shall be reimbursed by the association. Should the association fail to reimburse the city within ninety (90) days, the properties within the PUD shall be subject to lien and possible foreclosure of assets including but limited to the maintenance reserve fund required per section 31-804. 
(b)  In the event an owners' association fails to maintain a private street, the city shall serve notice on the association, setting forth in writing the manner in which the association has not fulfilled its obligations. Such notice shall state conditions prejudicial to the health, safety and welfare of the public. Effort to correct such deficiencies shall be initiated within thirty (30) days and such deficiencies shall be cured within ninety (90) days. The city shall deem the failure to cure deficiencies within the cure period as a public hazard. In such instances, the city shall remove security devices and maintain the street to correct the cited deficiencies. All costs incurred by the city in carrying out the obligations of the association shall be reimbursed by the association. Should the association fail to reimburse the city within ninety (90) days, the properties within the PUD shall be subject to lien and possible foreclosure of assets including but not limited to the maintenance reserve fund required per section 31-805. 
(Ord. No. 05-101, § III, 10-25-05; Ord. No. 14-092 , § I, 12-9-14)  
Sec. 31-808. - Waiver and abandonment. 
Once the PUD classification has been approved, the failure to submit a plat within a one-year period or the failure to submit plans for permit review on the development plan within a two-year period after the classification has been approved by the city council shall constitute waiver and abandonment of the PUD classification. Such period may be extended in one-year increments upon favorable recommendation by the planning and zoning commission and approval by the city council. If a plan is abandoned or the property transferred or conveyed prior to development, all negotiated land use and development agreements and regulations which would have applied to the plan shall be considered null and void and the property shall revert to the zoning district that existed prior to the approval of the PUD classification. 
(Ord. No. 05-101, § III, 10-25-05; Ord. No. 14-092 , § I, 12-9-14)  
Secs. 31-809—31-819. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - HERITAGE PRESERVATION 
 
Sec. 31-820. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this division, the following definitions shall apply: 
Alteration shall mean any act or process that changes one or more historic, architectural, or physical features of an area, site, place, and/or structure including, but not limited to the erection, construction or reconstruction of any structure. 
Architectural detail shall pertain to the specific architecture, its features, characteristics, materials, craftsmanship or physical attributes. 
Building shall refer to an edifice, such as a house, barn, church, hotel, or similar construction that is created to shelter any form of human activity. 
Certified local government shall refer to any local government that is certified by the National Park Service (NPS) and the State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO), and is eligible to receive technical and financial assistance to develop and sustain a strong preservation ethic that influences zoning and permit decisions critical to preserving local historic resources. 
Contributing building shall mean a historic building that is at least 50 years old or older that retains a significant amount of its physical integrity and character defining features or that is associated with significant people or events. 
Demolition by neglect shall refer to the willful or negligible acts of a property owner that allow a property to fall into a serious state of disrepair that it becomes necessary to demolish it. 
Design guidelines shall mean a set of guidelines adopted to serve as a visual and graphic aid in describing acceptable alterations for designated properties. 
Design review shall refer to the decision-making process conducted by the heritage preservation board or an appointed heritage preservation officer that is guided by established terms. 
Determination of significance shall refer to the procedures provided herein for identifying buildings, structures, sites, or districts eligible for designation as historic landmarks or districts under the standards of review provided in this division. 
Heritage preservation board (HPB or board) shall mean the five member board established in this division and appointed by city council. 
Heritage preservation officer (HPO) shall mean a qualified staff person who has professional experience in historic preservation and/or rehabilitation-type construction and who is appointed by the city council to administer this division. 
Historic designation shall refer to the act or process in which the city formally identifies and recognizes historic properties. 
Historic district shall mean any neighborhood or region designated by the city council as an area that possesses a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures, or objects united historically or aesthetically by plan or physical development. 
Historic property shall refer to a site, building, structure, or object important in American history, architecture, engineering, archeology, or culture at the national, state, or local level. 
Historic landmark shall refer to a historic property that has been formally designated by the city as having historical importance. 
Historic rehabilitation shall mean the process of returning a property to a state of utility, through repair or alteration, which makes possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions and features of the property which are significant to its historic, architectural, and cultural values. 
Integrity shall mean the authenticity of a property's historic identity, evidenced by survival of physical characteristics that existed during the property's historic or prehistoric period. 
Inventory shall mean a list of historic properties that have been identified and evaluated as meeting specified criteria of significance. 
Object is a term used to distinguish certain constructions from buildings and/or structures that are primarily artistic in nature or are relatively small in scale and simply constructed. Although it may be, by nature or design, movable, an object is associated with a specific setting or environment, such as statuary in a designed landscape. 
Order of demolition shall mean an order issued by the city indicating approval of plans for demolition of a designated landmark or property within a designated district. 
Order of design compliance shall mean an order issued by the city indicating approval of plans for alteration, construction, or removal affecting a designated landmark or property within a designated district. 
Ordinary maintenance shall mean repair of any exterior or architectural feature of a landmark or property within a historic district which does not involve a change to the architectural or historic value, style or general design. In-kind replacement or repair is included in this definition of ordinary maintenance. 
Owner shall mean the individual, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity in whom is vested the ownership, dominion, or title of property and who is responsible for payment of ad valorem taxes on that property; including a lessor or lessee if responsible for payment of ad valorem taxes. 
Preservation shall refer to the act or process of applying measures to sustain the existing form, integrity, and material of a building or structure, and the existing form and vegetative cover of a site. It may include initial stabilization work, where necessary, as well as ongoing maintenance of the historic building materials. 
Preservationist shall mean someone with experience, education or training in the field of preservation. 
Rehabilitation shall mean the act or process of returning a property to a state of utility through repair or alteration which makes possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions or features of the property which are significant to its historical, architectural, and cultural values. 
Secretary of the Interior's standards for rehabilitation shall refer to federal standards established by the US Department of the Interior regarding the preferred treatment of historic properties. 
Significant shall be a term to describe buildings, structures, objects, or sites which substantially comply with the landmark or district standards of review found in section 31-830 of this division. 
Site is the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historic occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself possesses historical, cultural, or archeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. 
Structure is a term used to distinguish specific types of functional constructions from buildings that are usually made for purposes other than creating shelter. 
(Ord. No. 08-047, § I, 6-24-08)  
Sec. 31-821. - Purpose. 
The city hereby declares that as a matter of public policy the protection, enhancement, rehabilitation, preservation and use of historic landmarks is a public necessity and is required in the interest of culture, prosperity, education and the general welfare of the people. The purpose of this division is to: 
A.  Protect, enhance, and perpetuate historic landmarks and districts which represent distinctive elements of the city's unique historic, architectural, and cultural heritage; 
B.  Foster civic pride in the history and accomplishments of the past; 
C.  Protect and enhance the city's attractiveness to visitors and the support and stimulus to the economy thereby provided; 
D.  Insure the harmonious, orderly and efficient growth and development of the city; 
E.  Promote economic prosperity and welfare of the community by encouraging the most appropriate use of such property within the city; and 
F.  Encourage stabilization, rehabilitation, restoration, and improvements of property values. 
(Ord. No. 08-047, § I, 6-24-08)  
Sec. 31-822. - Heritage preservation board. 
There is hereby created a board to be known as the Killeen heritage preservation board (HPB). The board shall consist of five (5) members to be appointed by city council, plus one ex-officio member from the planning and zoning commission. Members of the HPB shall have a demonstrated interest, competence or knowledge in historic preservation and/or rehabilitation. Board members shall serve for a term of three (3) years, with the exception of the initial term when three (3) members shall serve for two (2) years and two (2) members shall serve for three (3) years. No member may serve more than two (2) consecutive terms. 
A.  The city council shall appoint HPB members to fill vacancies that might arise and such appointments shall be to the end of the vacating member's term. 
B.  It is the first priority of the city council that the HPB have technical representation in historic preservation. Therefore, when vacancies occur and if appropriate, it shall be the first consideration of the city council to ensure that there is a licensed architect, preservationist, or other licensed professional having substantial experience in rehabilitation-type construction serving on the HPB, and secondly, that there is representation from the Killeen area heritage association. 
C.  In addition, the HPB should include members with the following qualifications, or representing the following interests: 
1.  A licensed real estate broker. 
2.  A property owner or non owner tenant of any historic district created by this or any subsequent ordinance demonstrating interest and knowledge of historic preservation. 
3.  A member appointed at large from the city with demonstrated interest and knowledge of historic preservation. 
(Ord. No. 08-047, § I, 6-24-08)  
Sec. 31-823. - Organization of the heritage preservation board. 
A.  Chairman. The HPB shall elect one of its members to serve as chairman for a term of one (1) year. The chairman may be elected to serve for one (1) consecutive additional term, but not for more than two (2) successive terms. If the chairman is absent from any meeting where a quorum would otherwise exist, the members may appoint a chairman pro tem to act as chairman solely for that meeting. 
B.  Quorum. No business shall be conducted without a quorum at the meeting. A quorum shall exist when the meeting is attended by three (3) of the appointed members, including the chairman or chairman pro tem. The ex-officio member shall not be counted towards establishing a quorum. Meetings shall be held in conformance with the Texas open meetings act. 
C.  Voting. All actions of the HPB shall be represented by a vote of the membership. A simple majority of the members present at the meeting in which action is taken shall approve any action taken. The ex-officio member shall not be a voting member of the HPB. The chairman may vote at the meetings. 
(Ord. No. 08-047, § I, 6-24-08)  
Sec. 31-824. - Powers of the heritage preservation board. 
The powers of the HPB are: 
A.  To preserve diverse and harmonious architectural styles and design preferences reflecting phases of the city's history, and to encourage complimentary, contemporary design and construction through the creation of comprehensive design guidelines, and update as necessary; 
B.  To protect and enhance the city's historic appeal to tourists and visitors; 
C.  To identify as early as possible and resolve conflicts between the preservation of cultural resources and alternative land uses; 
D.  To provide input to the city council towards safeguarding the heritage of the city through the protection of its historic resources, buildings, structures, objects, cultural resources or sites of significance; 
E.  To promote the private and public use of buildings of significance and contributing buildings, structures, sites/areas or objects; 
F.  To make recommendations to staff, the planning & zoning commission and the city council on designations, policies and ordinances that may encourage historic preservation; 
G.  To communicate and promote the benefits of historic preservation for education, prosperity, and general welfare of the people; 
H.  To provide input to staff, the planning & zoning commission , and the city council on matters concerning the overall development of the city's historic preservation program; 
I.  To make recommendations to the city council on the development of, and to administer, all city-sponsored preservation incentive programs; 
J.  To review and take action on all order of demolition applications; 
K.  To review and take action on all order of design compliance applications, upon request of the property owner or occupant, based on compliance with any adopted historic district design guidelines and the Secretary of the Interior's standards for rehabilitation; 
L.  To review and take action on all order of design compliance applications where the HPO requires direction on design policy, or if unable to render a determine compliance with any adopted historic district design guidelines and Secretary of the Interior's standards for rehabilitation; 
M.  To review and take action on all appeals or decisions of the HPO regarding order of design compliance applications based on compliance with the any adopted historic district design guidelines and the Secretary of the Interior's standards for rehabilitation; 
N.  To review and take action on all determinations of historic landmarks or districts; 
O.  Participate in the design review of any city-owned projects located within any designated historic district; 
P.  Recommend to the city council the purchase of interests in property for purposes of preserving the city's cultural resources; 
Q.  Investigate and report to the city council on the use of federal, state, local, or private funding sources and mechanisms available to promote the preservation of the city's cultural resources; 
R.  Recommend to the planning and zoning commission and the city council changes to the code of ordinances to reinforce the purpose of historic preservation; 
S.  Provide advice and guidance on request of the property owner or occupant on the construction, restoration, alteration, decoration, landscaping, or maintenance of any historic resource or property within a historic district, or neighboring property within a two (2) block radius of a historic district; and 
T.  To perform any other functions related to the mission of the board as requested by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 08-047, § I, 6-24-08)  
Sec. 31-825. - Limitations of the heritage preservation board. 
The HPB has no authority to waive or increase any requirement of any ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 08-047, § I, 6-24-08)  
Sec. 31-826. - Appointment of heritage preservation officer. 
The city manager shall appoint a qualified staff member who has professional experience in historic preservation and/or rehabilitation-type construction to serve as heritage preservation officer (HPO). This officer shall administer this division and advise the board on matters submitted to it. The HPO may issue orders of design compliance for those applications that meet compliance with the historic district design guidelines and the Secretary of the Interior's standards for rehabilitation and may submit applications for and make recommendations on determinations of significance. In addition to serving as the staff representative to the HPB, the HPO is responsible for providing the board with a monthly report on all HPO activities; for providing regular updates to city council on HPO and board activities; and for coordinating the city's preservation activities with those of state and federal agencies and with local, state, and national nonprofit preservation organizations. 
(Ord. No. 08-047, § I, 6-24-08)  
Sec. 31-827. - Design guidelines. 
The HPB shall promulgate and update as necessary design guidelines for use in a historic district. These guidelines shall, upon adoption by resolution of the city council, be used by the HPO and HPB in reviewing all orders of design compliance applications. The design guidelines shall apply to all properties located within the historic district and shall address the rehabilitation of existing buildings, additions to existing buildings, and the construction of new buildings. From time to time, the HPB may recommend changes to the design guidelines to the city council, provided that no changes in the guidelines shall take effect until adopted by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 08-047, § I, 6-24-08)  
Sec. 31-828. - Order of design compliance. 
A.  No person or entity shall construct, reconstruct, significantly alter, remove or demolish any exterior architectural detail of a designated historic landmark or any property within the historic district without the review and approval of an order of design compliance application by the HPO and/or HPB prior to submitting an application for a building permit. 
B.  Activities involving routine and ordinary maintenance, in-kind repair or replacement which does not involve a change to the architectural or historic value, style or general design shall not require the review and approval of an order of design compliance application. 
C.  Administrative review. A current copy of the proposed construction documents and an order of design compliance application shall be filed with the planning department. Upon receipt of a complete application, the HPO shall review the application within forty-five (45) days for compliance with the city's adopted design guidelines and the Secretary of the Interior's standards for rehabilitation. All guidelines and review criteria shall be made available to the property owners of historic landmarks or property owners within the city upon request. 
1.  Notice. Within five (5) days of receipt of an order of design compliance application, notice of the application shall be posted on the property for a period of ten (10) days. A written notice of the application shall also be provided to owners of adjoining property establishing a ten (10) day period in which written comments may be submitted to the HPO. 
2.  Decision. At the end of the notice period, if approved, the HPO shall issue an order of design compliance consisting of written findings, conclusions of law, and conditions of approval, if any, supporting the decision, and shall provide the owner and/or applicant and anyone submitting written comments with a copy and forward its decision to the permits and inspections department. Any specific conditions of approval as identified by the HPO shall be attached to the construction documents prior to the issuance of any building permits. No subsequent changes shall be made to the approved application without the review and approval of the HPO. An applicant shall have six (6) months from the date of issuance of an order of design compliance to secure a building permit for the specified improvements, or it shall become null and void. 
If the HPO finds the proposed work will adversely affect or destroy a significant architectural detail or historical feature of the exterior of the designated historic landmark or building within a designated district or is inconsistent with the Secretary of the Interior's standards for rehabilitation or adopted design guidelines, the HPO shall advise the applicant and any written commenter of the disapproval of the application and of any changes to the application which are necessary for approval of same. 
An application, once denied an order of design compliance, may not be resubmitted without incorporating changes to the application which are necessary for approval of the same. 
3.  If no action has been taken by the HPO within forty-five (45) days of original receipt by the HPO, an order of design compliance shall be deemed issued by the HPO, and the HPO shall so advise the applicant. 
4.  Appeal. The applicant or any persons adversely affected by any determination of the HPO may appeal the decision to the HPB. Appeal requests shall be on forms as prescribed by the city and shall be filed with the planning department within ten (10) days of the HPO's decision, and scheduled for the next available regularly scheduled HPB public hearing. Notice of the appeal shall be posted on the property for a period of ten (10) days upon receipt of a formal appeal request. A written notice of the public hearing for the appeal request shall also provided to all parties who received mailed notice for the original HPO preliminary determination. Appeals shall be considered only on the record made before the HPO. 
D.  HPB review. A current copy of the proposed construction documents and an order of design compliance application shall be filed with the planning department. Any applicant may request a formal review by the HPB. The HPO may also forward any order of design compliance application to the HPB for review and approval when direction on design policy is needed, or if unable to determine compliance with historic district design guidelines and the Secretary of the Interior's standards for rehabilitation. Within forty-five (45) days upon receipt of a complete application and proper notice, the application shall be scheduled for review by the HPB at the next regularly scheduled public hearing for compliance with the city's adopted design guidelines and the Secretary of the Interior's standards for rehabilitation. All guidelines, review criteria and the formal written report to the HPB shall be made available to the property owner prior to the hearing. 
1.  Notice. Notice of the application shall be posted on the property for a minimum period of fourteen (14) days prior to the scheduled hearing. A written notice of the HPB hearing shall also be mailed to all property owners within at least one hundred (100) feet of the subject property. A published notice of the scheduled hearing shall also be made once a minimum of fourteen (14) days prior to the hearing. 
2.  Decision. If approved, the HPB shall issue an order of design compliance consisting of written findings, conclusions of law, and conditions of approval, if any, supporting the decision, and shall provide the owner and/or applicant with a copy and forward its decision and copy of the submitted construction documents to the permits and inspections department. Any specific conditions of approval as identified by the HPB shall be attached to the construction documents prior to the issuance of any building permits. No subsequent changes shall be made to the approved application without the review and approval of the HPO or HPB. An applicant shall have six months from the date of issuance of an order of design compliance to secure a building permit for the specified improvements, or it shall become null and void. 
If the HPB finds the proposed work will adversely affect or destroy a significant architectural detail or historical feature of the exterior of the designated historic landmark or building within a designated district or is inconsistent with the Secretary of the Interior's standards for rehabilitation or any adopted design guidelines, the HPB shall advise the applicant of the disapproval of the application and of any changes to the application which are necessary to approval of same. 
An application, once denied an order of design compliance, may not be resubmitted without incorporating changes to the application which are necessary for approval of the same. 
3.  If no action has been taken by the board within forty-five (45) days of original receipt by the board, an order of design compliance shall be deemed issued by the board, and the HPO shall so advise the applicant. 
E.  Appeal. The applicant or any persons adversely affected by any determination of the HPB may appeal the decision to the city council. Appeal requests shall be on forms as prescribed by the city and shall be filed with the city manager's office within ten (10) days of the HPB's decision, and scheduled for the next available regularly scheduled city council meeting. Notice of the appeal shall be posted on the property for a period of ten (10) days upon receipt of a formal appeal request. A written notice of the public hearing for the appeal request shall also be mailed to all property owners within one hundred (100) feet of the subject property. Appeals shall be considered only on the record made before the HPB and will require a ¾ majority vote of the city council to overturn an HPB decision. 
(Ord. No. 08-047, § I, 6-24-08)  
Sec. 31-829. - Determination of significance. 
Buildings, structures, sites or districts within the city which substantially comply with the standards of review found in this section may be determined to be significant by the HPB and designated as a historic landmark or district. 
The HPO or any owner of a building, structure, or site may apply for a hearing before the HPB for a determination of significance of said property. Recommendations on all determinations of significance shall be made by the HPO to the HPB. The application shall be on forms as prescribed by the city and shall be filed with the planning department. Before a hearing of determination of significance, a determination of significance application must be completed by the property owner or by the HPO. The HPO shall schedule a hearing for the next available meeting of the HPB. At the hearing, the HPO, applicant, owners, interested parties, and technical experts may present testimony or documentary evidence which will become part of a record regarding historic, architectural, or cultural importance of the proposed historic district. 
A.  Landmarks. 
1.  Standards for review. Recommendations on all determinations of significance shall be made by the HPO to the HPB. At the hearing, the HPB shall evaluate whether the building, structure or site demonstrates a quality of significance in local, regional, state or national history, architecture, archaeology, engineering or culture, and integrity of location, design, setting, materials, and workmanship and if the property meets substantial compliance with the following criteria: 
a.  The building, structure or site is at least fifty (50) years old, or has achieved significance within the past fifty (50) years if the property is exceptional importance to the community; and/or 
b.  The building, structure or site is associated with events or lives of persons significant to the city's past; and/or 
c.  The building, structure or site embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method of construction or that represent the work of a master; and/or 
d.  The architectural or historical value or significance of the building, structure or site contributes to the historic value of the property and surrounding area; and/or 
e.  The relation of historic or architectural features found on the building, structure or site to other such features within the surrounding area; and/or 
f.  Any other factors, including aesthetic, which may be relevant to the historical or architectural aspects of the building, structure or site; and/or 
g.  Recognition as an existing recorded Texas historic landmark, national historic landmark, state archeological landmark, or listing on the national register of historic places. 
2.  Notice. Notice of the application shall be posted on the property for a period of fourteen (14) days prior to the scheduled hearing. A written notice of the HPB hearing shall also be provided to property owners of proposed historic landmarks and adjoining property owners. A published notice of the scheduled hearing shall also be made once a minimum of fourteen (14) days prior to the hearing. 
B.  Districts. 
1.  Standards for review. Recommendations on all determinations of significance shall be made by the HPO to the HPB. At the hearing, the HPB shall evaluate whether the district contains a significant concentration of sites, buildings or structures that are united historically or aesthetically by plan or physical development. The district must also demonstrate a quality of significance in local, regional, state or national history, and must have substantial compliance with the following criteria: 
a.  The proposed district contains properties and an environmental setting which meet one or more of the criteria for designation of a landmark; and 
b.  The proposed district constitutes a distinct section of the city. 
2.  Notice. A written notice of the HPB hearing shall also be provided to all property owners within a proposed historic district and shall also be mailed to all property owners within at least one hundred (100) feet of the proposed district. A published notice of the scheduled hearing shall also be made once a minimum of fourteen (14) days prior to the hearing. 
C.  Interim protection. A building, structure or site that is under review by the HPB for a formal determination of significance shall be protected by and subject to all of the provisions of this code governing demolition and minimum maintenance standards until a final decision on significance by the HPB becomes effective. 
D.  Decision. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the decision of the HPB. Notification shall include the written findings and conclusions of law, if any, supporting the decision of the HPB. Upon final recommendation of the board, the proposed historic designation shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning commission shall give notice and conduct its hearing on the proposed designation in the same manner and according to the same procedures as specifically provided in §211.007c of the Texas Local Government Code, to include notification of surrounding property owners. The city council shall schedule a hearing, on the planning and zoning commission's recommendation, at its next available meeting. The city council shall give notice, follow the publication procedure, hold a hearing and make a final determination in the same manner as provided in §211.007c of the Texas Local Government Code. 
E.  Action upon designation. Upon the designation of any a building, object, site, structure or district as a historic landmark or historic district, the city council shall cause the designation to be in the official public records of real property of Bell county as well as the official zoning maps of the city. All zoning maps should indicate the designated landmarks with an appropriate mark. Planning staff shall also provide a copy of the board's written findings to the owner and/or applicant. 
F.  Removal from list of historically significant properties. If the HPB finds that the building, structure or site is no longer significant based on a lack of substantial compliance with the criteria pursuant to this section, it shall immediately be removed from the list of historically significant properties or any other applicable records. The HPB shall forward a copy of its written findings to the owner and/or applicant. 
(Ord. No. 08-047, § I, 6-24-08)  
Sec. 31-830. - Demolition. 
A.  Intent. It is the intent of this and succeeding sections to preserve the historic and architectural resources of the city, through limitations on demolition and removal of historic buildings, structures and sites to the extent it is economically feasible, practical and necessary. The demolition or removal of historic buildings, structures and sites in the city diminishes the character of the city's historic district and it is strongly discouraged. Instead, the city recommends and supports preservation, rehabilitation, and relocation within the historic district. It is recognized, however, that structural deterioration, economic hardship and other factors not entirely within the control of the property owner may result in the necessary demolition or removal of a historic building, structure or site. 
Permit applications for demolition of any building, structure or site, including secondary buildings and landscape features, within the city shall be initially reviewed by the HPO and forwarded with a recommendation to the permits and inspections department. If the property is determined by the HPO to be a contributing building or is potentially significant, the applicant shall be required to apply for a hearing before the HPB for a determination of significance pursuant to section 31-829 herein, prior to the application for any building permit. 
B.  Determination of insignificance. If upon review, the HPB concludes that the building, structure or site sought to be demolished or removed is not a significant historic property, the applicant may apply for a demolition permit from the permits and inspections department. 
C.  Determination of significance. If upon review, the HPB concludes that the building, structure or site sought to be demolished or removed does possess significance, the owner shall be required to submit an order of economic hardship application pursuant to section 31-831. 
D.  Removal or repair of hazardous buildings. If the building official determines a historic landmark or property located within the historic district to be structurally unsound, and a hazardous or dangerous building, pursuant to chapter 8, article V, of the code of ordinances, the building official may order its removal or repair. The building official shall be required to provide written notice to the HPB of such action. 
1.  The provisions contained in section 214.00111 of the Texas Local Government Code provide additional authority to the city to preserve substandard historic buildings, and are effective immediately upon designation as a certified local government by the U.S. Department of the Interior, national park service and Texas state historic preservation officer as provided by 16 U.S.C.A. section 470 et seq.; and 
2.  The demolition or removal of a historic landmark or property located within a historic district under this section is subject to the penalties found in section 31-834 herein. 
E.  Requirement for stay of demolition. In the absence of a finding either of insignificance or of hazardous building, the request for demolition or removal shall be stayed for ninety (90) days during which time the owner shall allow the city to post a sign stating that the property is "subject to demolition." Said sign shall be at least three feet by two feet (3' X 2'), readable from a point of public access and state that more information may be obtained from the permits and inspections department for the duration of the stay. In addition, the owner shall conduct in good faith with the city, local preservation organizations and interested parties a diligent effort to seek an alternative that will result in the rehabilitation of the historic property. Negotiations may include, but is not limited to, such actions to utilize various preservation incentive programs, sell or lease the historic property, or facilitate proceedings for the city to acquire the property under its power of eminent domain, if appropriate and financially possible. If negotiations are successful, the request for demolition shall be considered withdrawn and all associated applications closed. 
F.  At the end of the ninety (90) days, if prior negotiations are unsuccessful and the request for demolition stands, the owner must submit a determination of economic hardship application. 
(Ord. No. 08-047, § I, 6-24-08)  
Sec. 31-831. - Determination of economic hardship. 
Any owner of a historic property requesting demolition may commence the economic hardship process by applying for a hearing before the HPB for a determination of economic hardship for said property. The application shall be on forms as prescribed by the city and shall be filed with the planning department. Upon receipt of a complete determination of economic hardship application, the HPO shall schedule a hearing on the HPB agenda within forty-five (45) days. At the hearing, the applicant shall have an opportunity to present testimony and evidence to demonstrate economic hardship. 
A.  In order to sustain a claim of unreasonable economic hardship due to the effect of this ordinance, the owner must prove that: 
1.  The subject historic property is incapable of earning a reasonable rate of return, regardless of whether the return represents the most profitable return possible; and 
2.  The subject historic property cannot be repaired or rehabilitated for any other beneficial use, whether by the current owner or by a purchaser, which would result in a reasonable return; and 
3.  Efforts to find a purchaser interested in acquiring the property and preserving it have failed. 
B.  Standards for review. The city shall adopt by resolution separate standards for investment for income producing and non-income producing properties, as recommended by the HPB. Non-income properties shall consist of owner occupied single-family dwellings and non-income producing institutional properties. All standards for review shall be made available to the owner prior to the hearing. The information required by the city may include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  purchase date, price and financing arrangements; 
2.  current market value; 
3.  form of ownership; 
4.  type of occupancy; 
5.  cost estimates of demolition and post-demolition plans for development; 
6.  maintenance and operating costs; 
7.  inspection report by licensed architect or structural engineer having experience working with historic properties; 
8.  costs and engineering feasibility for rehabilitation; 
9.  property tax information; 
10.  rental rates and gross income from the property. 
The HPB, upon review of the determination of economic hardship application, may request additional information as deemed appropriate. 
C.  Conduct of owner excluded. Demonstration of economic hardship by the owner shall not be based on conditions resulting from: 
1.  Evidence of demolition by neglect, or other willful and negligent acts by the owner; 
2.  Purchasing the property for substantially more than market value at the time of purchase; 
3.  Failure to perform normal maintenance and repairs; 
4.  Failure to diligently solicit and retain tenants; or 
5.  Failure to provide normal tenant improvements. 
D.  Notice. Notice of the application shall be posted on the property for a period of thirty (30) days prior to the scheduled hearing. A written notice of the HPB hearing shall also be mailed to adjoining property owners. A published notice of the scheduled hearing shall also be made once a minimum of at least fourteen (14) days prior to the hearing. 
E.  Interim protection. A historic property that is under review by the HPB for a formal determination of economic hardship shall be temporarily stabilized and secured by order of the building official, and at cost of the owner. The property shall be protected by and subject to all of the provisions of this code governing demolition until a final decision on significance by the HPB becomes effective. 
F.  Decision. Upon review of the application, the HPB may determine that unreasonable economic hardship exists and take action to approve or approve with modifications if the following conditions exist: 
1.  For income producing historic properties, the building, structure or site cannot be feasibly used or rented at a reasonable rate of return in its present condition or if rehabilitated and denial of the application would deprive the owner of all reasonable use of the property; or 
2.  For non-income producing historic properties, the building, structure or site has no beneficial use as a residential dwelling or for an institutional use in its present condition or if rehabilitated, and denial of the application would deprive the owner of all reasonable use of the property; and 
3.  The historic property cannot be feasibly moved or relocated. 
G.  Approval. If the HPB approves the application, the owner may apply for a demolition permit with the permits and inspections department and proceed to demolish the subject property in compliance with other regulations as they may apply. The historic property shall immediately be removed from the city's inventory of historic properties, the official public records of real property of Bell county and the official zoning maps of the city. HPO shall also provide a copy of the board's written findings to the owner. 
H.  The city may, as a condition of approval, require the owner, prior to demolition to provide the HPO with documentation of the demolished historic property according to the standards of the Historic American Building Survey (HABS). Such documentation may include photographs, floor plans, measured drawings, an archeological survey or other information as specified. The city may also require the owner to incorporate an appropriate memorialization of the building, structure or site, such as a photo display or plaque, into the proposed replacement project of the property. Approval of an economic hardship application shall be valid for one (1) year from the hearing date of the HPB's final decision. 
I.  Denial. If the HPB denies the application, the owner shall not demolish the historic property, and may not re-apply for an economic hardship application for a period of three (3) years from the hearing date of the HPB's final decision unless substantial changes in circumstances have occurred other than re-sale of the property or those caused by the negligence or intentional acts of the owner. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to stabilize and maintain the property so as not to create a structurally unsound, hazardous, or dangerous building, as identified in chapter 8, article V of the city's code of ordinances. The city may continue to provide the owner with information regarding financial assistance for the necessary rehabilitation or repair work, as it becomes available. 
J.  Appeal. The applicant or any persons adversely affected by any decision of the HPB may appeal the decision to the city council. Appeal requests shall be on forms as prescribed by the city and shall be filed with the city manager's office within ten (10) days of the HPB's decision, and scheduled for the next available regularly scheduled city council meeting. The appeal may only allege that the HPB's decision was arbitrary, capricious, or illegal. Notice of the appeal shall be posted on the property for a period of ten (10) days upon receipt of a formal appeal request. A written notice of the public hearing for the appeal request shall also be mailed to all property owners within one hundred (100) feet of the subject property. Appeals shall be considered only on the record made before the HPB and will require a ¾ majority vote of the city council to overturn an HPB decision. 
(Ord. No. 08-047, § I, 6-24-08)  
Sec. 31-832. - Enforcement. 
All work pursuant to an order of design compliance issued under this division shall conform to any requirements included therein. It shall be the duty of the building official or his designee to inspect periodically any such work to assure compliance. In the event work is not being performed in accordance with the order of design compliance or upon notification of such fact by the board and verification by the permits and inspections department, the permits and inspections department shall issue a stop work order and all work shall immediately cease. No further work shall be undertaken on the project as long as a stop work order is in effect. 
(Ord. No. 08-047, § I, 6-24-08)  
Sec. 31-833. - Demolition by neglect. 
No owner or person with an interest in real property designated as a landmark or included within a historic district shall permit the property to fall into a serious state of disrepair so as to result in the deterioration of an exterior architectural feature which would, in the judgment of the board produce a detrimental effect upon the character of the historic district as a whole or the life and character of the property itself. Examples of demolition by neglect shall include but not be limited to the following: 
1.  Failure to maintain protective treatment to exterior (walls no longer weatherproof due to peeling paint, missing siding, loose joints); 
2.  Structural members deteriorated; 
3.  Foundation walls not plumb, cracked; 
4.  Exterior walls have holes, are cracked, rotted and deteriorated; 
5.  Roof and drainage leaks; 
6.  Architectural (decorative features) not being maintained in good repair; 
7.  Overhang extensions not being maintained in good repair; 
8.  Stairways not in good repair; 
9.  Windows, skylight, door frames not maintained in good condition and weather tight; and 
10.  Exterior doors not maintained in good condition. 
(Ord. No. 08-047, § I, 6-24-08)  
Sec. 31-834. - Penalty. 
A.  It shall be unlawful to construct, reconstruct, significantly alter, restore or demolish any building or structure designated as a landmark or in a designated historic district in violation of the provisions of this division. The city, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful construction, reconstruction, significant alteration or demolition; to restrain, correct or abate such violation; or to prevent any illegal act, business, or maintenance in and about such premises, including acquisition of the property. 
B.  Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this division shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) or more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Such remedy under this section is in addition to the abatement restitution. 
(Ord. No. 08-047, § I, 6-24-08)  
Secs. 31-835—31-849. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - FENCES AND WALLS 
 
Sec. 31-850. - Purpose. 
The purposes of this division are to regulate the placement, construction, erection, enlargement, and alteration of all fences within the boundaries of the city in order to provide a practical safeguarding of life, health, and property from hazards that may arise from improper placement, construction, erection, enlargement or alteration of such installations and to preserve and enhance property values that may be adversely affected by the same. 
(Ord. No. 10-058, § I, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 31-851. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adjacent finished grade shall mean the elevation of the finished ground surface at the proposed fence location. 
Fence shall mean any barrier, constructed of stone, brick, pierced brick or block, chain-link, PVC, wood, metal, or similar material, that is greater than twenty-four (24) inches in height as measured from adjacent grade. Other materials not listed shall be approved in advance by the executive director of planning and development services or his/her designee. 
Guy wire shall mean a tensioned cable designed to add stability to a fence. 
(Ord. No. 10-058, § I, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 19-007 , § I, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 31-852. - Compliance with other provisions. 
Fences shall conform to the requirements of the city's code of ordinances, and nothing in this division shall be construed as permitting construction of a fence which would violate any provisions of the code, including the zoning ordinance or section 28-241, visibility at intersections, as the same now exists or may be hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 10-058, § I, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 19-007 , § I, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 31-853. - Permit required; application; fee. 
A building permit is required to erect new fence or move, repair, or replace an existing fence. A fence permit must be obtained from the building inspections division prior to installation of or replacement of a fence. The information required for such permit includes the height, materials, location of the fence, distances from each structure on the property, and lot size. Contractors are required to be properly registered with the city and may apply for a permit with the property owner's authorization. 
(Ord. No. 10-058, § I, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 19-007 , § I, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 31-854. - Exceptions to permit requirement. 
Repair of an existing fence with like materials of original construction and with no change to the original design or placement shall be allowed without a permit for any improvement that does not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the material area of the original fence (measured as length times width along the outside face of the fence) during a twelve-month period. 
(Ord. No. 10-958, § I, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 19-007 , § I, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 31-855. - Security or barbed-wire fences. 
Barbed-wire, fencing topped with broken glass, concertina wire, sharp objects, or electric fencing shall not be allowed in residential, "B-DC," "HOD," or "B-1" zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 10-958, § I, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 19-007 , § I, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 31-856. - Design, Height and Location. 
The smooth, finished side of the fence shall face outward, with the support posts on the inside, for property abutting public right-of-way. The height of the fence shall be the vertical distance between the finished grade and the top of the fence. In those instances where fences are attached or constructed on top of stem walls or retaining walls, the calculation of height shall include the combined fence and wall structure as measured from the finished grade. In those instances where there is a difference in surface elevation between two adjoining properties, then the fence on the adjacent property with the lower elevation shall not exceed the maximum allowable height plus the difference in surface elevation between the adjoining yard areas at the property line, but in no instance shall it measure more than eight (8) feet in vertical height along the property line of the back or side yard upon which the proposed fence is to be located. 
(a)  Front yard (applies to residential uses and "B-1" zoning district). The maximum height of a fence in a front yard shall be four (4) feet overall height as measured from the finished grade, except that wrought iron fences may not exceed six (6) feet overall height as measured from the finished grade. The height requirement shall extend horizontally from the front property line to the required front yard setback. Front yard fences are not permitted in the right-of-way or sight distance triangle areas. Fence columns shall not exceed twelve (12) inches above overall height of fence. 
(b)  Side and rear yard (applies to residential uses and "B-1" zoning district). The maximum height of a fence in a side or rear yard shall be eight (8) feet as measured from the finished grade. Side or rear yard fences that exceed six (6) feet shall not be constructed of chainlink. 
(Ord. No. 10-958, § I, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 19-007 , § I, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 31-857. - Visibility triangle at intersections. 
Fences on property that is at the intersection of two streets must not encroach within any visibility triangle. The visibility triangle shall mean a triangle sight area, at all intersections, which shall include that portion of public right-of-way and any corner lot within the adjacent curb lines and a diagonal line intersecting such curb lines at points thirty-five (35) feet back from their intersection (such curb lines being extended if necessary to determine the intersection point). This sight distance triangle must be kept free of fences that would obstruct the motorist's views of oncoming traffic in accordance with Killeen code of ordinances section 28-241. 
(Ord. No. 10-958, § I, 9-28-10)  
Sec. 31-858. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-007 , § I, adopted Feb. 26, 2019, repealed § 31-858, which pertained to location in publicly dedicated utility easement. and derived from Ord. No. 10-958, § I, adopted Sept. 28, 2010.  
Sec. 31-859. - Gates. 
Any gate opening that is constructed in conjunction with a fence must be at least three (3) feet in width to allow for passage of emergency personnel and equipment. An outward swinging front yard gate shall not lock in place if it extends across the property line or into public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 10-958, § I, 9-28-10)  
Chapter 32 - MUNICIPAL DRAINAGE UTILITY SYSTEM  
ARTICLE I. - MUNICIPAL DRAINAGE UTILITY SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 32-1. - Creation of municipal drainage utility. 
In the interest of public health and safety and a more efficient and economic operation of drainage facilities of the city, a municipality drainage utility system is created, which shall be a public utility. The rules and provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 552, subch. C, as amended, which is adopted and incorporated into this chapter by reference, and any other provisions of this Code relating to drainage shall govern the operation of the utility. Nothing in this section shall be construed to restrict the city council's ability to make other rules or policies governing the operation of the utility. The city shall have full authority to operate such municipal drainage utility system. Drainage service will be offered on nondiscriminatory, reasonable and equitable terms within the service area. 
(Ord. No. 01-50, § II, 10-9-01; Ord. No. 09-014, § I, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 32-2. - Dedication of assets to drainage utility system. 
Existing drainage facilities, municipal real, personal, or mixed property, materials and supplies are incorporated in the drainage utility as permitted by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 552.046, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 01-51, § I, 10-9-01; Ord. No. 09-014, § I, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 32-3. - Drainage service area. 
The service area for the drainage utility fund shall include the corporate limits of the City of Killeen, as those corporate limits are altered from time to time in accordance with state law and the Charter and ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 01-51, § I, 10-9-01)  
Sec. 32-4. - Creation of drainage utility fund. 
A separate fund, within the city's fund structure, shall be created as of the effective date of the ordinance, known as the drainage utility fund, for the purpose of identifying and controlling all revenues and expenses attributable to municipal drainage services. All drainage fees collected by the city after the effective date of this ordinance and such other monies as may be available by or to the city for the purpose of drainage shall be deposited in the drainage utility fund. Such drainage revenues shall be used for the purpose of the creation, operation, planning, engineering, inspection, construction, repair, maintenance, improvement, reconstruction administration and other reasonable and customary charges associated with the operation of drainage services of the city. The income derived from the operation of municipal drainage services must be segregated in one or more accounts and completely identifiable from other city accounts. 
(Ord. No. 01-51, § I, 10-9-01)  
Sec. 32-5. - Administration of municipal drainage services. 
The city manager, acting through the director of public works, shall be responsible for the administration of this ordinance including, but not limited to, enacting any procedures necessary for the administration of the drainage charges and the consideration of variances, developing maintenance programs, and establishing a drainage design manual and standards for operation of the drainage system. 
(Ord. No. 01-51, § I, 10-9-01; Ord. No. 11-107, § III, 11-8-11)  
Sec. 32-6. - No assumed liability for floods and nonpoint source pollution. 
Floods from drainage and stormwater runoff may occasionally occur which exceed the capacity of the drainage system maintained and financed with the drainage charges. In addition, surface water stagnation and pollution arising from nonpoint source runoff may occasionally occur which exceed the capacity of the drainage system maintained and financed with drainage charges. This ordinance does not imply that properties subject to charges shall always be free from flooding or flood damage, surface water stagnation or nonpoint source pollution or that all flood control and water treatment projects to control the quantity and quality of runoff can be constructed effectively. Nothing whatsoever in this ordinance should be construed as or be deemed to create additional duties on the part of the city to hold the city liable for any damages incurred in a flood or from adverse water quality due to drainage runoff. Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to waive the city's immunity under state law or reduce the need or necessity for flood insurance by property owners within or without the city. 
(Ord. No. 01-51, § I, 10-9-01)  
Sec. 32-7. - Categories of developed use. 
A drainage fee is imposed upon each developed lot and parcel with structural improvements within the city for drainage services and facilities provided by the city. For purposes of imposing the drainage fee, all benefited property shall mean an improved lot or tract to which drainage service is made available under this chapter categorized as "residential property" and "non-residential property:" Non-residential property includes any property that is not described as residential property in this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-51, § I, 10-9-01; Ord. No. 05-74, § I, 9-13-05; Ord. No. 07-077, § I, 9-11-07; Ord. No. 10-003, § VII, 2-9-10; Ord. No. 19-032 , § I, 7-23-19)  
Sec. 32-8. - Findings related to calculation of the drainage. 
The city council finds that it is reasonable and equitable to assume that each water, wastewater, or solid waste utility customer in the service area is a user of a drainage-benefited property pursuant to V.T.C.A., Texas Local Government Code, ch. 552, subch. C, as amended. The city council further finds that drainage attributable to a detached single-family residential land use is relatively uniform, and that non-single-family residential properties, including land used for multi-family properties, mobile home parks, commercial and industrial properties, have higher runoff factors and higher pollutant contributions than single-family residential development. 
(Ord. No. 01-51, § I, 10-9-01; Ord. No. 05-74, § I, 9-13-05; Ord. No. 09-014, § I, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 19-032 , § I, 7-23-19)  
Sec. 32-9. - Calculation of drainage fees. 
Every property owner and city service customer shall be responsible for paying the drainage fee for the benefited property. Such properties are charged monthly based on the amount of impervious area on a parcel of property. 
Except as otherwise stated in this article, the drainage fee is calculated using the following formula: 
Equivalent residential unit (ERU) × drainage charge = monthly bill. 
ERU means a unit of measurement of impervious surface area determined as the average residential house structure or a garage, driveway and other impervious area within the parcel. The current ERU for the City of Killeen is based on three thousand twenty-seven (3,027) square feet of impervious cover. The ERU for any multi-family or nonresidential property shall not be less than one (1). 
The drainage charge is set at six dollars ($6.00) per month per ERU. 
(1)  The following schedule shall be used to determine the applicable drainage fee: 
a.  Residential property: 
1.  Each detached single-family residential property receiving utility service from the city shall be considered one (1) ERU. (1 ERU × $6.00 = $6.00 drainage fee per month). 
2.  Each duplex residential property receiving utility service from the city shall be considered one (1) ERU. (1 ERU × $6.00 = $6.00 drainage fee per month). 
A.  The monthly drainage fee shall be calculated for the entire property and shall be paid by the property owner. The city shall place the monthly drainage fee on a master meter account billed to the owner or the owner's agent. 
B.  At its sole discretion, the city may prorate the monthly drainage fee among the separate meters in relation to the number of dwelling units served by the meters; provided the customer provides adequate assurance for payment, documentation of the number of dwelling units served by each meter, and documentation by all owners and/or tenants. 
3.  The number of ERUs for each multi-family residential property (three (3) or more units) receiving utility service from the city shall be individually determined by dividing the actual impervious cover surface area of the property by 3,027 rounded up to the nearest whole number. 
A.  The monthly drainage fee shall be calculated for the entire property and shall be paid by the property owner. The city shall place the monthly drainage fee on a master meter account billed to the owner or the owner's agent. 
B.  At its sole discretion, the city may prorate the monthly drainage fee among the separate meters in relation to the number of dwelling units served by the meters; provided the customer provides adequate assurance for payment, documentation of the number of dwelling units served by each meter, and documentation by all owners and/or tenants. 
4.  Each mobile home park property receiving utility service from the city shall have one (1) ERU per mobile home pad or trailer pad and shall pay six dollars ($6.00) per month per ERU. 
A.  The monthly drainage fee for the entire mobile home park shall be placed on a master meter within the property, or, at the city's sole discretion, may be billed separately to the property owner or the owner's agent. 
B.  For individually metered trailer pads, the city may, at its sole discretion, bill the drainage fee on the individually metered accounts; provided the customer provides adequate assurance for payment, documentation of the number of dwelling units served by each meter, and documentation by all owners and/or tenants. 
b.  Non-residential property: 
1.  The number of ERUs for each non-residential property receiving utility service from the city shall be individually determined by dividing the actual impervious surface area of the property by 3,027 rounded up to the nearest whole number. 
A.  In the case of multiple meters on a single parcel, the drainage utility fee shall be calculated for the entire property and shall be paid by the property owner. The city shall place the drainage fee on a master meter account billed to the owner or the owner's agent. 
B.  At its sole discretion, the city may prorate the drainage fee among the separate meters in relation to the area served by the meters provided the customer provides adequate assurance for payment, complete documentation of impervious area pro rata calculations, and documentation of concurrence by all owners and/or tenants. 
(2)  The following shall be exempt from the provisions of any rules or ordinances adopted by the city pursuant to V.T.C.A., Texas Local Government Code, ch. 552, subch. C, as amended: 
a.  Property with proper construction and maintenance of a wholly sufficient and privately owned drainage system; 
b.  Property held and maintained in its natural state, until such time that the property is developed and all of the public infrastructure constructed has been accepted by the city for maintenance; and 
c.  A subdivided lot, until improvements have been built on the lot and a certificate of occupancy, certificate of completion, or final green tag has been issued by the city. 
(3)  The city council may review the foregoing schedule of fees at any time and may, by resolution, increase or decrease or otherwise alter the fee structure upon a determination that such increase or decrease is warranted. 
(4)  The city council finds and determines that the drainage fees have been established in accordance with the provisions of the V.T.C.A., Texas Local Government Code, ch. 552, subch. C, "Municipal Drainage Utility Systems," as amended. 
(Ord. No. 01-51, § I, 10-9-01; Ord. No. 05-74, § I, 9-13-05; Ord. No. 06-102, § I, 9-12-06; Ord. No. 07-077, § I, 9-11-07; Ord. No. 09-014, § I, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 10-046, § I, 9-14-10; Ord. No. 19-032 , § I, 7-23-19)  
Sec. 32-10. - Billing and payment; penalties. 
A.  Billing and payment. 
(1)  Bills or statements for the drainage fee shall be rendered by the city for all properties subject to the fee. Bills shall be payable when rendered and shall be considered as received by the customer and/or owner, whether actually received or not, when deposited in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the utility customer. 
(2)  Bills shall be rendered monthly. 
(3)  Bills shall be for services for the preceding month. 
(4)  Bills are due when rendered, and subject to late charges, disconnection of service, and reconnection fees authorized under the provisions relating to water and wastewater charges. 
(5)  Drainage fees shall be billed with the city's water, wastewater, and solid waste billings and shall be identified separately on the bill as a drainage fee. Delinquent fee bills shall be mailed to the customer at the address at which the owner receives other city utility services, or if no other city utility services are rendered, to any known address of the owner. 
B.  Penalties. 
(1)  Any charge due hereunder which is not paid when due will subject the user to discontinuance of all utility services provided by the City of Killeen, including water, wastewater, and solid waste services. 
(2)  Any drainage charge due hereunder which shall not be paid when due may be recovered in an action at law by the city. The employees of the city's drainage services shall have access, at all reasonable times, to any benefitted properties served by the drainage services for inspection, repair or enforcement of the ordinance. 
C.  Notice of the imposition of drainage fees shall be mailed to all customers of the city's water, wastewater, and solid waste services. Such notice shall state that drainage fees will be billed to the customer of each such service and that failure of a customer and/or owner to pay such fees may result in the discontinuance of all city water, wastewater and solid waste services. 
(Ord. No. 01-51, § I, 10-9-01; Ord. No. 19-032 , § I, 7-23-19)  
Sec. 32-11. - Stormwater credit program. 
Non-residential properties may apply for and the city may grant to such users credit against that portion of their respective drainage fees attributable to the ERU based on their voluntary use of stormwater best management practices ("BMPs") to offset the impacts of their property on stormwater runoff (the "stormwater credit program" or "program"). Stormwater credits are based on stormwater BMPs that exceed the applicable requirements chapter 26 and chapter 32 article IV of the Killeen Code of Ordinances, or an approved development agreement with the city. The stormwater credit is applied as a percent discount to regular monthly drainage fees and will be administered pursuant to the city's stormwater credit program. The city will develop and amend as necessary a stormwater credit program manual to assist in administration of this article. 
(Ord. No. 19-032 , § I, 7-23-19)  
Sec. 32-12. - Administration of stormwater credit program. 
(a)  The director of public works will be responsible for the overall administration of the program including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Accepting, reviewing, and approving or disapproving applications; 
(2)  Certifying the total amount of the BMP credit; 
(3)  Amending the drainage account records to reflect changes in the BMP credit: 
(4)  Receiving and reviewing annual self-inspection reports; and 
(5)  Requesting independent inspections as appropriate to ensure proper maintenance. 
(b)  Any property owner or city service customer aggrieved by a decision of the director of public works regarding (1) a determination as to whether a certain parcel of property is exempt from the drainage fee or (2) the application of the stormwater credit program to a certain parcel of property may appeal the determination of the director of public works to the city manager, or designee. The property owner or city service customer shall file an appeal in writing with the director of public works within ten (10) days from the date of the decision being appealed. 
The written appeal filed by the property owner or city service customer shall identify the facts supporting (1) any claim that the property in question is exempt from the levy of a drainage charge or (2) any claim that the property in question is entitled to more stormwater credits than approved by the director of public works. 
The burden of proof shall be on the appellant to demonstrate that the property is exempt from the drainage fee or the amount of the stormwater credit was not calculated according to the applicable schedule of stormwater credits or the guidelines established for determining stormwater credits. 
(Ord. No. 19-032 , § I, 7-23-19)  
Sec. 32-13. - Application for stormwater credit. 
All required attachments indicated in the forms or specified above must be included for the application to be considered complete. The director of public works will, following review of the complete application, determine the appropriate amount of the stormwater credit to which a property is entitled pursuant to the city's stormwater credit program and subject to this article. Such stormwater credit will be valid for a period of time, as set forth in section 32-14, below, subject to continuing compliance of the stormwater credit options on the property in question with the stormwater credit program. 
(Ord. No. 19-032 , § I, 7-23-19)  
Sec. 32-14. - Expiration of stormwater credit, renewal application and annual reporting. 
(a)  BMPs with annual renewal. A stormwater credit approved by the director of public works pursuant to the city's stormwater credit program utilizing one (1) of the following BMPs shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date of approval, at which time the right to receive the stormwater credit will expire: 
(1)  Voluntary community cleanup program (onsite or downstream); and 
(2)  Parking lot sweeping. 
For the continuation of the foregoing stormwater credits, a renewal application must be filed annually prior to the expiration of the then-current stormwater credit year approved by the director of public works. Annual self-reports and maintenance records together with any other documentation identified by the stormwater credit program will be required to be submitted with the renewal application annually prior to expiration to document program compliance for the preceding year. If the complete renewal application is not received by the city by the expiration date, the stormwater credit will automatically expire and the full amount of the drainage fees collected for the property will be charged. 
Timely filing of the complete renewal application with the city will stay the expiration of the stormwater credit for the property in question until such time as the director of public works reviews and approves, or disapproves, the renewal application. The director of public works may increase, decrease, or terminate the amount of the stormwater credit a particular property is eligible to receive pursuant to the city's stormwater credit program based upon the director of public works' review and evaluation of the renewal application, the annual self-report, and any and all other information then available. Failure to provide any required information in support of the renewal application shall result in the denial of the stormwater credit for the property. 
(b)  BMPs of continuous duration. A stormwater credit approved by the director of public works pursuant to the city's stormwater credit program for one (1) of the following BMPs shall be valid from the date of approval and for so long as the BMPs are inspected, properly maintained, and remain compliant with the applicable program requirements: 
(1)  Five (5) percent for voluntary community cleanup program (onsite or downstream); 
(2)  Five (5) percent for parking lot sweeping program; 
(3)  Ten (10) percent for rainwater harvesting; 
(4)  Ten (10) percent for bioretention/rain garden; 
(5)  Ten (10) percent for riparian preservation; 
(6)  Twenty (20) percent for dry extended detention basin; 
(7)  Forty (40) percent for retention pond; and 
(8)  Forty (40) percent for green roofs. 
Notwithstanding the continuous duration of the foregoing BMPs, the property owner or city service customer shall cause the BMPs to be inspected annually and maintained in accordance with the city's stormwater credit program. 
(Ord. No. 19-032 , § I, 7-23-19)  
Sec. 32-15. - Types of stormwater credit. 
Non-residential properties may be eligible for stormwater credit against drainage fees up to a maximum total combined stormwater credit per property of forty (40) percent. Types of stormwater credit are available up to the maximum percentage identified for the following onsite stormwater credit options. 
(1)  Maximum percentage of stormwater credit allowed per BMP. 
a.  Five (5) percent for voluntary community cleanup program (onsite or downstream); 
b.  Five (5) percent for parking lot sweeping program; 
c.  Ten (10) percent for rainwater harvesting; 
d.  Ten (10) percent for riparian preservation; 
e.  Ten (10) percent for bioretention/rain garden; 
f.  Twenty (20) percent for multi-stage detention; 
g.  Forty (40) percent for retention pond; and 
h.  Forty (40) percent for green roofs. 
Each stormwater credit option listed above is given to encourage voluntary practices that will benefit the drainage utility. 
(Ord. No. 19-032 , § I, 7-23-19)  
Secs. 32-16—32-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE PREVENTION AND STORMWATER PROTECTION  
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 32-20. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to city's municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) to the maximum extent practicable as required by Federal and State law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the city's MS4 in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit and the Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) permit processes. The objectives of this ordinance are to: 
(a)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants or contaminants to the city's MS4 or the waters in the State or U.S. by any person; 
(b)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to city's MS4; 
(c)  Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, releases, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to city's MS4; 
(d)  Protect and preserve the functionality of water courses and ways located within the city; and, 
(e)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 09-046, § I, 7-28-09)  
Sec. 32-21. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all water or substances entering the MS4 generated on any developed or undeveloped lands throughout the corporate limits of the city unless specifically exempted by this article. All references to local, State and Federal statutes and regulations, including the Code of Federal Regulations, reference any amendment to the same that may occur in the future. 
(Ord. No. 09-046, § I, 7-28-09)  
Sec. 32-22. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of stormwater protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. This article does not intend nor imply that compliance will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants into the MS4. This article shall not waive immunity or create liability on the part of the city or any official or employee thereof for any damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 09-046, § I, 7-28-09)  
Sec. 32-23. - Definitions. 
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated. Additionally, all references to any Federal or State regulation or act shall refer to the current regulation or act and any amendments thereto. 
Agricultural stormwater runoff. Any stormwater or tail water runoff from orchards, cultivated crops, pastures, range lands, forest lands, and other non-point source agricultural activities, but not discharges from concentrated animal feeding operations as defined in 40 Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.) § 122.23 or discharges from concentrated aquatic animal production facilities as defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.24. 
Best management practices (BMPs). Best management practices include schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance or monitoring procedures, structural controls, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants or contaminants into the city's MS4, the waters in the State or U.S. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, discharge or release, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage areas. 
C.F.R. The Code of Federal Regulations, as amended. 
Commercial. Pertaining to any business, trade, industry, or other activity engaged in for profit or as a non-profit entity. 
Contamination. The presence of, or entry into a public water supply system, the MS4 or waters in the State or U.S. of any substance, including pollutants, which may be deleterious to the public health and/or the quality of the water. 
Contaminant. Any substance deleterious to the public health and/or the quality of the water. 
Conveyance. Curbs, gutters, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels or ditches, drains, pipes, and other constructed features designed or used for flood control or to otherwise transport stormwater runoff. 
Director. The executive director of public works or his/her duly authorized representative or designee. 
Discharge. Any addition, introduction or release of any pollutant, stormwater, or any other substance whatsoever into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or into waters in the State or U.S. 
Domestic sewage. Waste and wastewater from humans or household operations that is discharged to a wastewater collection system or otherwise enters a treatment works. 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The United States Environmental Protection Agency, the regional office thereof, any federal department, agency, or commission that may succeed to the authority of the EPA, and any duly authorized official of EPA or such successor agency. 
Extremely hazardous substance. Any substance listed in the Appendices to 40 C.F.R. Part 355, Emergency Planning and Notification. 
Facility. Any building, structure, installation, process, or activity from which there is or may be a discharge. 
Fertilizer. A solid or non-solid substance or compound that contains an essential plant nutrient element in a form available to plants and is used primarily for its essential plant nutrient element content in promoting or stimulating growth of a plant or improving the quality of a crop, or a mixture of two or more fertilizers. The term does not include the excreta of an animal, plant remains, or a mixture of those substances, for which no claim of essential plant nutrients is made. 
Fire department. The fire department of the City of Killeen or any duly authorized representative thereof. 
Fire protection water. Any water, and any substances or materials contained therein, bused by any person other than the fire department to control or extinguish a fire. 
Garbage. Waste consisting of putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage facilities, handling, and sale of produce and other food products. 
Harmful quantity. The amount of hazardous substance the discharge or spill of which is determined to be harmful to the environment or public health or welfare or may reasonably be anticipated to present an imminent and substantial danger to the public health or welfare by federal law and by the state law. 
Hazardous household waste (HHW). Any waste generated in a household (including single and multiple residences, hotels and motels, bunk houses, ranger stations, crew quarters, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreational areas) by a consumer which, except for the exclusion provided in 40 C.F.R. § 261.4(b)(1), would be classified as a hazardous waste under 40 C.F.R. Part 261. 
Hazardous substance. A material where either of the following conditions are met: 
(a)  the elements, compounds, and hazardous wastes are listed in Table 302.4 of 40 C.F.R. Part 302; or 
(b)  a solid waste, as defined in 40 C.F.R. § 261.2, which is not excluded from regulation as a hazardous waste under 40 C.F.R. § 261.4(b), if it exhibits any of the characteristics identified in 40 C.F.R. § 261.20 through § 261.24 (e.g., ignitability, corrosivity, reactivity, or toxicity). 
Hazardous waste. Any waste identified or listed as a hazardous waste by the EPA under the Federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), 40 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq., or the Texas Solid Waste Disposal Act, Texas Health and Safety Code, Article 361 et seq. 
Hazardous waste treatment, disposal, and recovery facility. All land, and structures, other appurtenances and improvements on the land, used for the treatment, disposal, or recovery of hazardous waste. 
Herbicide. A substance or mixture of substances used to destroy a plant or to inhibit plant growth. 
Illegal connection. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the MS4 including, without limitation, any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, processed wastewater or wash water to enter the MS4, regardless of whether such drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted or approved by the city. 
Illicit discharge. Any discharge to the MS4 that is not entirely composed of stormwater, except discharges pursuant to this article, State or Federal law and discharges resulting from emergency fire fighting activities. 
Industrial. Activities including manufacturing, processing, material storage, and waste material disposal (and similar activities where stormwater can contact industrial waste) at an industrial facility described by the TPDES Multi Sector General Permit, TXR050000, or by another TCEQ or TPDES permit. 
Industrial waste. Any waterborne liquid or solid waste or substance that results from any process of industry, manufacturing, mining, production, trade or business as more specifically defined in 40 C.F.R. 122.26 (b)(14). 
Maximum extent practicable (MEP). The technology-based discharge standard for municipal separate storm sewer systems to reduce pollutants in stormwater discharges that was established by the Federal Clean Water Act § 402(p). A discussion of MEP as it applies to the MS4 is found at 40 C.F.R. § 122.34. 
Motor vehicle fluids. Any vehicle crankcase oil, motor oil, antifreeze, transmission fluid, brake fluid, differential lubricant, gasoline, diesel fuel, gasoline/alcohol blend, and any other fluid used in a motor vehicle. 
Municipal landfill (or landfill). An area of land or an excavation in which municipal solid waste is placed for permanent disposal, and which is not a land treatment facility, a surface impoundment, an injection well, or a pile (as these terms are defined in regulations promulgated by the TCEQ). 
Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). A conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, inlets, gutters, ditches, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, or storm drains) owned or operated by the city and designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, and which is not used for collecting or conveying sewage and which is not part of a Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) as defined at 40 C.F.R § 122.2. 
Municipal solid waste. Waste resulting from or incidental to municipal community, commercial, institutional, or recreational activities, and including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and all other waste other than industrial waste. 
NPDES permit. A permit issued by EPA that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable to an individual, group or generally on an area-wide basis. 
Non-point source. Any source of any discharge of a pollutant that is not a point source. 
Notice of intent (NOI). A written submission to the executive director of the TCEQ from an applicant requesting coverage under a general permit issued by the TCEQ. Each NOI shall also be submitted to the appropriate MS4 operator receiving the permitted discharge. 
Notice of change (NOC). A written notification to the executive director of the TCEQ from a permittee authorized under a general permit issued by the TCEQ providing changes to information that was previously provided in a notice of intent. Each NOC shall also be submitted to the appropriate MS4 operator receiving the permitted discharge. 
Notice of termination (NOT). A written submission to the executive director of the TCEQ from a permittee authorized under a general permit issued by the TCEQ seeking to terminate such permit coverage. Each NOT shall also be submitted to the appropriate MS4 operator receiving the permitted discharge. 
Oil. Oil of any kind or in any form, including, but not limited to, petroleum, fuel oil, crude oil or any fraction thereof which is liquid at standard conditions of temperature and pressure, sludge, oil refuse, and oil mixed with wastes other than dredged spoil. Oil does not include used oil, petroleum product, or oil designated as a hazardous substance in 40 C.F.R. § 302.4. 
Operator. An entity or individual who meets one of the following conditions: 
(a)  the person or persons associated with a large or small construction activity that meets either of the following two criteria: (1) the person or entity having operational control over construction plans and specifications to the extent necessary to meet the requirements and conditions of a NPDES or TPDES permit; or (2) the person or entity having day-to-day operational control of those activities at a construction site that are necessary to ensure compliance with a Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) for the site or other permit conditions (e.g., they are authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the SWPPP or comply with other NPDES or TPDES permit conditions); or 
(b)  the person or persons associated with a large or small construction activity that meets either of the following two criteria: (1) the person or entity having operational control over construction plans and specifications to the extent necessary to meet the requirements and conditions of a NPDES or TPDES permit; or (2) the person or entity having day-to-day operational control of those activities at a construction site that are necessary to ensure compliance with a Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) for the site or other permit conditions (e.g., they are authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the SWPPP or comply with other NPDES or TPDES permit conditions); or 
(c)  the owner, person or entity that is responsible for the management of an industrial facility subject to the provisions of a NPDES or TPDES permit. 
Owner. The person or entity who owns a premises or part of a premises. 
Person. An individual, organization, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, business trust, estate, government, governmental subdivision or agency, or any other legal entity or association; or its legal representatives, agents, or assigns. 
Pesticide. A substance or mixture of substances intended to prevent, destroy, repel, or mitigate any pest, or any substance or mixture of substances intended for use as a plant regulator, defoliant, or desiccant (as these terms are defined in Section 76.001 of the Texas Agriculture Code, as amended). 
Petroleum product. A petroleum substance obtained from distilling and processing crude oil and that is liquid at standard conditions of temperature and pressure, and that is capable of being used as a fuel for the propulsion of a motor vehicle or aircraft, including but not limited to motor gasoline, gasohol, other alcohol blended fuels, aviation gasoline, kerosene, distillate fuel oil, and #1 and #2 diesel. The term does not include naphtha-type jet fuel, kerosene-type jet fuel, or a petroleum product destined for use in chemical manufacturing or feedstock of that manufacturing. 
Petroleum storage tank (PST). Any one or combination of aboveground or underground storage tanks that contain petroleum products and any connecting underground pipes. 
Point source. Any discernable, confined, and discrete conveyance, including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation, landfill leachate collection system, vessel or other floating craft from which pollutants are or may be discharged. This term does not include return flows from irrigated agriculture or agricultural stormwater runoff (40 CFR 122.22). 
Pollutant. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; motor oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; noxious or offensive matter of any kind; biochemical oxygen demand (BOD); sediment or a parameter that addresses sediment (such as total suspended solids, turbidity, or siltation); oil and grease; and any pollutant that has been identified as a cause of impairment of any water body that will receive a discharge from the MS4 (40 CFR 122.32(e)(3)). The term "pollutant" does not include tail water or rainwater runoff from cultivated or uncultivated rangeland, pastureland and farmland. 
Pollution. The alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, or biological quality of, or the contamination of, any water in the State or U.S. that renders the water harmful, detrimental, or injurious to humans, animal life, vegetation, or property, or to public health, safety, or welfare, or impairs the usefulness of the public enjoyment of the water for any lawful or reasonable purpose. 
Premises. Any site and/or facility, as defined under this article, or building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips, owned or operated by a person from which there has been, is or may be a discharge. 
Release. Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping, or disposing of a pollutant or contaminant into the MS4 or water in the State or U.S. 
Reportable quantity (RQ). For any "hazardous substance," the quantity established and listed in Table 302.4 of 40 C.F.R. Part 302 (except for any discharge into water in the State where the Final RQ threshold is greater than 100 pounds, in this case the RQ threshold shall be 100 pounds); for any "extremely hazardous substance," the quantity established in 40 C.F.R. Part 355 and listed in Appendix A thereto. 
Rubbish. Non-putrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, that consists of both (a) combustible waste materials, including paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves, and similar materials; and (b) noncombustible waste materials, including glass, crockery, tin cans, aluminum cans, metal furniture, and similar materials that will not burn at ordinary incinerator temperatures (1,600 to 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit). 
Sanitary sewer. The system of pipes, conduits, and other conveyances which carry industrial waste and domestic sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, to a publicly-owned treatment works facility (and to which stormwater, surface water, and groundwater are not intentionally admitted). 
Septic tank waste. Any domestic sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
Service station. Any retail establishment engaged in the business of selling fuel for motor vehicles that is dispensed from stationary storage tanks. 
Sewage (or sanitary sewage). The domestic sewage and/or industrial waste that is discharged into the city sanitary sewer system and passes through the sanitary sewer system to a publicly-owned treatment works. 
Site. The land or water area where any facility or activity is physically located or conducted, including adjacent land used in connection with the facility or activity. 
Stormwater and stormwater runoff. Rainfall runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. 
Stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity. Stormwater runoff that exits any system that is used for collecting and conveying stormwater that originates from manufacturing, processing, material storage, and waste material disposal areas (and similar areas where stormwater can contact industrial pollutants related to the industrial activity) at an industrial facility described by the applicable TPDES. 
Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP). A plan required by a NPDES or TPDES permit that describes and ensures the implementation of BMPs that are to be used to reduce the pollutants in stormwater discharges associated with construction or other industrial activity at the regulated facility to water in the State and U.S. 
Tail water. The runoff of irrigation water from the lower end of an irrigated field. 
TCEQ. The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality including its successor or predecessor agencies. 
TPDES permit. A permit issued by the State through the TCEQ, predecessor or any successor agency, under the authority delegated by EPA pursuant to 33 U.S.C § 1342(b) (Federal Clean Water Act) and pursuant to the Texas Water Code that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to water in the State or U.S., whether the permit is applicable to a person, group, or generally on an area-wide basis. 
Uncontaminated. A substance that does not contain a harmful quantity of any substance. 
Used oil (or used motor oil). Any oil that has been refined with crude oil, or any synthetic oil, that has been used, and, as a result of use, is contaminated by physical or chemical impurities. 
Vehicle. For purposes of this article vehicle includes any vehicle held for personal use including automobiles, trucks, recreational vehicles, motorcycles of any type and boats or personal watercrafts. 
Water in the state. Groundwater, percolating or otherwise, lakes, bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries, wetlands, marshes, inlets, canals, the Gulf of Mexico inside the territorial limits of the state (from the mean high water mark out 10.36 miles into the Gulf), and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, navigable or non-navigable, and including the beds and banks of all watercourses and bodies of surface water, that are wholly or partially inside or bordering the state or inside the jurisdiction of the state, except that water in treatment systems which are authorized by State or Federal law, regulation or permit, and which are created for the purpose of waste treatment are not considered to be water in the state. 
Waters of the United States (orwaters in the U.S.). Any water characterized as: 
(a)  All waters that are currently used, were used in the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide; 
(b)  All interstate waters, including interstate wetlands; 
(c)  All other waters such as intrastate lakes, rivers, streams (including intermittent streams), mudflats, sand flats, wetlands, sloughs, prairie potholes, wet meadows, playa lakes, or natural ponds that the use, degradation, or destruction of which would affect or could affect interstate or foreign commerce including any such waters: 
(1)  that are or could be used by interstate or foreign travelers for recreational or other purposes; 
(2)  from which fish or shellfish are or could be taken and sold in interstate or foreign commerce; or 
(3)  that are used or could be used for industrial purposes by industries in interstate commerce; 
(d)  All impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the United States under this definition; 
(e)  Tributaries of waters identified in paragraphs (a) through (d) of this definition; 
(f)  The territorial sea; and 
(g)  Wetlands adjacent to waters (others than waters that are themselves wetlands) identified in paragraphs (a) through (f) of this definition. 
Waste treatment systems including treatment ponds or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act are not waters of the United States. This exclusion applies only to manmade bodies of water that neither were originally created in waters of the United States (such as disposal area in wetlands) nor resulted from the impoundment of waters of the United States. Waters of the United States do not include prior converted cropland. Notwithstanding the determination of an area's status as prior converted cropland by any other federal agency, for the purposes of the Clean Water Act, the final authority regarding Clean Water Act jurisdiction remains with EPA. 
Water quality standards. Provisions that consist of a designated use or uses for the water in the State and water quality criteria for such waters based upon such uses. Water quality criteria consist of narrative provisions and numerical criteria deemed by the State to be necessary to protect those uses, as specified in 30 Texas Administrative Code (TAC) Article 307. 
Watercourse. A watercourse includes a drainage path or way or the channel of a stream, to include, without limitation, waters in the State or U.S., in which water flows within a defined bed and banks, even though the same may be slight, imperceptible or even absent in places, and originates from a definite source or sources. The water need not always be present and may be intermittent if the latter occurs with some degree of regularity, depending on the characteristics of the sources (i.e.: water is present or flowing during and/or after a rainfall event). 
Wetlands. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
Yard waste. Leaves, grass, grass clippings, bushes, shrubs, yard and garden debris, and brush that results from landscaping maintenance and land-clearing operations. 
(Ord. No. 09-046, § I, 7-28-09)  
Sec. 32-24. - General prohibition and requirements. 
(a)  No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the MS4 any discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
(b)  It is an affirmative defense to any enforcement action for violation of subsection (a) of this section that the discharge was composed entirely of one or more of the following categories of discharges: 
(1)  A discharge or flow from water line flushing, but not including a discharge from water line disinfection by hyperchlorination or other means unless the total residual chlorine (TRC) has been reduced to less than 0.10 milligrams per liter (mg/l) and it contains no harmful quantity of chlorine or any other chemical used in line disinfection; 
(2)  Runoff or return flow from lawn watering, landscape irrigation and other irrigation utilizing potable water, groundwater, or surface water sources; 
(3)  A discharge from a potable water source; 
(4)  A discharge or flow from a diverted stream flow or natural spring; 
(5)  A discharge or flow from rising ground waters and springs; 
(6)  Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration (as defined as 40 C.F.R. § 35.2005(20)) to the MS4; 
(7)  A discharge or flow from uncontaminated pumped ground water; 
(8)  Uncontaminated discharge or flow from a foundation drain or footing drain; 
(9)  A discharge or flow from air conditioning condensation that is unmixed with water from a cooling tower, emissions scrubber, emissions filter, or any other source of pollutant or contaminant; 
(10)  Uncontaminated discharge or flow from a crawl space pump, or sump pump; 
(11)  A discharge or flow from individual residential vehicle washing; 
(12)  A discharge or flow from a riparian habitat or wetland; 
(13)  Swimming pool water that has been de-chlorinated so that TRC is less than 0.10 mg/l and that contains no harmful quantity of chlorine, muriatic acid or other chemical used in the treatment or disinfection of the swimming pool water or in pool cleaning; 
(14)  A discharge or flow from water used in street washing; 
(15)  A discharge or flow resulting from fire fighting activities by the fire department (fire fighting activities do not include washing of trucks, run-off water from training activities, test water from fire suppression systems, and similar activities); 
(16)  Other allowable non-stormwater discharges listed in 40 CFR 122.23(d)(2)(iv)(B)(1); 
(17)  A discharge authorized by, and in full compliance with, a NPDES or TPDES permit. Such TPDES permit includes the TPDES Multi Sector General Permit and the TPDES Construction General Permit; 
(18)  Other similar occasional incidental non-stormwater discharges, unless the TCEQ develops permits or regulations addressing these discharges; 
(19)  Agricultural stormwater runoff; 
(20)  A discharge or flow from a potable water source not containing any pollutant, contaminant or a harmful quantity of a substance or material from the cleaning or draining of a storage tank or other container; 
(21)  Stormwater runoff from a roof that is not contaminated by any runoff or discharge from an emissions scrubber or filter or any other source of pollutant; and 
(22)  A discharge or flow from water used in vehicle, exterior building, and pavement wash water where detergents and soaps are not used and where spills or leaks of hazardous substances or hazardous waste have not occurred (unless all spilled material is removed). 
(c)  The use of BMPs or the presence of pervious cover that filters pollutants or contaminants from a discharge before the discharge reaches the MS4 will be considered an additional affirmative defense if no pollutant or contaminant is present upon the discharges release into the MS4. 
(d)  No affirmative defense shall be available under subsection (b) of this section if the discharge, release or flow in question has been determined by the director to be a source of a pollutant or contaminant to water in the State or U.S. or the MS4, written notice of such determination has been provided to the discharger and the discharge has continued to occur seven (7) calendar days following receipt of such notice. 
(e)  Illegal connections. The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the MS4 is prohibited. 
(1)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(2)  A person violates this article if the person connects a line conveying domestic or industrial sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(3)  Illegal connections in violation of this article shall be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, by the owner or operator to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the director. 
(4)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or an equivalent, and which may be connected to the MS4, shall be located by the owner, occupant or operator of that property within three (3) calendar days following receipt of a written notice of violation (NOV) from the director. Such notice may grant a longer time period, not to exceed sixty (60) calendar days but shall require that the drain or conveyance be identified as a storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other type of conveyance, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the MS4, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations shall be documented and provided to the director to confirm compliance with this article. 
(f)  Nuisances. An actual or threatened discharge to the MS4 or any condition caused or permitted to exist that violates or would violate this article is a threat to public health, safety and welfare and is hereby deemed to be a nuisance and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken in accordance with division 3 below. 
(g)  NPDES/TPDES Required. A person violates this article if the person discharges, or causes to be discharged, stormwater without first having obtained a NPDES or TPDES permit to do so (if applicable) or fails to comply with paragraph (h) of this section. 
(h)  Submission of SWPPP/NOI/NOC/NOT Required. The operator or owner of a premises, including construction sites, required to have a NPDES or TPDES permit to discharge stormwater shall submit a copy of the SWPPP to the director within two (2) business days of the time that the operator or owner submits notification to the TCEQ that a SWPPP is available, if applicable. The operator or owner shall also submit a copy of the applicable NOI, NOC and NOT to the director in accordance with the time frame provided for under the applicable TPDES or NPDES permit. Submission of a SWPPP under this section or under section 26-80 of this code (Land Disturbance Permit) shall constitute compliance with both sections in relation to the SWPPP. 
(i)  Compliance with NPDES/TPDES. A premises shall be operated in strict compliance with the requirements of any applicable and required NPDES or TPDES permit. A person violates this article if the person operates a premises in violation of a requirement of any such permit. 
(j)  Modification of SWPPP. The director may request that any operator or owner of a premises to consider modifying the applicable SWPPP if, in the best professional judgment of the director, the SWPPP does not comply with the requirements of the applicable NPDES or TPDES to discharge stormwater. Any deficiencies so noted shall be provided to the operator or owner in writing and the director shall give the operator or owner a reasonable amount of time, not to exceed thirty (30) days, to consider and implement such changes to the SWPPP. If the operator or owner disagrees with the director, the operator or owner shall submit, in writing, the basis for such disagreement and non-implementation. 
(k)  Notice of release required. Notwithstanding any other requirements of local, State or Federal law, as soon as any person responsible for a premises or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a premises or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges of contaminants or pollutants into the MS4, the waters in the State or U.S. in any reportable or harmful quantity said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of household hazardous waste, hazardous substance(s) or hazardous waste said person shall immediately notify the director by telephone and other State or Federal emergency response agencies, if required. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the director by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by telephone shall be confirmed by written notice within three (3) business days of the personal notification. 
(l)  Watercourse protection. Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, and other obstacles that may pollute, contaminate, or adversely retard the flow of water through the watercourse. 
(m)  Best management practices (BMPs) required. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial premises or any premises where a SWPPP is required by the TCEQ, shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the MS4, waters in the State or U.S. or watercourses through the use of structural and non-structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants or contaminants to the MS4. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES or TPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the maximum extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this paragraph. These BMPs shall be part of a SWPPP as necessary for compliance with the requirements of the NPDES or TPDES permit. 
(Ord. No. 09-046, § I, 7-28-09)  
DIVISION 2. - SPECIFIC PROHIBITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 32-25. - Specific prohibitions and requirements. 
(a)  The specific prohibitions and requirements in this section are not inclusive of all the discharges prohibited by the general prohibitions in division 1 of this article. 
(b)  No person shall introduce, release or cause to be introduced any discharge into the MS4 that causes or contributes to causing the city to violate a water quality standard, the city's stormwater permit coverage for discharges from its MS4, any applicable EPA or TCEQ regulation or State or Federal law. 
(c)  No person shall discharge, release, or otherwise introduce or cause, allow, or permit to be introduced any of the following substances into the MS4: 
(1)  Any used motor oil, antifreeze, or any other motor vehicle fluids; 
(2)  Any industrial waste; 
(3)  Any hazardous substance or hazardous waste, including HHW; 
(4)  Any domestic sewage or septic tank waste, grease trap waste, or grit trap waste; 
(5)  Any garbage, rubbish, or yard waste; 
(6)  Any discharge from: a commercial carwash facility, vehicle dealership, rental agency, body shop, repair shop, maintenance facility, or commercial or public facility that contains any soap, detergent, degreaser, solvent, or any other harmful cleaning substance from any vehicle washing, cleaning, or maintenance; 
(7)  Any discharge from the washing, cleaning, de-icing, or other maintenance of aircraft; 
(8)  Any discharge from a commercial mobile power washer including, without limitation, discharges from mobile vehicle detailing or cleaning equipment, or from the washing or other cleaning of a building exterior that contains any soap, detergent, degreaser, solvent, or any other harmful cleaning substance; 
(9)  Any discharge from commercial or professional floor, rug, or carpet cleaning containing a harmful quantity of any pollutant or contaminant; 
(10)  Any discharge from the wash down or other cleaning of pavement or the exterior of buildings that contains any soap, detergent, solvent, degreaser, emulsifier, dispersant, or any other harmful cleaning substance; or any wastewater from the wash down or other cleaning of any pavement where any spill, leak, or other release of oil, motor fuel, or other petroleum or hazardous substance has occurred, unless all harmful quantities of such released material have been previously removed; 
(11)  Any effluent from a cooling tower, condenser, compressor, emissions scrubber, emissions filter, or the blow down from a boiler; 
(12)  Any ready-mixed concrete, mortar, ceramic, or asphalt base material, or material from the cleaning of vehicles or equipment containing, or used in transporting or applying, such material; 
(13)  Any discharge or wash down water from any commercial animal pen, kennel, or fowl or livestock containment area, to include a livestock management facility as defined in chapter 6 of this code, containing more than five (5) animals; 
(14)  Any filter backwash from a swimming pool, fountain or spa; 
(15)  Any swimming pool water containing TRC of 0.10 mg/l or more or containing any harmful quantity of chlorine, muriatic acid or other chemical used in the treatment or disinfection of the swimming pool water or in pool cleaning; 
(16)  Any fire protection water containing oil or hazardous substances or materials, unless treatment adequate to remove pollutants and contaminants occurs before discharge (this prohibition does not apply to discharges or flow from fire fighting by the fire department); 
(17)  Any water from a water curtain in a spray room used for painting vehicles or equipment; 
(18)  Any substance or material that will damage, block, or clog the MS4; 
(19)  Any release from a petroleum storage tank (PST) or any leachate or runoff from soil contaminated by a leaking PST, or any discharge of pumped, confined, or treated wastewater from the remediation of any such PST release, unless the discharge satisfies all of the following criteria: 
(a)  Compliance with all State and Federal standards and requirements; 
(b)  No discharge containing a harmful quantity of any pollutant; and 
(c)  No discharge containing more than 50 parts per billion of benzene; 500 parts per billion combined total quantities of benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, and xylene (BTEX); or 15 mg/l of total petroleum hydrocarbons (TPH). 
(20)  Any amount of herbicides or pesticides that constitute a harmful quantity. 
(d)  No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the MS4 any sediment, silt, earth, soil, or other material associated with clearing, grading, excavation or other construction activities, or associated with any land filling or other placement or disposal of soil, rock, or other earth materials, in excess of what could be retained on site or captured by employing sediment and erosion control measures or other BMPs to the maximum extent practicable. 
(e)  Motor vehicle fluids, oil, petroleum product and used oil regulation. No person shall: 
(1)  Discharge motor vehicle fluids, oil, petroleum products or used oil into the MS4 or a sewer drainage system, septic tank, surface water, groundwater, or watercourse; 
(2)  Knowingly mix or commingle motor vehicle fluids, oil, petroleum products or used oil with any type of waste that is to be disposed of in a landfill or knowingly directly dispose of motor vehicle fluids, oil, petroleum products or used oil on land or in a landfill; or 
(3)  Apply motor vehicle fluids, oil, petroleum products or used oil to a road or land for dust suppression, weed abatement, or other similar use that introduces motor vehicle fluids, oil, petroleum products or used oil into the environment. 
(Ord. No. 09-046, § I, 7-28-09)  
DIVISION 3. - COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 32-26. - Compliance monitoring. 
(a)  Right of entry; inspection and sampling. The director shall have the right to enter the premises of any person discharging into the MS4 or to waters in the State or U.S. to determine if the person is complying with all requirements of this article. A person shall allow the director ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and for the performance of any additional duties necessary to ensure compliance with this article. A Person shall make available to the director, upon request, any NOIs, NOCs, NOTs, SWPPPs and any modifications thereto, self-inspection reports, monitoring records, compliance evaluations, and any other records, reports, or other documents related to compliance with this article or compliance with any State or Federal stormwater discharge permit. (State law reference: Texas Water Code § 26.173.) 
(1)  Where a person has security measures in force that require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the person shall make necessary arrangements with its security personnel or employees so that, upon presentation of suitable city issued identification, the director shall be permitted to enter without unreasonable delay. Unreasonable delays, which shall be defined as delays in excess of forty-eight (48) hours of the initial request, shall be considered a violation of this article. 
(2)  The director shall have the right to set up on the person's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the person's operations related to all discharges regulated by this article. 
(3)  If the director has reason to believe that there is an actual or potential illicit discharge associated with a premises, the director may require any person to conduct specified sampling, testing, analysis, and other monitoring of such premises' discharges, and may specify the frequency and parameters of any such activities necessary to ensure compliance with this article. All required sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition. All such activities shall be at the person's sole expense. 
(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction that obstructs safe and easy access to the premises to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the person at the written or verbal request of the director and shall not be thereafter replaced. The costs of providing such access shall be borne by the person. 
(b)  Search warrants. If the city is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample a premises as part of a routine inspection and sampling program established by the city and designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance of a search warrant to gain entry from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 09-046, § I, 7-28-09)  
Sec. 32-27. - Administrative enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Generally. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the director to take any action, including emergency action or any other enforcement action, without first issuing any other type of notice or order provided under this section. Compliance with any notice or order issued hereunder in no way relieves the alleged violator of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of any notice or order. 
(b)  Warning notice. When the director finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, the director may serve upon that person a written warning notice, specifying the particular violation believed to have occurred and requesting that the person immediately comply with this article or any order so issued. 
(c)  Notification of violation (NOV). When the director finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, the director may serve upon that person a written NOV. Within ten (10) calendar days of the receipt of the NOV the person shall submit an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention of reoccurrence thereof, to include specific required actions and time lines for completion, to the director. If the alleged violator denies that any violation occurred and/or contends that no corrective action is necessary, an explanation of the basis of any such denial or contention shall be submitted to the director within the same time period. Receipt of the NOV is presumed to occur five (5) calendar days following the date the NOV is mailed. This subsection (c) shall not apply to a NOV issued pursuant to subsection (h) of this section 32-27. 
(d)  Consent orders. The director may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar agreements with any person responsible for the noncompliance with any provision in this article or any order issued hereunder. Such agreements may include specific action to be taken by the person to correct the noncompliance within a stated time period. Agreements entered into under this paragraph shall be judicially enforceable. 
(e)  Compliance orders. When the director finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, the director may issue an order to the person directing the person to come into compliance with this article within a specified time limit. Compliance orders may contain requirements to address the actual or threatened violation and/or a reoccurrence thereof, including additional monitoring requirements and/or requiring the establishment of BMPs designed to eliminate or minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the MS4 and surface water in the State or U.S. The compliance order may also contain requirements directing the person to remediate, abate and/or restore any environmental or other adverse effects associated with a particular discharge, including, but not being limited to, monitoring, assessment, and evaluation of the adverse effects and determination of the appropriate remedial, abatement, and/or restoration action; confinement, removal, cleanup, treatment, and disposal of any discharged or released pollution or contamination; prevention, minimization, and/or mitigation of any damage to the public health, welfare, or the environment that may result from the violation; restoration or replacement of city property or natural resources damaged by the violation. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for any compliance established by State or Federal requirements. 
(f)  Stop work orders. When the director finds that any owner or operator of a premises under construction has violated, continues to violate or threatens to violate any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, the director may issue a stop work order which shall be posted at the premises and distributed to all city departments and divisions whose decisions affect any continuing construction activity at the premises. Unless express written exception is made by the director, the stop work order shall prohibit any further construction activity at the premises and shall bar any further inspection or approval by the city associated with a building permit, grading permit, plat approval, site development plan approval, or any other city approval necessary to commence or continue construction or to assume occupancy at the premises. 
(g)  Emergency cease and desist orders. When the director finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, or that the person's past violation(s) are likely to reoccur, and that the person's violation(s) has caused or contributed to an actual or threatened discharge to the MS4 or surface water in the State or U.S. which reasonably appears to present an imminent or substantial threat to the health, safety or welfare of persons or to the environment, the director may issue an order to the person directing such person to immediately cease and desist all such violations and directing the person to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with this article; and 
(2)  Take such appropriate preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including immediately halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
Any person issued an emergency order shall immediately comply with the provisions of such order. In the event of a person's failure to immediately comply with the emergency order, the director may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize harm to the MS4 or water in the State or U.S. including immediate termination of the premises' municipal utility services, seeking injunctive relief and/or any other remedies provided by this article or at law. The director may authorize the reconnection of municipal utility services, at the person's sole expense, and may authorize the person to recommence discharging into the MS4 when it has been demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director that the premises is in full compliance with this article and that the violation(s) will not reoccur. An emergency order issued under this section shall also require a person that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting an imminent or substantial threat to the health, safety or welfare of persons or the environment to submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the director within ten (10) calendar days of the receipt of the emergency order. Receipt is presumed to occur five (5) calendar days following the date the notice is mailed. 
(h)  Nuisance abatement. The city may, in conjunction with the administrative remedies provided in this section or as a separate action, abate a nuisance as follows: 
(1)  Notice of violation: nuisance. 
(a)  Any owner of any lot, parcel of land, or premises within the city limits having on it a nuisance described in this article shall be required to remove, abate, or cure such nuisance within seven (7) calendar days from the date of receipt of a NOV declaring the same from the director. Receipt is presumed to occur five (5) calendar days following the date the NOV is mailed. 
(b)  Any owner of any lot, parcel of land, or premises who receives the NOV described in this subsection (h) who cannot remove, abate or cure the nuisance due to weather conditions or who requires additional time to arrange a contractor to remove, abate or cure the nuisance may request and, at the director's discretion, may be granted an extension of time, not to exceed fourteen (14) calendar days. 
(c)  A NOV issued under this subsection (h) shall be given to the owner as follows: 
(i)  personally, in writing; or 
(ii)  by letter (regular mail) addressed to the owner at the owner's address as recorded in the tax appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the property is located; or 
(iii)  if personal service cannot be obtained: 
a.  by publication at least once; or 
b.  by posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the premises to which the violation relates; or 
c.  by posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the premises to which the violation relates, if the premises contains no buildings. 
(d)  A NOV issued under this subsection (h) may also be sent by letter (regular mail) to any operator, lessee, occupant or person in control of the property known to the director, as applicable. 
(e)  If the director mails a NOV to an owner in accordance with this subsection (h), and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as "refused" or "unclaimed," the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered as delivered. 
(2)  City authorized to abate. If the owner fails to comply with the NOV issued under this subsection (h), within the period prescribed, the city may enter the premises and remove, abate, or cure such nuisance. 
(3)  Lien on property. If the city abates a nuisance under this subsection (h), the owner of such premises shall be notified by regular mail of the expenses incurred therefrom and the administrative fee provided in paragraph (4) of this subsection (h). If such charges are not paid within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of such notice, the director shall cause to be filed with the county clerk documentation of such expenses sufficient to establish a lien against the premises on which the nuisance was abated. 
(4)  Remedies, expenses, and citation. Any owner who violates this article shall be subject to abatement restitution, penal fine(s) or both, or any other relief provided by law. A person who fails to abate such nuisance within the time provided shall be required to pay an administrative fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) in addition to the expenses incurred by the city to abate the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 09-046, § I, 7-28-09)  
Sec. 32-28. - Right to reconsideration and appeal. 
(a)  Reconsideration. 
(1)  Any person subject to a compliance order, stop work order or an emergency cease and desist order issued pursuant to this article may petition the director to reconsider the basis for the director's order within ten (10) calendar days of the affected person's receipt of such order. 
(2)  Failure to submit a timely written petition for reconsideration shall be deemed to be a waiver of any further right to administrative reconsideration or review of the order. 
(3)  In its petition, the petitioning party must indicate the provisions of the order objected to, the reasons for the objection(s), any facts that are contested, the facts that support the petitioner's view of the facts, and any alternative terms of any order that the petitioner would accept. 
(4)  The effect of any compliance order shall be stayed upon the director's receipt of the petition pending the director's reconsideration of the petition unless the director expressly makes a written determination to the contrary. The effectiveness of any stop work order or emergency cease and desist order shall not be stayed pending the director's reconsideration unless the director expressly makes a written determination staying such order. 
(5)  Within ten (10) calendar days of receipt of a petition for reconsideration, the director shall either (a) grant the petition and withdraw or modify the order accordingly; or (b) deny the petition and provide a written explanation detailing the reasons for the denial. The director's determination shall be personally served upon the petitioner, or his agent, or mailed, certified, return receipt requested, to the petitioner. 
(6)  Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the director to take any other enforcement action or prevent existing or further enforcement action from proceeding without first making the determination contemplated by this section. 
(b)  Appeal. 
(1)  Any person whose petition for reconsideration by the director has not been granted in its entirety and who remains adversely affected by the director's order may appeal the action of the director to the city manager by filing a written appeal with the city secretary within ten (10) calendar days of receipt of the director's decision. Receipt is presumed to occur five (5) calendar days following the date the determination is mailed. 
(2)  Failure to submit a timely written appeal to the city manager shall be deemed to be a waiver of further administrative review. 
(3)  In its written appeal to the city manager, the appealing party shall indicate the particular provisions of the order objected to, the particular determinations of the director that are contested, the reasons that the director's order and/or determinations are contested, and any alternative order that the appealing party would accept. 
(4)  The effect of the director's order, as issued or modified, shall not be stayed pending the appeal to the city manager, unless the city manager expressly makes a written determination staying the order. 
(5)  Within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of a written appeal to the city manager, the city manager shall consider the appeal and make a final written determination to the appellant. Such determination shall be personally served upon the appellant, or his agent, or mailed, certified, return receipt requested, to the appellant. 
(6)  Following final action by the city manager on the appeal, any adversely affected party may challenge such action by the city manager in an appropriate court of competent jurisdiction. 
(7)  Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the director to take any other enforcement action or prevent existing or further enforcement action from proceeding unless the same is expressly stayed by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 09-046, § I, 7-28-09)  
Sec. 32-29. - Judicial enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Civil remedies. Whenever it appears that a person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article relating to point source effluent limitations or the discharge of a pollutant or contaminant, other than from a non-point source, into the MS4, the city may petition the Bell County District Court for injunctive relief and/or civil penalties not to exceed $5,000 per day. (State law reference: Texas Local Government Code §§ 54.012 and 54.017.) 
(b)  Injunction. Upon a showing of substantial danger of injury or an adverse health impact to any person or to the property of any person other than the owner or operator, the city may obtain a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, against the owner or the operator of a premises that: 
(1)  prohibits specific conduct that violates this article; and 
(2)  requires specific conduct that is necessary for compliance with any provision of this article. 
(State law reference: Texas Local Government Code § 54.016.) 
(c)  Criminal penalties. 
(1)  Penalty. A person who violates, or causes or permits the violation of, any provision of this article, including knowingly making any false statement, representation, or certification in any application, record, report, plan, petition, appeal or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this article, or any order issued hereunder, or who has falsified, tampered with, or knowingly rendered inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article, commits a Class C misdemeanor which shall be punishable under section 1-8 of this code. A fine not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) may be imposed for violation of the provisions of this article that govern fire safety or public health and sanitation. With respect to violations of this code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. Proof of a culpable mental state, unless otherwise stated in this article, is not required for conviction of an offense under this article. 
(2)  Considerations. In determining the amount of any fine imposed hereunder, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the violation, corrective actions by the violator, the compliance history of the violator, the violator's knowledge, intent and/or negligence, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(d)  Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies that the city may have under State or Federal law or other city ordinances, including other civil actions provided under the Texas Water Code. The city may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a violator. The city is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any violator and these actions may be taken concurrently. 
(Ord. No. 09-046, § I, 7-28-09)  
Secs. 32-30—32-34. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL ORDINANCE 
 
Sec. 32-35. - Purposes and policy. 
During the construction process, soil is highly vulnerable to erosion by wind and water. Eroded soil endangers water resources by reducing water quality and causing the siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and other desirable species. Eroded soil also necessitates the cleaning and repair of storm sewers and open channels and the dredging of lakes. In addition, land disturbances during construction cause the loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and aquatic habitat. 
As a result, the purpose and policy of this article is to safeguard persons, protect property, prevent damage to the environment, and to facilitate the city's compliance with state and federal water quality regulations. This ordinance, as applicable, will also promote the public welfare by guiding, regulating, and controlling the design, construction, use, and maintenance of any development or other activity that disturbs or breaks the topsoil or results in the movement of earth on land in the city. 
(Ord. No. 11-061, § I, 7-12-11)  
Sec. 32-36. - Definitions. 
Best management practices shall mean a schedule of activities, prohibition of practices, maintenance of monitoring procedures, structural controls, and other management practices to provide effective erosion, sediment and site control, both on and off a particular site. 
Certified professional shall mean a person who has received training and is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (i.e.: through CPESC, Inc. or equivalent recognized by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality), is a State of Texas licensed professional engineer, or is licensed by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) to design, implement, inspect and maintain erosion and sediment control practices. 
Clearing shall mean any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover from land. 
City when used in this article shall mean the City of Killeen's director of public works or his designee. 
Common plan of development shall mean a construction activity that is completed in separate stages, separate phases, or in combination with other construction activities. A common plan of development (also known as a "common plan of development or sale") is identified by the documentation for the construction project that identifies the scope of the project, and may include plats, blueprints, marketing plans, contracts, building permits, a public notice or hearing, zoning requests, or other similar documentation and activities. A common plan of development does not necessarily include all construction projects within the jurisdiction of a public entity (e.g.: a city or university). Construction of roads or buildings in different parts of the jurisdiction would be considered separate "common plans," with only the interconnected parts of a project being considered part of a "common plan" (e.g.: a building and its associated parking lot and driveways, airport runway and associated taxiways, a building complex, etc.). Where discrete construction projects occur within a larger common plan of development or sale, but are located ¼ mile or more apart, and the area between the projects is not being disturbed, each individual project can be treated as a separate plan of development or sale, provided that any interconnecting road, pipeline or utility project that is part of the same "common plan" is not included in the area to be disturbed. 
Disturb (or any derivative of the word disturb) when relating to the alteration of improved or unimproved land shall mean any activity including, without limitation, the clearing, grading, filling, grubbing, scraping, dredging, mining, paving, excavating, drilling or movement of land, or the construction of any building or structure, the stockpiling of soil or materials, the baring of soil or rock, the diversion or piping of any natural or man-made watercourse, or any other activity that will or may result in soil erosion from water or wind, the movement of solid materials into waters or onto adjacent lands, or that changes the volume or peak flow discharge rate of stormwater runoff from the land surface. 
Drainage path or drainage way shall mean any channel, natural or man-made, that conveys surface runoff through, off and/or adjacent to the site. 
Erosion control shall mean a measure that prevents soil erosion. 
Erosion and sediment control plan (or plan) shall mean a plan or set of plans prepared by or under the direction of a certified professional indicating the specific measures and sequencing to be used to control sediment and erosion on a development site before, during and after construction on a site. In many cases, this plan will be satisfied by the submission of a Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) as required by sections 26-80 and/or 32-24 of this Code, provided that the same plan complies with this article. 
Final stabilization shall mean a construction site status where any of the following conditions are met: 
(a)  All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed and a uniform (i.e.: evenly distributed, without large bare areas) perennial vegetative cover with a density of at least seventy percent (70%) of the native background vegetative cover for the area has been established on all unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of riprap, gabions, or geotextiles) have been employed. 
(b)  For individual lots in a residential construction site by either: 
(1)  the homebuilder completing final stabilization as specified in condition (a) above; or 
(2)  the homebuilder establishing temporary stabilization for an individual lot prior to the time of transfer of the ownership of the home to the buyer and after informing the homeowner of the need for, and benefits of, final stabilization. If temporary stabilization is not feasible, then the homebuilder may fulfill this requirement by retaining perimeter controls or other best management practices, and informing the homeowner, in writing, of the need for removal of temporary controls and the establishment of final stabilization. If the homebuilder complies with these requirements, it shall be the duty of the homeowner to ensure final stabilization is achieved within one year after the transfer of ownership of the home to the buyer. 
(c)  For construction activities on land used for agricultural purposes (e.g.: pipelines across crop or range land), final stabilization may be accomplished by returning the disturbed land to its preconstruction agricultural use. Areas disturbed that were not previously used for agricultural activities, such as buffer strips immediately adjacent to surface water and areas that are not being returned to their preconstruction agricultural use must meet the final stabilization conditions of condition (a) above. 
(d)  In arid, semi-arid, and drought-stricken areas only, all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed and both of the following criteria have been met: 
(1)  Temporary erosion control measures (e.g.: degradable rolled erosion control product) are selected, designed, and installed along with an appropriate seed base to provide erosion control for at least three (3) years without active maintenance by the operator, and 
(2)  The temporary erosion control measures are selected, designed, and installed to achieve seventy percent (70%) vegetative coverage within three (3) years. 
Perimeter control shall mean a best management practice that prevents sediment from leaving a site by filtering sediment-laden runoff or other materials or diverting the same to a sediment trap or basin. 
Person, for purposes of compliance and/or liability under this article, shall be deemed to include an individual, partnership, corporation or any other type of legal entity or association owning or having an ownership interest in the subject land, as well as any assignee, agent, contractor or sub-contractor of the same whose actions or omissions violate the terms of this article. 
Phasing shall mean disturbing a site in distinct phases, with the stabilization of each phase being in compliance with this article before the disturbance of the next phase. 
Sediment control shall mean best management practices that prevent eroded materials from leaving a site. 
Site shall mean a parcel of land or a contiguous combination thereof, where land disturbance work is performed as a single unified operation. 
Site disturbance permit shall mean a permit issued by the city to regulate land disturbing activities to meet the objectives of articles II, III and IV of this chapter. A site disturbance permit shall be deemed to be the same as a land disturbance permit issued under section 26-80 of this code, provided that the requirements of these various articles are met. 
Stabilization shall mean the use of best management practices that prevent exposed soil from eroding. 
Start of construction shall mean, without limitation, the first land-disturbing activity associated with a development including land preparation such as clearing, grading, and filling; installation of streets and walkways; excavation for structural footings, piers, or foundations, and installation of accessory buildings such as garages. 
Structural control (or practice) shall mean a pollution prevention practice that requires the construction of a device, or the use of a device, to capture or prevent pollution in stormwater runoff. Structural controls and practices may include but are not limited to: silt fences, earthen dikes, drainage swales, sediment traps, check dams, subsurface drains, storm drain inlet protection, rock outlet protection, reinforced soil retaining systems, gabions, and temporary or permanent sediment basins. 
Temporary stabilization shall mean a condition where exposed soils or disturbed areas are provided a protective cover or other structural control to prevent the migration of pollutants. Temporary stabilization may include temporary seeding, geotextiles, mulches, and other techniques to reduce or eliminate erosion until either final stabilization can be achieved or until further construction activities take place. 
Watercourse shall mean and include a drainage path or drainage way, channel, or stream to include, without limitation, waters in the state (as those waters are defined under chapter 32, article II of this code), in which water flows within a defined bed and banks, even though the same may be slight, imperceptible or even absent in places, and originates from a definite source or sources. The water need not always be present and may be intermittent if the latter occurs with some degree of regularity, depending on the characteristics of the sources (i.e.: water is present or flowing during and/or after a rainfall event). 
**Terms not defined in the article shall be as defined in article II of this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 11-061, § I, 7-12-11; Ord. No. 12-046, § IV, 8-7-12)  
Sec. 32-37. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person shall disturb any area of land located within the corporate limits of the City of Killeen that is one (1) acre or larger, or land that is less than one (1) acre that is a part of a common plan of development that totals one (1) acre or more of land, before issuance of a site disturbance permit provided for in this article. 
(b)  No person shall fail to comply with an issued site disturbance permit throughout the duration of any land disturbing activity up to and including final stabilization of a site. 
(c)  No person shall be granted a site disturbance permit for land disturbing activity without the submission of an erosion and sediment control plan to the city and the subsequent release of the plan by the city, as indicated by the issuance of said permit. Upon issuance of the permit, the released erosion and sediment control plan shall be deemed to be part of the site disturbance permit for all purposes and shall be deemed to be conditions thereof. 
(d)  A site disturbance permit is not required for the following activities: 
(1)  Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property, or natural resources; 
(2)  Agricultural operations conducted as an allowable main or accessory use; or 
(3)  Any activity listed in section 26-80(b) of this code. 
(e)  Each application for a site disturbance permit shall contain all components required by sections 26-80(c) and 32-24(h) of this code and shall conform to the requirements of this article, section 26-80 and chapter 32, article II of this code. 
(f)  Each application shall include a statement that any land disturbing activity including, without limitation, disturbing, construction, or development involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance with the erosion and sediment control plan. 
(Ord. No. 11-061, § I, 7-12-11)  
Sec. 32-38. - Review, issuance, and appeal. 
(a)  The city will review each application for a site disturbance permit to determine its conformance with the provisions of this article, chapter 32, article II, and section 26-80 of this code. The review and issuance processes shall be as established in section 26-80(d) and (f) of this code and the appeal process of section 26-80(g) shall be available for the purpose indicated and according to the procedure identified therein. In accordance with those sections and to conform with this article, in the time period provided therein the city shall take one (1) of the following two (2) actions: 
(1)  Issue the permit application; 
(2)  Deny the permit application, indicating the reason(s) for non-issuance and the procedure for submitting a revised application. 
(b)  Failure of the city to act on an original or revised application within the applicable time period shall authorize the applicant to proceed in accordance with the plans as filed unless such time is extended by a mutual agreement between the applicant and the city. Pending preparation and approval of a revised plan, development activities may be allowed to proceed, at the city's discretion, in accordance with written conditions established by the city. 
(Ord. No. 11-061, § I, 7-12-11)  
Sec. 32-39. - Erosion and sediment control plan. 
(a)  In addition to the requirements of chapter 32, article II and section 26-80 of this code, an erosion and sediment control plan shall include the following: 
(1)  A natural resources map, at a scale of no smaller than 1"= 100', identifying soils, vegetative cover, watercourses, and resources protected under this and other chapters of this code including, without limitation, those protected under chapters 12 and 32; 
(2)  A sequence of construction and disturbance of the development site, including stripping and clearing; rough grading; construction of utilities, infrastructure, and buildings; and final grading and landscaping, as applicable. Sequencing shall identify the expected date that land disturbance will begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, areas of clearing, installation of temporary erosion and sediment control measures, and establishment of permanent vegetation and final stabilization measures. Sequencing shall indicate benchmarks in accordance with the inspection provisions indicated under section 31-41(a) of this article; 
(3)  A sequence of erosion and sediment control measures necessary to meet the objectives of this Article throughout all phases of construction and after completion of development of the site until the proposed time for city acceptance of infrastructure or the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, as applicable. Depending upon the complexity of the project, the drafting of intermediate plans may be required for each phase of development. 
(b)  Modifications to the erosion and sediment control plan shall be requested in advance of employing the modification and shall be processed and approved or disapproved in the same manner as section 32-38 of this article. Modifications authorized by the city by written authorization to the permittee may include, without limitation: 
(1)  Major amendments of the erosion and sediment control plan originally submitted to the city; and/or 
(2)  Field modifications of a significant nature, for example, the replacement or alteration of a best management practice to achieve compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 11-061, § I, 7-12-11)  
Sec. 32-40. - Design and operation requirements and restrictions. 
(a)  Land disturbing and sequencing plans, erosion control practices, sediment control practices, watercourse crossings, and other best management practices required to comply with this article shall be submitted by a certified professional, as defined in this article, to meet the design criteria set forth in the most recent version of the city's drainage design criteria, and shall be adequate to prevent the migration of sediment from the site and satisfy the other requirements of this article. Cut and fill of earthen and non-hardened slopes shall be no greater than a 3:1 ratio, except as approved by the city to meet other community or environmental objectives. 
(b)  Clearing or filling of wetlands or protected riparian corridors shall not be permitted, except when in compliance with all other chapters of this code and applicable state and federal law. Disturbing techniques that retain natural vegetation and drainage patterns shall be used to comply with the provisions of this article to the greatest extent practicable. 
(c)  Clearing, except that necessary to install sediment control devices and as otherwise allowed under this article, shall not begin until all sediment control measures have been installed in accordance with an issued site disturbance permit. 
(d)  A phasing plan shall be required on all sites disturbing greater than twenty (20) acres. The permittee shall establish the size of each phase at plan review and the phasing plan shall be indicated in an issued site disturbance permit. Phasing plans shall include each phase of the erosion and sediment control plan. Phase I shall show the existing conditions with the initial controls. The subsequent phase(s) shall be shown in a manner that takes into account a logical progression of work, while controls are maintained to protect from off-site damage. The final phase shall show all temporary controls removed and all permanent controls in place. 
(e)  Erosion control requirements shall include, without limitation, the following best management practices: 
(1)  Soil stabilization after disturbing or inactivity in construction shall be completed in accordance with this article and the current version of the applicable TCEQ TPDES permit authorizing stormwater discharges from construction sites, as amended; 
(2)  To ensure stabilization and compliance with this article and other provisions of this Code, additional best management practices shall be required when portions of the land proposed to be disturbed are unsuitable for site improvements based on soil type, unique topography, or geotechnical conditions; or where steep slopes or watercourses exist; 
(3)  Soil and material stockpiles shall be stabilized or covered as soon as practicable and proper best management practices shall be employed to comply with this article; 
(4)  The entire site must be stabilized or contained by utilizing best management practices if a project's completion is delayed or suspended for an extended period (i.e., a time period exceeding fourteen (14) or more calendar days); 
(5)  Best management practices shall be employed to minimize the blowing of dust or sediment from the site; and 
(6)  Best management practices shall be employed to divert upland runoff past disturbed slopes to the maximum extent practicable. 
(f)  Sediment control requirements shall include the following best management practices: 
(1)  Perimeter controls; 
(2)  Settling basins, sediment traps or tanks that are designed in a manner that shall allow adaptation to provide long-term stormwater management, if required by this Code or state or federal regulations; and/or 
(3)  Protection for adjacent properties through the use of a vegetated buffer strip in combination with other perimeter controls or best management practices to include, without limitation, practices that ensure compliance with title 30, Texas Administrative Code, section 305.541 (Effluent guidelines and standards), as amended. 
(g)  Watercourse protection requirements shall include: 
(1)  A temporary watercourse crossing if a perennial or intermittent watercourse will be crossed regularly during construction; 
(2)  Stabilization of the watercourse channel before, during, and after any in-channel work; 
(3)  All drainage ways on the site shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the city's drainage design criteria; and 
(4)  Stabilization measures shall be adequate to prevent erosion near or at the outlets of all pipes, flumes, and other hardened stormwater drainage features. 
(h)  Construction site access requirements shall include: 
(1)  A temporary access road/construction entrance shall be provided at all sites; and 
(2)  Measures shall be employed to ensure that sediment is not tracked onto public rights-of-way or washed into public storm drains. 
(Ord. No. 11-061, § I, 7-12-11)  
Sec. 32-41. - Inspection. 
(a)  The city or its designated agent reserves the right to make inspections of sites defined by this article to determine if work completed under the plan is in conformance with the same. Following inspection, the city will notify the permittee of the deficiencies in the work and require the permittee to comply with the erosion and sediment control plan as part of the issued site disturbance permit. Plans bearing the release by the city shall be maintained at the site during the progress of the work or notice shall be placed on-site indicating the location of the plan. The following records must be maintained by the permittee and either attached to or referenced in the SWPPP, and made readily available to the city upon request: 
(1)  The dates when major grading activities occur; 
(2)  the dates when construction activities temporarily or permanently cease on a portion of the site; 
(3)  The dates when stabilization measures are initiated; 
(4)  The dates of installation of sediment and erosion measures; 
(5)  The dates of completion of final landscaping and final stabilization. 
(b)  The permittee or his/her agent shall make regular inspections of the site in accordance with the inspection schedule outlined on the erosion and sediment control plan(s) and site disturbance permit. The purpose of such inspections shall be to determine the overall effectiveness of the plan and the need for additional erosion and sediment control measures, or amended/additional best management practices. All inspections shall be documented in written form and retained on site throughout construction and/or land disturbance and shall be made available to the city upon request. The city or its designated agent may enter the property of the applicant as deemed necessary to make regular inspections to ensure the permittee's compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 11-061, § I, 7-12-11)  
Sec. 32-42. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Administrative enforcement remedies. 
(1)  Generally. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city to take any action, including emergency action or any other enforcement action, without first issuing any other type of notice or order provided under this section. Compliance with any notice or order issued hereunder in no way relieves the alleged violator of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of any notice or order. 
(2)  Warning notice. When the city finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, the city may serve upon that person a written warning notice, specifying the particular violation believed to have occurred and requesting that the person immediately comply with this article or any order so issued. 
(3)  Notification of violation (NOV). When the city finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, the city may serve upon that person a written NOV. Within ten (10) calendar days of the receipt of the NOV the person shall submit an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention of reoccurrence thereof, to include specific required actions and time lines for completion, to the city. If the alleged violator denies that any violation occurred and/or contends that no corrective action is necessary, an explanation of the basis of any such denial or contention shall be submitted to the city within the same time period. Receipt of the NOV is presumed to occur five (5) calendar days following the date the NOV is mailed. 
(4)  Consent orders. The city may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar agreements with any person responsible for the noncompliance with any provision in this article or any order issued hereunder. Such agreements may include specific action to be taken by the person to correct the noncompliance within a stated time period. Agreements entered into under this paragraph shall be judicially enforceable. 
(5)  Compliance orders. When the city finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, the city may issue an order to the person directing the person to come into compliance with this article within a specified time limit. Compliance orders may contain requirements to address the actual or threatened violation and/or a reoccurrence thereof. The compliance order may also contain requirements directing the person to remediate, abate and/or restore any environmental or other adverse effects associated with a particular violation, including, but not being limited to, monitoring, assessment, and evaluation of the adverse effects and determination of the appropriate remedial, abatement, and/or restoration action; confinement, removal, cleanup, treatment, and disposal of any discharged or released sediment or other materials; prevention, minimization, and/or mitigation of any damage to the public health, welfare, or the environment that may result from the violation; restoration or replacement of city property or natural resources damaged by the violation. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for any compliance established by state or federal requirements. 
(6)  Stop work orders. When the city finds that any owner or operator, or agent thereof, of a site under construction or disturbance has violated, continues to violate or threatens to violate any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, the city may issue a stop work order which shall be posted at the premises and distributed to all city departments and divisions whose decisions affect any continuing construction activity at the premises. Unless express written exception is made by the city, the stop work order shall prohibit any further construction activity at the premises and shall bar any further inspection or approval by the city associated with a building permit, grading permit, plat approval, site disturbance plan approval, or any other city approval necessary to commence or continue construction or to assume occupancy at the premises. 
(7)  Revocation of construction registration. When the city finds that any agent, contractor or subcontractor, that holds a construction registration issued under chapter 8, article III of this code of ordinances, under contract with the owner of real property is responsible for a violation of this article, the city may institute proceedings under chapter 8 for the suspension of the construction registration. The grounds of such proceeding shall be a failure to comply with this article and all regulatory, procedural and appeal rights of sections 8-69 through 8-72 shall be deemed to apply to the action. 
(b)  Judicial enforcement remedies. 
(1)  Civil remedies. Whenever it appears that a person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article relating to point source effluent limitations or the discharge of a pollutant or contaminant, including sediment, other than from a non-point source, into the MS4, the city may petition the Bell County district court for injunctive relief and/or civil penalties not to exceed $5,000 per day. (State law reference: Texas Local Government Code §§ 54.012 and 54.017.) 
(2)  Injunction. Upon a showing of substantial danger of injury or an adverse health impact to any person or to the property of any person other than the owner or operator, the city may obtain a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, against the owner or the operator of a premises that: 
(a)  prohibits specific conduct that violates this article; and 
(b)  requires specific conduct that is necessary for compliance with any provision of this article. (State law reference: Texas Local Government Code § 54.016.) 
(3)  Criminal penalties. 
(a)  Penalty. A person who violates, or causes or permits the violation of, any provision of this article, including knowingly making any false statement, representation, or certification in any application, record, report, plan, petition, appeal or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this article, or any order issued hereunder commits a Class C misdemeanor which shall be punishable under section 1-8 of this code. A fine not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) may be imposed for violation of the provisions of this article that govern fire safety or public health and sanitation. With respect to violations of this code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. Proof of a culpable mental state, unless otherwise stated in this article, is not required for conviction of an offense under this article. 
(b)  Considerations. In determining the amount of any fine imposed hereunder, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the violation, corrective actions by the violator, the compliance history of the violator, the violator's knowledge, intent and/or negligence, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(c)  Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies that the city may have under state or federal law or other city ordinances, including other civil actions provided under the Texas Water code. The city may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a violator. The city is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any violator and these actions may be taken concurrently. 
(Ord. No. 11-061, § I, 7-12-11)  
ARTICLE IV. - POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER CONTROL ORDINANCE 
 
Sec. 32-43. - Purpose and policy. 
The objective and purpose of this article is to establish minimum stormwater management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the general health, safety, and welfare of the public. This article seeks to meet this objective and achieve the stated purpose through the realization of the following general benchmarks: 
(a)  Mitigate increases in stormwater runoff from land disturbing activities to reduce flooding, siltation, and stream bank erosion, and maintain the integrity and functionality of watercourses; 
(b)  Minimize increases in nonpoint source pollution caused by stormwater runoff from land disturbing activities that would otherwise degrade local water quality; 
(c)  Manage surface water runoff from land disturbing activities to limit increases in flow and preserve pre-land disturbance hydrologic conditions to the maximum extent practicable; and 
(d)  Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management controls and monitoring to verify that these management controls are properly maintained and continue to minimize threats to public safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 12-046, § I, 8-7-12)  
Sec. 32-44. - Applicability. 
This article shall be applicable to all landowners, applicants, and/or agents of the same conducting land disturbing activity disturbing one (1) acre or more of land, land disturbing activities disturbing areas that are smaller than one (1) acre if the land is part of a larger common plan of development, and any land disturbing activities conducted within or adjacent to a Creek Buffer Zone (CBZ) as defined herein and the city's adopted Drainage Design Manual (DDM), which is incorporated into this article for all intents and purposes. 
(Ord. No. 12-046, § I, 8-7-12)  
Sec. 32-45. - Performance standards; exemptions. 
To minimize the adverse impacts from stormwater runoff and to realize the objectives of this article, the city has developed this article and the applicable sections of the DDM to provide a set of minimum performance standards that shall be met for all land disturbing activity to which this article applies. The following activities may be exempt from these stormwater performance standards: 
1.  Additions or modifications to existing single family structures; 
2.  Repairs to any stormwater treatment measure deemed necessary by the director or other regulatory entity; and 
3.  Activities exempted from the land disturbance permit process under section 26-80(b) of this code. 
(Ord. No. 12-046, § I, 8-7-12)  
Sec. 32-46. - Compatibility with other law. 
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of federal, state or local law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions incompatible with those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 12-046, § I, 8-7-12)  
Sec. 32-47. - Definitions. 
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated. Additionally, all references to any Federal or State regulation or act shall refer to the current regulation or act and any amendments thereto after the effective date of this ordinance. Terms not defined in the article shall be as defined in article II and article III of this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
Applicant shallmean a property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed a stormwater management site plan. 
Creek Buffer Zone (CBZ) shall mean a setback established for all property located on or adjacent to a natural, vegetated, earthen or grass lined watercourse as shown on United States Geological Survey (U.S.G.S.) maps or FEMA maps in which land disturbance may be restricted due to a stream bank erosion hazard. In addition, any watercourse that is shown on the maps identified above that is not within a FEMA special flood hazard area and not having side slopes of 3:1 or steeper shall not be considered as a creek buffer zone. Any land disturbing activity in a CBZ shall comply with the Drainage Design Manual (DDM), Chapter 10 "Post-Construction Stormwater Best Management Practices." Delineation methods for CBZs are defined in the city's DDM. 
Detention shall mean the temporary storage of storm runoff in a stormwater management facility with the goals of controlling peak discharge rates and providing gravity settling of pollutants. 
Impervious cover shall mean those surfaces that do not allow the effective infiltration of rainfall or stormwater runoff into the ground (e.g., building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc.). 
Land disturbing activity shall mean any activity including, without limitation, the clearing, grading, filling, grubbing, scraping, dredging, mining, paving, excavating, drilling or movement of land, or the construction of any building or structure, the stockpiling of soil or materials, the baring of soil or rock, the diversion or piping of any natural or man-made watercourse, or any other activity that will or may result in soil erosion from water or wind, the movement of solid materials into waters or onto adjacent lands, or that changes the volume or peak flow discharge rate of stormwater runoff from the land surface. 
Landowner shall mean the legal or beneficial owner of land, including those holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding proprietary rights in the land. 
Maintenance easement, covenant and agreement shall mean a legally-binding and recorded document that acts as a real property easement, covenant and restriction providing for the perpetual existence and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
Off-site facility shall mean a stormwater management facility located outside the subject property boundary depicted in the applicable SWSMP. 
On-site facility shall mean a stormwater management facility located within the subject property boundary depicted in the applicable SWSMP. 
Potential stormwater pollutants shall mean stormwater pollutants that may be introduced to the city's MS4 and/or waters of the State or U.S. as a result of land disturbing activity and shall include, without limitation, total suspended solids, total dissolved solids, increased temperature, fats, oils and grease, floatables (e.g. trash, rubbish, etc.), nutrients (e.g. nitrogen; phosphorus; etc.), bacteria (e.g. fecal coliform; e. coli), metals, pesticides and herbicides, and sediment (due to soil erosion). 
Redevelopment shall mean any construction, alteration or improvement of a site that changes the "footprint" of a site or building to an extent that triggers this article's applicability. 
Site disturbance permit shall mean a permit issued by the city to regulate land disturbing activities to meet the objectives of articles II, III and IV of this chapter. A site disturbance permit shall be deemed to be the same as a land disturbance permit issued under section 26-80 of this code, provided that the requirements of these various articles are met. 
Stormwater management shall mean the use of structural or non-structural practices and BMPs that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes, peak flow discharge rates and detrimental changes in stream temperature that affect water quality and habitat. 
Stormwater management facility shall mean any facility that is built to control stormwater runoff in order to comply with the BMPs and requirements established herein. 
Stormwater management site plan (SWMSP) shall mean a plan that shall be included as part of the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) for a site that describes all structural and nonstructural post-construction BMPs to be utilized to comply with this article. The SWMSP shall be submitted with the site disturbance permit in instances where a SWPPP is not required under this code. 
Structural control (or practice) shall mean a pollution prevention practice that requires the construction of a device, or the use of a device, to capture or prevent pollution in stormwater runoff. 
(Ord. No. 12-046, § I, 8-7-12)  
Sec. 32-48. - Stormwater management site plan. 
(a)  A stormwater management site plan (SWMSP) is required for all land disturbing activities to which this article applies. 
(b)  No application for a site disturbance permit shall be approved unless a SWMSP is submitted therewith detailing how runoff and associated water quality impacts resulting from the land disturbing activity will be controlled or managed in compliance with the requirements of this article. If a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) or erosion and sediment control plan is required for the site, the SWMSP shall be included as a component of the SWPPP. 
(c)  For land disturbing activities located within a CBZ that disturb less than one (1) acre of land, where a SWPPP is not required, the SWMSP shall be submitted as a separate document to the director for review and approval prior to the commencement of any land disturbing activity. 
(d)  The SWMSP shall meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklist found in section 32-49 (b) of this article, be prepared by a certified professional and shall indicate whether stormwater will be managed on-site or off-site. The plan shall include the specific location and type of practices in order to receive consideration for BMP credit provided in this article. 
(e)  The SWMSP shall be developed and coordinated with the drainage construction design and may be shown on the same plan sheet, if applicable. It shall also be coordinated with the landscaping construction design to prevent conflicts and assure compatible land use, if landscaping is a selected and approved BMP. 
(f)  A site disturbance permit shall not be issued until a SWMSP has been reviewed and released by the director after determining that the plan is consistent with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-046, § I, 8-7-12)  
Sec. 32-49. - Stormwater management site plan requirements. 
(a)  A SWMSP shall be required with site disturbance permit applications and shall include sufficient information to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the site, the potential impacts of all proposed land disturbing activity of the site on the affected water resources, both present and future, and the effectiveness and acceptability of the measures proposed for managing stormwater generated at the site. This information is required to enable the director to determine the type of stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, and to ensure adequate planning for management of stormwater runoff from future land disturbing activities. 
(b)  The following information, in addition to the information required by Chapter 10, "Post-Construction Stormwater Best Management Practices," and other applicable sections of the DDM shall be included in the SWMSP: 
(1)  Plan. A map (or maps) depicting the site layout plan that indicates: 
(A)  The location of proposed structural and non-structural stormwater management facilities; 
(B)  The drainage patterns and drainage areas that drain to each stormwater management facility or BMP; 
(C)  The limits of land disturbing activities and any natural areas that are proposed to be preserved; 
(D)  The percentage of the total disturbed area that drains to one or more stormwater BMPs and the limits of CBZs, if applicable; and 
(E)  For BMP credits related to site design BMPs, the map(s) shall show special flood hazard areas, natural features, sensitive areas or erodible soils, as applicable, to demonstrate compliance with the DDM. 
(2)  Engineer Analysis. An engineering analysis is required to show that the proposed stormwater management measures are capable of controlling runoff from the site in compliance with this article, the specifications included within the DDM, and other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  Inventory. A written or graphic inventory, as described in the DDM, of the natural resources existing at the site and surrounding area (a minimum of 500 feet from the property line) prior to the proposed or actual commencement of land disturbing activities and a description of the applicable watershed and its relation to the site. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas in applicable areas. 
(4)  Maintenance and Repair Plan. The design and planning of all stormwater management facilities shall include detailed maintenance and repair procedures to ensure their continued functionality. This plan shall identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility that need to be maintained and the equipment and skills or training necessary. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures, which meet all specifications found in the DDM, shall also be included in this plan. 
(5)  Maintenance easement, covenant and agreement ("agreement"). Except for CBZs, the applicant shall ensure that all proposed BMPs are perpetually maintained. As such, the applicant shall reserve or secure perpetual access and maintenance easements to all stormwater BMPs at the site for the purpose of inspection, repair and perpetual maintenance. The landowner may assign the respective maintenance and repair obligations to a Home Owners Association, upon formal written consent of the same, or retain the same. The agreements shall be presented to the City in draft form as a part of the SWMSP. Following completion and release of all initially required actions contemplated by the SWMSP, the applicable agreements shall be recorded with the SWMSP in the real property records of Bell County at the applicant's expense. The agreement shall also conform to the following: 
(A)  The agreement shall contain affirmative language, in the nature of a covenant running with the land, obligating the landowner, his successors, heirs and assigns, to perpetually preserve, protect and maintain the stormwater BMPs and otherwise comply with this article; 
(B)  The agreement shall identify the city as co-grantee for access and inspection purposes and as a beneficiary to said agreement's obligations; 
(C)  The agreement shall include any and all maintenance easements required to access and inspect the stormwater management facilities, and to perform routine maintenance as necessary to ensure the perpetual functionality of the stormwater management facility in accordance with this article and the applicable SWMSP; 
(D)  The agreement shall provide for access to the facility for periodic inspection by the city for regular or special assessments of the property to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper working condition to meet design standards and any other provisions established by this article; 
(E)  The agreement shall provide a schedule describing necessary maintenance activities and providing a periodic schedule for the same to ensure continued functionality of the stormwater management facility. The agreement shall also include a schedule for interim periodic inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance. Maintenance and inspection schedules shall conform to the DDM and section 32-60 of this article; and 
(F)  The agreement shall provide a provision authorizing the city, upon written notification thereof, to increase the inspection and maintenance requirements as deemed reasonably necessary to ensure proper functioning of the stormwater management facility. 
(6)  Maintenance by city. In its sole discretion, upon written request of the applicant accompanying the SWMSP, the director may agree in writing, under terms the director may deem necessary and beneficial, to accept and maintain easements containing a site's stormwater management facility as a publicly-dedicated improvement following completion of BMP construction and stabilization, if a public benefit to said acceptance is proposed by the applicant and validated by the director. This agreement may be tentatively reached as a substitute for the maintenance easement, covenant and agreement required above. If the facility or facilities are constructed in compliance with the terms of the agreement and this article, it will be accepted by the city. However, this provision shall not be construed as a guarantee of the city's final acceptance of any BMP as a public improvement that does not comply with the terms of any such agreement or this article. 
(7)  A concept plan is required to evaluate the maximum development potential of a site and adjacent properties under current common ownership and its affect on the objectives of this article under existing zoning, regardless of whether the applicant presently intends to develop the site to its maximum potential. 
(c)  For land disturbing activity proposed on a redevelopment site, an applicant shall be required to include within the SWMSP measures for controlling existing stormwater runoff discharges from the site in accordance with the standards of this article, to the maximum extent practicable. 
(Ord. No. 12-046, § I, 8-7-12)  
Sec. 32-50. - Required permanent BMPs. 
To preserve the existing natural resources in the city and to promote sustainable development, demonstration of compliance with the following permanent BMPs, where applicable, are required in the SWMSP of all land disturbing activities. 
(a)  Site Layout Compliance. As indicated above, each SWMSP shall depict the site layout as well as the placement of the selected BMPs. Compliance with a proposed site layout and SWMSP is a condition precedent to the issuance of a written acceptance of infrastructure, certificate of occupancy, and/or building permit, as may be applicable. 
(b)  Creek Buffer Zone (CBZ). All sites located on or adjacent to a natural, vegetated, earthen or grass lined watercourse as shown on U.S.G.S. maps or FEMA maps are hereby deemed to be wholly or partially within a CBZ. In addition, any watercourse that is shown on the maps identified above that is not within a FEMA special flood hazard area and not having side slopes of 3:1 or steeper shall not be considered as a creek buffer zone. When a site is located within or is directly connected to a CBZ, the developer, builder or landowner, as applicable, shall comply with the techniques found in the DDM, Chapter 10 , "Post-Construction Stormwater Best Management Practices," while disturbing a CBZ site. 
(c)  Water Quality Standards. Each SWMSP is required to address compliance with the minimum water quality standards as defined in chapter 32, article II of this code. 
(Ord. No. 12-046, § I, 8-7-12)  
Sec. 32-51. - Additional BMP credit point requirements. 
In addition to the required BMPs, listed in Section 32-50 above, the following number of BMP credit points are required based on the size of the project and development type: 
Table 1: Additional BMP Credit Point Requirements. 
Non-Residential 	
	Number of additional BMP Credits required 
1 acre < Disturbed Area < 5 acres 	0.5 
5 acres < Disturbed Area < 10 acres 	1.0 
10 acres < Disturbed Area < 20 acres 	1.5 
> 20 acres 	2.0 
 
Residential 	
	Number of additional BMP Credits required 
1 acre < Disturbed Area < 5 acres 	0.5 
5 acres < Disturbed Area < 50 acres 	1.0 
> 50 acres 	1.5 
 
The number of credits attributed to individual BMPs are specified in Chapter 10, "Post-Construction Stormwater Best Management Practices" and Appendix C of the DDM. In addition, a credit of 0.5 will be attributed to the CBZ permanent BMP. 
(Ord. No. 12-046, § I, 8-7-12)  
Sec. 32-52. - Factors to be considered. 
The following are examples of factors that should be considered when evaluating and selecting BMPs: 
(a)  Effect of the land disturbing activity on runoff volumes and rates; 
(b)  Release of potential pollutants from the land disturbing activity; 
(c)  Percent of site treated by each BMP; 
(d)  Effectiveness of the BMP on minimizing the release of potential pollutants from the land disturbing activity; 
(e)  Natural resources on the site; and 
(f)  Configuration of site, including existing watercourses. 
(Ord. No. 12-046, § I, 8-7-12)  
Sec. 32-53. - Additional BMPs. 
The following items are acceptable permanent post-construction stormwater BMPs to be utilized when meeting the requirements of Table 1: additional BMP credit requirements in Section 32-51, if appropriate and based on the size of the land disturbing activity, and if implemented and/or constructed in compliance with the applicable designs provided in Chapter 10, "Post-Construction Stormwater Best Management Practices" of the DDM: 
(a)  Preserve Special Flood Hazard Areas (Riparian Buffer); 
(b)  Protection of Natural Features; 
(c)  Dedication and acceptance of Linear Parks; 
(d)  Reduce Limits of Clearing and Grading; 
(e)  Open Space Design/Cluster Development; 
(f)  Minimize Directly Connected Impervious Area; 
(g)  Locate Development in Less Sensitive Areas; 
(h)  Minimize Siting on Erodible Soils; 
(i)  Dedication and Acceptance of Conservation Easements; 
(j)  Urban Forestry; 
(k)  Xeriscaping; 
(l)  Parking Lot/Stormwater Islands; 
(m)  Porous Concrete/Asphalt; 
(n)  Modular Porous Pavement System; 
(o)  Bioretention (Rain Garden); 
(p)  Dry Extended Detention Basin; 
(q)  Stream Restoration; 
(r)  Stormwater Wetland; 
(s)  Vegetated Swales; 
(t)  Multi-Purpose Detention Areas; 
(u)  Enhanced Swales; 
(v)  Wet Pond; and 
(w)  Other Proposed BMPs, which will be considered when submitted as part of a SWMSP, provided supporting calculations and references are provided. 
(Ord. No. 12-046, § I, 8-7-12)  
Sec. 32-54. - Variances. 
(a)  Every applicant shall comply with all requirements of this article, unless a written request is filed with the director at the time of SWMSP submittal requesting a variance from one or more requirements and the director grants the variance in accordance with this section. 
(b)  A variance, in whole or in part, may be granted from the minimum requirements of this article upon written request of the applicant, provided that: 
(1)  It can be demonstrated that the proposed development is not likely to impair attainment of the purpose of this article; 
(2)  The request for the variance is a result of a special condition inherent to the physical attributes of the property itself resulting in an unnecessary or unusual hardship to the applicant; 
(3)  The special condition is one unique to the property and is not a widespread condition existing on similarly-situated properties; 
(4)  The special condition was not self-created or self-imposed; 
(5)  The variance request is not based on financial considerations alone; 
(6)  The variance request represents the least possible deviation from the requirements of this article necessary for the landowner to be able to reasonably use the landowner's property; and 
(7)  The applicant satisfies the remaining requirements of this section. 
(c)  To qualify for a variance the applicant shall propose alternative minimum requirements to satisfy the purpose of this article. If the applicant's request proposes an off-site treatment facility, the facility shall be designed and constructed to provide a level of protection equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site BMPs and otherwise comply with the requirements of this article. Additionally, non-structural BMPs shall be used on the site to reduce the generation of stormwater from the site and minimize the pollutants generated at the site. 
(d)  In instances where the conditions above are satisfied, the director may grant a variance from strict compliance with this article, as long as acceptable mitigation measures are provided and the health, safety and welfare of the public is not compromised. 
(Ord. No. 12-046, § I, 8-7-12)  
Sec. 32-55. - Establishment and delineation of creek buffer zones. 
All property located on or adjacent to a natural, vegetated, earthen or grass lined watercourse as shown on U.S.G.S. maps or FEMA maps is hereby deemed to be wholly or partially within a CBZ and shall be delineated and otherwise comply with the requirements and standards of the DDM, Chapter 10, "Post-Construction Stormwater Best Management Practices." In addition, any watercourse that is shown on the maps identified above that is not within a FEMA special flood hazard area and not having side slopes of 3:1 or steeper shall not be considered as a creek buffer zone. 
(Ord. No. 12-046, § I, 8-7-12)  
Sec. 32-56. - Designation requirements. 
(a)  All plats, plans, permit applications and SWMSPs shall clearly show the limits of CBZs based on criteria in the DDM, Chapter 10, "Post-Construction Stormwater Best Management Practices." 
(b)  The limits shall be indicated by dashed lines and labeled "Creek Buffer Zone." 
(c)  CBZ designation may be combined with other lines in cases where CBZ lines coincide with regulatory floodplain limits or publicly dedicated easements, such as drainage easements, provided that dual labeling is utilized. 
(d)  CBZ requirements shall not apply to watercourses that have been engineered to convey a one-percent (1%) chance storm (100-year frequency storm) and to withstand erosive forces and that have been adequately stabilized by man-made construction materials such as concrete rip-rap, gabions and concrete retaining walls. Wood timbers ties shall not be used and will not be considered to stabilize watercourses due to their relatively short life span of service. 
(Ord. No. 12-046, § I, 8-7-12)  
Sec. 32-57. - Review, issuance, and appeal. 
(a)  The director will review each application containing a SWMSP to determine its conformance with the provisions of this article, this chapter, and section 26-80 of this code. The review and permit issuance processes shall be as established in section 26-80(d) and (f) of this code and the appeal process of section 26-80(g) shall be available for the purpose indicated and according to the procedure identified therein. In accordance with those sections and to conform with this article, in the time period provided therein the director shall take one (1) of the following two (2) actions: 
(1)  Issue the permit application; 
(2)  Deny the permit application, indicating the reason(s) for non-issuance and the procedure for submitting a revised application. 
(b)  Failure of the director to act on an original or revised application within the applicable time period shall authorize the applicant to proceed in accordance with the plans as filed unless such time is extended by a mutual agreement between the applicant and the director. However, no proposed dedication shall be deemed accepted until formally accepted by the city or as otherwise provided by applicable law. Pending preparation and approval of a revised plan, development activities may be allowed to proceed, at the director's discretion, in accordance with written conditions established by the city. 
(Ord. No. 12-046, § I, 8-7-12)  
Sec. 32-58. - Construction inspection. 
Stormwater management facility inspections shall comply with all requirements found within DDM, Chapter 10, "Post-Construction Stormwater Best Management Practices" and the following: 
The director reserves the right to make inspections of sites as hereinafter described and either shall approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the landowner or agent wherein the work fails to comply with the SWMSP as approved. To obtain inspections, the landowner, applicant or developer shall notify the city at least two (2) working days before commencement or request of the following: 
(1)  Start of construction; 
(2)  Installation of post construction BMPs; and 
(3)  Final acceptance of public infrastructure, or prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy dependent upon respective development stage. 
(Ord. No. 12-046, § I, 8-7-12)  
Sec. 32-59. - Record drawings. 
All applicants are required to submit actual "Record Drawings" for any structural stormwater BMP or stormwater management facility after final construction is completed. The drawings shall show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer. Installation records and record drawings shall be permanently retained and shall be subject to inspection and review by the director as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-046, § I, 8-7-12)  
Sec. 32-60. - Minimum inspection requirements for all stormwater management facilities. 
All stormwater management facilities shall be inspected at least once annually, or at the recommended frequency specified in the DDM or any applicable SWMSP agreement recorded under section 32-49(b) above, whichever is more stringent. The inspection shall document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of this provision. Repair and maintenance needs may include but are not limited to: removal of silt, litter and other debris accumulated within BMPs; replacement of soil or biofiltration/filtration media; replacement or repair of damaged sections of porous pavement or asphalt; grass cutting and vegetation removal; and replacement of landscape vegetation. Any maintenance or repair needs identified through inspection or other means shall be performed in a timely manner not to exceed thirty (30) days' of discovery, or immediately upon notification by the director. Recommended inspection schedules are specified in the DDM, Chapter 10, "Post-Construction Stormwater Best Management Practices." 
(Ord. No. 12-046, § I, 8-7-12)  
Sec. 32-61. - Inspection programs for stormwater management facilities. 
(a)  The director may enter the property of the applicant as deemed necessary to make regular inspections to ensure the applicant's compliance with this article and the validity of the reports filed under section (b) below. The director reserves the right to make inspections of sites to determine if work and/or maintenance provided in the SWMSP is in conformance with the same. Inspection programs may be established on any reasonable basis including, without limitation, routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection of drainage basins or areas identified as higher than typical sources of sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses or industries of a type associated with higher than usual discharges of contaminants or potential pollutants or with discharges of a type that are more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of state or federal water quality standards or TPDES stormwater permits; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, without limitation, the following activities: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and other stormwater treatment practices. 
(b)  For all privately owned and maintained stormwater management facilities, the landowner or agent shall make regular inspections of all BMPs in accordance with Section 32-49(b)(4) and (5). The purpose of such inspections will be to determine the overall effectiveness of the permanent BMPs and the need for additional control measures. All inspections shall be documented in written form and kept on file for a period of three (3) years. In addition, record drawings of the facilities' installation and construction shall be retained permanently. Maintenance and inspection reports and record drawings shall be provided to the director upon inspection and/or reasonable request. 
(Ord. No. 12-046, § I, 8-7-12)  
Sec. 32-62. - Nuisance. 
Nuisances. Any violation of this article including, without limitation, failing to comply with the provisions of an applicable SWMSP or properly maintain stormwater management facilities is a threat to public health, safety and welfare and is hereby deemed to be a nuisance. Nuisances may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's sole expense in accordance with this article, and/or a civil or criminal action may be pursued to abate, enjoin, otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance, or to exercise other legal remedies. 
(Ord. No. 12-046, § I, 8-7-12)  
Sec. 32-63. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Administrative enforcement remedies. 
(1)  Generally. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city to take any action, including emergency action or any other enforcement action, without first issuing any other type of notice or order provided under this section. Compliance with any notice or order issued hereunder in no way relieves the alleged violator of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of any notice or order. 
(2)  Warning notice. When the city finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, the city may serve upon that person a written warning notice, specifying the particular violation believed to have occurred and requesting that the person immediately comply with this article or any order so issued. 
(3)  Notification of violation (NOV). When the city finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, the city may serve upon that person a written NOV. Within ten (10) calendar days of the receipt of the NOV, the person shall submit an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention of reoccurrence thereof, to include specific required actions and time lines for completion, to the city. If the alleged violator denies that any violation occurred and/or contends that no corrective action is necessary, an explanation of the basis of any such denial or contention shall be submitted to the city within the same time period. Receipt of the NOV is presumed to occur five (5) calendar days following the date the NOV is mailed. 
(4)  Consent orders. The city may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar agreements with any person responsible for the noncompliance with any provision in this article or any order issued hereunder. Such agreements may include specific action to be taken by the person to correct the noncompliance within a stated time period. Agreements entered into under this paragraph shall be judicially enforceable. 
(5)  Compliance orders. When the city finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, the city may issue an order to the person directing the person to come into compliance with this article within a specified time limit. Compliance orders may contain requirements to address the actual or threatened violation and/or a reoccurrence thereof. The compliance order may also contain requirements directing the person to remediate, abate and/or restore any environmental or other adverse effects associated with a particular violation, including, but not being limited to, monitoring, assessment, and evaluation of the adverse effects and determination of the appropriate remedial, abatement, and/or restoration action; confinement, removal, cleanup, treatment, and disposal of any discharged or released sediment or other materials; prevention, minimization, and/or mitigation of any damage to the public health, welfare, or the environment that may result from the violation; restoration or replacement of city property or natural resources damaged by the violation. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for any compliance established by state or federal requirements. 
(6)  Stop work orders. When the city finds that any owner or operator, or agent thereof, of a site under construction or disturbance has violated, continues to violate or threatens to violate any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, the city may issue a stop work order which shall be posted at the premises and distributed to all city departments and divisions whose decisions affect any continuing construction activity at the premises. Unless express written exception is made by the city, the stop work order shall prohibit any further construction activity at the premises and shall bar any further inspection or approval by the city associated with a building permit, grading permit, plat approval, site disturbance permit approval, or any other city approval necessary to commence or continue construction or to assume occupancy at the premises. 
(7)  Revocation of construction registration. When the city finds that any agent, contractor or subcontractor, that holds a construction registration issued under chapter 8, article III of this code of ordinances, under contract with the owner of real property is responsible for a violation of this article, the city may institute proceedings under chapter 8 for the suspension of the construction registration. The grounds of such proceeding shall be a failure to comply with this article and all regulatory, procedural and appeal rights of sections 8-69 through 8-72 shall be deemed to apply to the action. 
(b)  Nuisance abatement. The city may, in conjunction with the administrative remedies provided in this section or as a separate action, abate a nuisance as follows: 
(1)  Notice of violation: nuisance. 
(A)  Any owner of any lot, parcel of land, or premises within the city limits having on it a nuisance described in this article shall be required to remove, abate, or cure such nuisance within seven (7) calendar days from the date of receipt of a NOV declaring the same from the director. Receipt is presumed to occur five (5) calendar days following the date the NOV is mailed. 
(B)  Any owner of any lot, parcel of land, or premises who receives the NOV described in this subsection (b) who cannot remove, abate or cure the nuisance due to weather conditions or who requires additional time to arrange a contractor to remove, abate or cure the nuisance may request and, at the director's discretion, may be granted an extension of time, not to exceed fourteen (14) calendar days. 
(C)  A NOV issued under this article shall be given to the owner as follows: 
(i)  personally, in writing; or 
(ii)  by letter (regular mail) addressed to the owner at the owner's address as recorded in the tax appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the property is located; or 
(iii)  if personal service cannot be obtained: 
a.  by publication at least once; or 
b.  by posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the premises to which the violation relates; or 
c.  by posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the premises to which the violation relates, if the premises contains no buildings. 
(D)  A NOV issued under this subsection (b) may also be sent by letter (regular mail) to any operator, lessee, occupant or person in control of the property known to the director, as applicable. 
(E)  If the director mails a NOV to an owner in accordance with this subsection (b), and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as "refused" or "unclaimed," the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered as delivered. 
(2)  City authorized to abate. If the owner fails to comply with the NOV issued under this subsection (h), within the period prescribed, the city may enter the premises and remove, abate, or cure such nuisance. 
(3)  Lien on property. If the city abates a nuisance under this article, the owner of such premises shall be notified by regular mail of the expenses incurred therefrom and the administrative fee provided in paragraph (4) of this subsection (b). If such charges are not paid within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of such notice, the director shall cause to be filed with the county clerk documentation of such expenses sufficient to establish a lien against the premises on which the nuisance was abated. 
(4)  Remedies, expenses, and citation. Any owner who violates this article shall be subject to abatement restitution, penal fine(s) or both, or any other relief provided by law. A person who fails to abate such nuisance within the time provided shall be required to pay an administrative fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) in addition to the expenses incurred by the city to abate the nuisance. 
(c)  Judicial enforcement remedies. 
(1)  Civil remedies. Whenever it appears that a person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, the city may petition the Bell County district court for injunctive relief and/or civil penalties not to exceed $5,000 per day. (State law reference: Texas Local Government Code §§ 54.012 and 54.017.) 
(2)  Injunction. Upon a showing of substantial danger of injury or an adverse health impact to any person or to the property of any person other than the owner or operator, the city may obtain a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, against the owner or the operator of a premises that: 
(A)  prohibits specific conduct that violates this article; and 
(B)  requires specific conduct that is necessary for compliance with any provision of this article. 
State Law reference— V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.016. 
(3)  Criminal penalties. 
(A)  Penalty. A person who violates, or causes or permits the violation of, any provision of this article, including knowingly making any false statement, representation, or certification in any application, record, report, plan, petition, appeal or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this article, or any order issued hereunder commits a Class C misdemeanor which shall be punishable under section 1-8 of this Code. A fine not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) may be imposed for violation of the provisions of this article that govern fire safety or public health and sanitation. With respect to violations of this code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. Proof of a culpable mental state, unless otherwise stated in this article or required by law, is not required for conviction of an offense under this article. 
(B)  Considerations. In determining the amount of any fine imposed hereunder, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the violation, corrective actions by the violator, the compliance history of the violator, the violator's knowledge, intent and/or negligence, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(C)  Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies that the city may have under state or federal law or other city code provisions, including other civil actions provided under the Texas Water code. The city may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a violator. The city is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any violator and these actions may be taken concurrently. 
(Ord. No. 12-046, § I, 8-7-12) 
