CODE OF THE CITY OF KELLER, TEXAS 
____________ 
CHARTER 
AND 
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF KELLER, TEXAS 
____________ 
Pat McGrail 
Mayor 
____________ 
Mitch Holmes (Place 1) 
Sean Hicks (Mayor Pro Tem) 
Sheri Almond (Place 3) 
Beckie Paquin (Place 4) 
Chris Whatley Place 5) 
Tag Green (Place 6) 
City Council 
____________ 
Mark Hafner 
City Manager 
____________ 
Kelly Ballard 
City Secretary 
____________ 
Stan Lowry 
City Attorney 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF KELLER, TEXAS 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Larry Bowman 
Mayor 
____________ 
Carol Yule 
Charles Talley 
Duane Hicks 
Kenneth Dennis 
Ken Birchfield 
City Council 
____________ 
Johnny Sartain 
City Manager 
____________ 
Sheila Stephens 
City Secretary 
____________ 
George Staples 
City Attorney 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a republication of the Code of the City of Keller, Texas, prepared by George Staples, city attorney, in 1983. 
The original style and format have been modified to conform with Municipal Code Corporation style and format. In particular, a history note in parentheses has been included at the end of a section to indicate its amendment subsequent to the original codification in 1983. The absence of a history note following a particular section indicates that the section derived unamended from the 1983 Code. The reader may wish to use the Code Comparative Table appearing at the back of this volume which serves as a guide to the location of ordinances included in the Code. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this republication is the same system used in the original codification. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash representing the chapter number and the figure after the dash indicating the position of the section within the chapter. Generally, the figure after the dash is a three-digit figure, the first digit of which represents the article within the chapter. Exceptions to this occur when there is too much material in an article to accommodate this system, and in chapters 16, 19 and 20. 
Indices 
The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within each index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. Each such amendment, when incorporated into this Code, may be cited as a part hereof. 
The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
The republication of this Code was under direct supervision of Robert L. Laslie, Vice-President Supplements, and Charles Vignos, Supplement Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publishers are most grateful to George Staples, City Attorney, and Johnny Sartain, City Manager, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publishers have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 375 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code of Ordinances of the City of Keller, Texas; Establishing the Same; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances not Included Therein, Except as Herein Expressly Provided; Providing for the Effective Date of Such Code and a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be it Ordained by the City Council of the City of Keller, Texas: 
Section 1. That the Code of Ordinances, consisting of Chapters 1 to 20, each inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Keller, Texas" and shall be treated and considered as a new and original comprehensive ordinance which shall supersede all other general and permanent ordinances passed by the city council on or before September 1, 1983, to the extent provided in Section 2 hereof. 
Section 2. That all provisions of such Code shall be in full force and effect from and after the first day of June 1984, except as hereinafter provided. All ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this Code are hereby repealed, but only to the extent of such conflict. 
Section 3. That the repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not affect any of the following: 
(a)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of such Code; 
(b)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city, or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(c)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(d)  Any right or franchise granted by the city; 
(e)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(f)  Any ordinance relating to municipal street maintenance agreements with the State of Texas; 
(g)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades for streets in the city; 
(h)  Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for the levy of taxes or for an annual budget; 
(i)  Amendments to the zoning map; 
(j)  Any ordinance relating to local improvements and assessing therefor; 
(k)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the city or discontinuing territory as a part of the city; 
(l)  Any ordinance enacted after September 1, 1983. 
The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. That whenever in such Code an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of such Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00), as provided in such Code. 
Section 5. That any and all additions and amendments to such Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code so that reference to the "Code of Ordinances, City of Keller, Texas" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
Section 6. That in case of the amendment of any section of such Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in Section 4 of this ordinance and in such Code shall apply to the section as amended; or, in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
Section 7. That a copy of such Code shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary preserved in looseleaf form, or in such other form as the city secretary may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the city secretary, or someone authorized by her, to insert in their designated places all amendments or ordinances which indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of such Code when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such Code all provisions which may be from time to time repealed by the city council. This copy of such Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same. 
Section 8. That it shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Keller to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in Section 4 of this ordinance. 
Section 9. That it is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this ordinance are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this ordinance shall be declared invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this ordinance, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this ordinance of any such invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
Section 10. That this ordinance shall become effective immediately upon publication. 
Section 11. That the city secretary shall cause this ordinance to be published in its entirety. 
And It Is So Ordered. 
Passed on first reading on the 1st day of May 1984, by a vote of 5 to 0. 
Passed on second reading on the 15th day of May, 1984, by a vote of 5 to 0. 
CITY OF KELLER 
By:  _____
/s/ Bruce Lee, Mayor 
Attest: 
/s/ Sheila Stephens 
City Secretary 
Approved as to form and legality: 
/s/ George A. Staples, Jr. 
City Attorney  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Contained herein is the Charter of the City of Keller as approved by the voters at an election held on Nov. 2, 2010. This new Charter supersedes the prior Charter, as amended, which was in effect at the 1986 publication of this Code. 
 
PREAMBLE 
We, the citizens of Keller, Texas, in order to establish a home rule municipal government, provide for the welfare and progress of our city and obtain more fully the benefits of local self-government, do hereby adopt this Home Rule Charter.  
ARTICLE I. - BOUNDARIES AND ANNEXATIONS 
 
Section 1.01. - Boundaries. 
The initial boundaries of the City of Keller shall be those of the City of Keller as of the date of adoption of this Charter.  
Section 1.02. - Annexation. 
The limits of the City of Keller may be hereafter altered and extended by ordinance after publication of such notices and holding of such hearings as are required by law.  
Section 1.03. - Boundary agreements. 
The city council may, after compliance with the notice provisions required by the Municipal Annexation Act for annexations, by ordinance disannex a portion of the city in order to adjust the city limits pursuant to a boundary agreement entered into with an adjacent city.  
ARTICLE II. - POWERS OF THE CITY 
 
Section 2.01. - General. 
The City of Keller shall have and may exercise all the powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities of every name and nature whatsoever now or hereafter granted to municipal corporations and the city by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, together with all the implied powers necessary to carry into execution all the powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities granted.  
Section 2.02. - General powers adopted. 
The enumeration of particular powers by this Charter shall not be deemed to be exclusive, and in addition to the powers enumerated herein or implied hereby, or appropriate to the exercise of such powers, it is intended that the City of Keller shall have and may exercise all powers of local self-government not prohibited by state law or the Texas Constitution, and any other powers which under the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, it would be competent for this Charter specifically to enumerate.  
ARTICLE III. - THE CITY COUNCIL 
 
Section 3.01. - Number, selection, term. 
The governing and policy making body of the City of Keller shall consist of the mayor and six (6) council members in places designated as 1 through 6, elected at large for three-year terms by majority vote of the registered voters voting at the election for such position, and shall be known as the city council of the City of Keller. The Mayor and City Council places five (5) and six (6) shall be elected for the initial three (3) year term in 2011 and every three years thereafter. Council places one (1) and two (2) shall run through the year 2012 and shall be elected every three (3) years thereafter. Council places three (3) and four (4) shall run through 2013 and shall be elected every three (3) years thereafter.  
Section 3.02. - Eligibility. 
Each member of the city council shall be a registered voter of the city who has been a resident of the city for at least one (1) year immediately prior to the election, and at least twenty-one (21) years of age. A member of the council who at any time ceases to possess any of the qualifications specified in this section or any other section of this Charter, or who is convicted of a felony while in office shall immediately forfeit his/her office. Any member of the city council who shall file for any other public elected office or any other position on the city council or for mayor at a time when he/she has more than one (1) year to serve on his/her current term shall upon such filing, forthwith, forfeit his/her office.  
Section 3.03. - Council judge of election of members. 
The city council shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its own members, subject to review of the courts in case of contest. The city council shall, within the time provided by state law, either at a called meeting called for that purpose or at its regular meeting date of said council, after each regular or special election, canvass the return and declare the results of each election. This shall be the first order of business on the agenda at whichever type of meeting is held first. The second order of business shall be the swearing in of elected council members or mayor.  
Section 3.04. - Vacancies. 
Vacancies on the council, shall be filled as required by state law and the Texas Constitution. 
Any member of the city council or mayor remaining absent for three (3) consecutive regular meetings of the council may have his/her office declared vacated by a majority vote of all the remaining members of the governing body of the city.  
Section 3.05. - The mayor. 
The mayor shall preside over the meeting of said city council and perform such other duties consistent with the office as may be imposed upon him/her by this Charter and ordinances and resolutions passed in pursuance thereof. The mayor shall vote in the same manner as other council members on issues before the council.  
Section 3.06. - Mayor pro tempore. 
The city council shall elect from among its members a mayor pro tempore who shall act as mayor during the absence or disability of the mayor. The mayor pro tempore shall, during the absence or disability of the mayor, have the same powers and limitations as the mayor.  
Section 3.07. - Reimbursement. 
Members of the city council shall receive no compensation, but shall be entitled to reimbursement of actual out-of-pocket expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties when approved by the city council.  
Section 3.08. - Powers. 
The city council shall have all powers necessary and incident to the proper discharge of the duties imposed upon it and is hereby invested with all power necessary to carry out the terms and provisions of this Charter; it being intended that the city council shall have and exercise all powers enumerated in this Charter or implied thereby, except those powers specifically conferred on some other office by this Charter, and all powers that are now, or hereafter may be granted to municipalities by the Constitution or laws of the State of Texas.  
Section 3.09. - Number of meetings. 
The city council shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting per month, to be designated by ordinance or resolution, and as many special meetings as the council may deem necessary. Special meetings shall be called by the city secretary upon written request of the mayor or three (3) councilmembers. Any such request shall state the subject to be considered at the special meeting.  
Section 3.10. - Quorum. 
A quorum at any council meeting will be established by the presence of a majority of the members of the council. The mayor shall count as a council member for the establishment of a quorum.  
Section 3.11. - Prohibitions and ethics. 
(1)  Holding other office. Except where authorized by law, no councilmember shall hold other city office or employment during the term for which he/she was elected to the city council, and no former councilmember shall hold any compensated appointive city office or employment until one (1) year after the expiration of the term for which he/she was elected to the city council. 
(2)  Appointments and removals. Neither the city council nor any of its members shall in any manner dictate the appointment or removal of any city administrative officers or employees, other than those appointed by the city council, whom the city manager or any of his/her subordinates are empowered to appoint, but the city council may express its views and fully and freely discuss with the city manager anything pertaining to appointment and removal of such officers and employees. 
(3)  Interference with administration. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the city manager and neither the council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the city manager, either publicly or privately. Any councilmember violating the provisions of this section, or voting for a resolution or ordinance in violation of this section, shall be subject to removal by the council.  
Section 3.12. - Personal financial interest. 
Any city officer, elected or appointed official, or employee who has a substantial financial interest as defined by state law, direct or indirect or by reason of ownership of stock in any corporation, in any contract with the city or in the sale of any land, material, supplies or services to the city or to a contractor supplying the city shall make known that substantial financial interest and shall refrain from voting upon or otherwise participating in his/her capacity as a city officer, elected or appointed official, or employee in the making of such sale or in the making or performing of such contract. 
Any city officer, elected or appointed official, or employee who willfully conceals such a substantial financial interest or willfully violates the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall forfeit his/her office or position. 
Violation of this section with the knowledge, express or implied, of the person or corporation contracting with or making a sale to the city shall render the contract or sale voidable by the city manager or the city council.  
ARTICLE IV. - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS 
 
Section 4.01. - Elections. 
The regular city election shall be held annually on the uniform election date for May or as the date may be amended by state law, at which time officers will be elected to fill those offices which become vacant that year. The city council shall fix the hours and place for holding such election. The city council may, by resolution, order a special election, fix the time and place for holding same and provide all means for holding such special election as provided by state law.  
Section 4.02. - Regulation of elections. 
The city council shall make all regulations which it considers needful or desirable, not inconsistent with this Charter or the laws of the State of Texas, for the conduct of municipal elections for the prevention of fraud in such elections and for the recount of ballots in case of doubt or fraud. Municipal elections shall be conducted by the appointed election authorities who shall also have power to make regulations not inconsistent with this Charter or with any regulation made by the council or the laws of the State of Texas.  
Section 4.03. - Filing for office. 
Any qualifying person may have his/her name placed on the official ballot as a candidate for the office of city council member or mayor by filing an application in the form as provided by state law. If there is no form provided by state law, then the application shall be on a form prepared by the city that reflects the name of the person running and that the minimum requirements of the Charter are met. 
The application shall be filed in the office of the city secretary and be witnessed by an officer of the city who is qualified to administer oaths. The official ballots shall be printed not less than twenty (20) days before the date of the election.  
Section 4.04. - The official ballot. 
The name of all candidates for office, except such as may have withdrawn, died or become ineligible, shall be printed on the official ballots without party designated in the order determined in a drawing of lots conducted by the city secretary.  
Section 4.05. - Registered voter. 
A registered voter as herein used is one who is a registered voter in the State of Texas who has resided in the corporate limits of the City of Keller for at least thirty (30) days.  
Section 4.06. - Laws governing city elections. 
All city elections shall be governed, except as otherwise provided by this Charter, by the laws of the State of Texas governing general and municipal elections.  
Section 4.07. - Conducting and canvassing elections. 
The election judges and other necessary election officials for conducting all such elections shall be appointed by the city council. The election judges shall conduct the elections, determine, record and report the results as provided by the general election laws of Texas. Within the time provided by state law, the city council shall meet, open the returns, canvass and officially declare the results of the elections as to candidates and questions and issue certificates of elections to candidates elected as herein provided.  
Section 4.08. - Oath of office. 
Every officer of the city shall, before entering upon the duties of his/her office, take and subscribe to the oath or affirmation required by the Texas Constitution or state law. A copy of the oath or affirmation shall be filed and kept in the office of the city secretary.  
ARTICLE V. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Section 5.01. - City manager. 
(a)  Appointment and qualifications. The city council shall appoint a city manager who shall be the chief administrative and executive officer of the city and shall be responsible to the city council for the administration of all the affairs of the city. He/she shall be chosen by the city council solely on the basis of his/her executive and administrative training, experience and ability. No member of the city council shall, during the time for which he/she is elected and one (1) year thereafter, be appointed city manager. 
(b)  Term and salary. The city manager may be removed at the will and pleasure of the city council voting in an open meeting. The action of the city council in suspending or removing the city manager shall be final, it being the intention of this Charter to vest all authority and fix responsibility for such suspension or removal in the city council. In the event of the removal of the city manager by the city council, the city council shall be authorized to grant him/her a settlement as determined by the city council. In case of the extended absence or disability of the city manager, the city council may designate some qualified person other than an elected officer of the city to perform the duties of the office during such absence or disability. The city manager shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the city council. 
(c)  Power and duties of the city manager. 
(1)  Appoint, and when necessary for the welfare of the city, remove any employee of the city, except as otherwise provided by this Charter. 
(2)  Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the city council, and be responsible for its administration after adoption. 
(3)  Prepare and submit to the city council as of the end of the fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year. 
(4)  Keep the city council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations as may seem desirable. 
(5)  Perform such duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or may be required of him/her by the city council, not inconsistent with this Charter.  
Section 5.02. - City secretary. 
The city secretary may be removed at the will and pleasure of the city council voting in an open meeting. The action of the city council in suspending or removing the city secretary shall be final, it being the intention of this Charter to vest all authority and fix responsibility for such suspension or removal in the city council. In the event of the removal of the city secretary by the city council, the city council may be authorized to grant him/her a settlement as determined by the city council. In case of the extended absence or disability of the city secretary, the city council may designate some qualified person other than an elected officer of the city to perform the duties of the office during such absence or disability. The city secretary shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the city council. The city secretary or an assistant city secretary shall give notice of council meetings, shall keep the minutes of the proceedings of such meetings, shall authenticate by his/her signature and record in full, all ordinances and resolutions, and shall perform other such duties as the city council shall assign to him/her, and those elsewhere provided in this Charter.  
Section 5.03. - Professional services. 
The city council may employ such professional consultants, including engineers, planners, architects or others whom it finds appropriate and in the best interest of the city to engage. The city council may fix the compensation of such professionals and work directly with them or direct that they work with the city manager or his/her designee.  
Section 5.04. - City attorney. 
The city council shall appoint a competent and duly licensed attorney practicing law in Tarrant County, Texas, who shall be the city attorney. He/she shall receive for his/her services such compensation as may be fixed by the city council and shall hold his/her office at the pleasure of the city council. The city attorney, or such other attorneys selected by him/her with the approval of the city council, shall represent the city in all litigation. He/she shall be the legal advisory for, and attorney and counsel for, the city and all departments thereof.  
Section 5.05. - Municipal court. 
There shall be a court or courts known as the municipal court or courts of the City of Keller. The court shall be a municipal court of record, with such jurisdiction, powers and duties, as are given and prescribed by the laws of the State of Texas. 
The municipal court or courts shall be presided over by a magistrate or magistrates who shall be known as the judge of the municipal court, who shall be a qualified and licensed attorney in the State of Texas appointed by the Keller City Council and who shall meet all the requirements set out in state law for a judge of a municipal court of record. The judge may be removed from office as provided for by state law or in Section 1-a, Article V of the Texas Constitution or, additionally, may be removed by the City Council after a hearing in an open meeting upon a finding of official misconduct, willful or persistent violation of rules promulgated by the Supreme Court of Texas, incompetence in performing the duties of the office, willful violation of the Code of Judicial Conduct, or willful or persistent conduct that is clearly inconsistent with the proper performance of his/her duties or casts public discredit upon the judiciary or administration of justice.  
Section 5.06. - Nepotism. 
No person related within the second degree by affinity or within the third degree by consanguinity, to the mayor or to any member of the city council, or to the city manager, shall be appointed to any office, position, clerkship or service of the city.  
ARTICLE VI. - RECALL OF OFFICERS 
 
Section 6.01. - Scope of recall. 
Any city official, elected by the people, shall be subject to recall and removal from office by the registered voters of the city on grounds of incompetency, misconduct or malfeasance in office.  
Section 6.02. - Petition for recall. 
Before the question of recall of such officer shall be submitted to the registered voters of the city, a petition demanding such question to be so submitted shall first be filed with the person performing the duties of the city secretary; which said petition shall be signed by registered voters of the city equal in number to at least five percent (5%) of the registered voters in the city. Each signer of such recall petition shall personally sign their name thereto in ink or indelible pencil. Each signature shall comply with the requirements of the Texas Election Code as it may be amended or construed by the courts. Each signer shall write thereon the day, the month and year his/her signature was affixed.  
Section 6.03. - Form of recall petition. 
The recall petition mentioned above must be addressed to the city council of the City of Keller, must distinctly and specifically point out the ground or grounds upon which such petition for removal is predicated, and, if there be more than one (1) ground, such as for incompetency, misconduct or malfeasance in office, shall specifically state each ground with such certainty as to give the officer sought to be removed, notice of the matters and things with which he/she is charged. The signature shall be verified by oath in the following form: 
STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF TARRANT 
"I, ___________, being first duly sworn on oath, depose and say that I am one of the signers of the above petition; and that the statements made therein are true, and that each signature appearing thereto was made in my presence on the day and date it purports to have been made, and I solemnly swear that the same is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be. 
Sworn to and subscribed before me this the ________ day of _________, _______. __________ 
Notary Public in and for the State of Texas 
My commission expires: _____________"  
Section 6.04. - Various papers constituting petition; Notification of Officer. 
All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size and style and shall be assembled as one instrument for filing. No signature to such petition shall remain effective or be counted which were placed on the petition more than thirty (30) days prior to the filing of such petition or petitions with the person performing the duties of city secretary. Each signature shall comply with the requirements of the Texas Election Code and this Charter. The signatures shall be verified by oath in the following form: 
"I, ________, being first duly sworn, on oath depose and say that I am one of the signers of the above petition, and that the statements made therein are true, and that each signature appearing thereto was made in my presence on the day and date it purports to have been made and I solemnly swear that the same is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be. 
Signature___________ 
Sworn to and subscribed before me this _____ day of ____, _____. 
Notary Public in and for the State of Texas 
My commission expires: _______" 
Upon receiving the petition, the City Secretary shall immediately notify, in writing, the officer so sought to be removed, by mailing the notice to the officer's Keller address.  
Section 6.05. - Presentation of petition to city council. 
Within thirty (30) calendar days after the date of the filing of the papers constituting the recall petition, the person performing the duties of city secretary shall present such petition to the city council of the City of Keller.  
Section 6.06. - Public hearing to be held. 
The officer whose removal is sought may, within five (5) days after such removal petition has been presented to the city council, request that a public hearing be held to permit him/her to present facts pertinent to the charges specified in the recall petition. In this event, the city council shall order such public hearing to be held, not less than five (5) days nor more than fifteen (15) days after receiving such request for a public hearing.  
Section 6.07. - Election to be called. 
If the officer whose removal is sought does not resign, then it shall become the duty of the city council to order an election and fix a date for holding such recall election. If no public hearing is requested, or if a hearing is requested, after the public hearing occurs, the city council shall call an election within the next two (2) City Council meetings after the Petition was verified or found to be sufficient. Unless otherwise provided by law, any election called under this Article shall be held on an authorized election date that occurs at least sixty-five (65) days after the petition was presented to the city council.  
Section 6.08. - Ballots in recall election. 
Ballots used at recall elections shall conform to the following requirements: 
(a)  With respect to each person whose removal is sought, the question shall be submitted: "Shall (name of person) be removed from the office of (name of office) by recall?" 
(b)  Immediately below each such question there shall be printed the following words, one above the other, in the order indicated: 
"Yes" 
"No"  
Section 6.09. - Results of recall election. 
If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election shall be against the recall of the person named on the ballot, he/she shall continue in office for the remainder of his/her unexpired term, subject to recall as before. If a majority of the votes cast at such an election be for the recall of a person named on the ballot, he/she shall, regardless of any technical defects in the recall petition, be deemed removed from office and the vacancy shall be filled as vacancies in the city council are filled.  
Section 6.10. - Recall; restriction thereon. 
No recall petition shall be filed against any officer of the City of Keller within six (6) months after his/her election, or within six (6) months after an election for such officer's recall.  
Section 6.11. - Failure of city council to act. 
In case all of the requirements of this Charter shall have been met and the city council shall fail or refuse to receive the recall petition, or order such recall election, or discharge any other duties imposed upon said city council by the provisions of this Charter with reference to such recall, then the county judge of Tarrant County, Texas, shall discharge any of such duties herein provided to be discharged by the person performing the duties of city secretary or by the city council.  
ARTICLE VII. - LEGISLATION BY THE PEOPLE; INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM 
 
Section 7.01. - Initiative and Referendum. 
The people of the City of Keller reserve the power of direct legislation by initiative or referendum, and in the exercise of such power, may propose, or seek voter approval or disapproval of any ordinance or resolution not in conflict with this Charter, the State Constitution or the state laws, except an ordinance appropriating money or authorizing the levy of taxes or an ordinance repealing an ordinance appropriating money or levying taxes.  
Section 7.02. - Petition. 
Registered voters of the City of Keller may initiate legislation by submitting a petition addressed to the city council which requests the submission of a proposed ordinance or resolution to a vote of the registered voters of the city. Said petition must be signed by registered voters of the city equal in number to five percent (5%) of the number of registered voters in the city. Each copy of the petition shall have attached to it a copy of the proposed legislation. Each signer of a petition to initiate legislation shall personally sign their name thereto in ink or indelible pencil. Each signature shall comply with the requirements of the Charter, the Texas Election Code as it may be amended or construed by the courts and all state laws. Each signer shall write thereon the day, the month and the year that their signature was affixed. The petition must be addressed to the city council of the City of Keller. All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size and style and shall be assembled as one instrument for filing. The signatures shall be verified by oath in the following form: 
"I, _____ being first duly sworn, on oath depose and say that I am one of the signers of the above petition, and that the statements made therein are true, and that each signature appearing thereto was made in my presence on the day and date it purports to have been made and I solemnly swear that the same is the genuine signature of the person it purports to be. 
Signature ___________ 
Sworn and subscribed to before me this ______ day of ___, _____. 
Notary Public, in and for the State of Texas 
My commission expires: ____" 
No signature placed on the petition more than thirty (30) days before the petition is filed, shall be counted. Such petition shall be filed with the person performing the duties of city secretary, who shall present said petition and proposed ordinance or resolution to the city council. Upon presentation to the city council of the petition and draft of the proposal, ordinance or resolution, it shall become the duty of the city council, within the fifteen (15) days after the receipt thereof, to pass and adopt such ordinance or resolution or to call a special election, to be held on the next uniform election date, provided that such date must be at least sixty-five (65) days thereafter, at which the registered voters of the City of Keller shall vote on the question of adopting or rejecting the proposed legislation. However, if any other municipal election is to be held within sixty-five (65) days after the filing of the petition, the question may be voted on at such election.  
Section 7.03. - Referendum. 
Registered voters of the City of Keller may require that any ordinance or resolution passed by the city council be submitted to the voters of the city for approval or disapproval, by submitting a petition for this purpose within thirty (30) days after final passage of said ordinance or resolution, or within thirty (30) days after its publication. Said petition shall be addressed, prepared, signed and verified as required for petitions initiating legislation as provided in Section 7.02 of this Charter and shall be submitted to the person performing the duties of city secretary. Immediately upon the filing of such petition, the person performing the duties of city secretary shall present said petition to the city council. Thereupon the city council shall immediately reconsider such ordinance or resolution and if it does not entirely repeal the same, shall submit it to popular vote as provided in Section 7.02 of this Charter. Pending the holding of such election, such ordinance or resolution shall be suspended from taking effect and shall not later take effect unless a majority of the qualified voters voting thereon at such election shall vote in favor thereon.  
Section 7.04. - Voluntary submission of legislation by the council. 
The city council, upon its own motion and by a majority vote of its members, may submit to popular vote at any election for adoption or rejection any proposed ordinance or resolution or measure, or may submit for repeal any existing ordinance, resolution or measure, in the same manner and with the same force and effect as provided in this article for submission on petition, and may in its discretion call a special election for this purpose.  
Section 7.05. - Form of ballots. 
The ballots used when voting upon such proposed and referred ordinances, resolutions or measures, shall set forth their nature sufficiently to identify them and shall also set forth upon separate lines the words: "FOR the ORDINANCE," and "AGAINST the ORDINANCE," or "FOR the RESOLUTION," and "AGAINST the RESOLUTION."  
Section 7.06. - Publication of proposed and referred ordinances. 
The person performing the duties of the city secretary shall publish the proposed or referred ordinance or resolution at least once in the official newspaper of the city or publish on the city's website or give notice in any other legally approved manner not more than fifteen (15) nor less than five (5) days before the date of the election, and shall give such other notices and do such other things relative to such election as are required in general municipal elections or by the ordinance or resolution calling said election.  
Section 7.07. - Adoption of ordinances. 
If a majority of the registered voters voting on any proposed ordinance or resolution or measure shall vote in favor thereof, the measure shall become effective as law or as a mandatory order of the city council, but no measure shall take effect until after the election occurs and the votes are counted. The date to take effect may be contained in the measure, ordinance or resolution, so long as the effective date is after the election date.  
Section 7.08. - Inconsistent ordinances. 
If the provisions of two (2) or more proposed ordinances or resolutions approved at the same election are inconsistent, the ordinance or resolution receiving the highest number of votes shall prevail.  
Section 7.09. - Ordinances passed by popular vote: repeal or amendment. 
No ordinance or resolution which may have been passed by the city council upon a petition or adopted by popular vote under the provisions of this article shall be repealed or amended for five (5) years except by the city council in response to a referendum petition or by submission as provided in Section 7.04 of this Charter.  
Section 7.10. - Further regulations by city council. 
The city council may pass ordinances or resolutions providing other and further regulations for carrying out the provisions of this article not inconsistent herewith.  
ARTICLE VIII. - FINANCE 
 
Section 8.01. - Finance and fiscal control by city. 
The city shall have the power to control and manage the finances of the city as may be directed by the city council. No expenditure shall be made by the city unless such is budgeted or is paid for with bond funds.  
Section 8.02. - Submission of budget and budget message. 
The fiscal year of the city shall begin on the first day of October and end on the last day of the following September. 
On or before August 15 of each year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a budget for the ensuing fiscal year and an accompanying message in the form and with the content as prescribed by the council.  
Section 8.03. - Budget a public record. 
The budget and budget message and all supporting schedules shall be a public record in the office of the city secretary open to public inspection by anyone. The city manager shall cause sufficient copies of the budget and budget message to be prepared for distribution to the council and to the public library.  
Section 8.04. - Notice of public hearing. 
The city shall provide all statutory notices required to give the public notice of the budget hearing or hearings. If there are no statutory requirements, the City shall publish, either in the newspaper or on its website, notice of all upcoming budget hearings at least seven (7) days in advance of said hearing or hearings or in accordance with state law.  
Section 8.05. - Public hearing on budget. 
At the time and place given in the notice, or at any time and place to which such public hearing shall from time to time be adjourned, the council shall hold a public hearing on the budget as submitted, at which all interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard, for or against the estimates or any item thereof.  
Section 8.06. - Further consideration of budget. 
After the conclusion of such public hearing, the city council may make such changes as it shall deem proper, except that such proposed expenditures as are fixed by law cannot be changed.  
Section 8.07. - Addition to budget. 
Based upon information heard at the hearing or hearings, the city council may insert any additional item or items, and make the increase or increases, to the amount indicated in the notice of the budget. The city council shall not increase the total proposed expenditures, unless it shall also increase the total anticipated revenue to at least equal such total proposed expenditures.  
Section 8.08. - Majority of full council required. 
The budget shall be adopted by the favorable votes of at least a majority of all the members of the council.  
Section 8.09. - Date of final adoption; failure to adopt. 
The budget shall be finally adopted not later than the twenty-seventh day of the last month of the fiscal year. Should the council take no final action on or prior to such date, the budget, as submitted, shall be deemed to have been finally adopted by the council.  
Section 8.10. - Effective date of budget; certification; copies made available. 
Upon final adoption, the budget shall be in effect for the budget year. A copy of the budget, as finally adopted, shall be certified by the mayor and city secretary and filed in the office of the city secretary. The budget as certified may be printed or otherwise reproduced and sufficient copies thereof may be made available for the use of all offices, departments and agencies and for the use of interested persons.  
Section 8.11. - Budget establishes appropriation. 
From the effective date of the budget the several amounts stated therein as proposed expenditures shall be and become appropriated to the several objects and purposes therein named.  
Section 8.12. - Amendment. 
The city council may during the fiscal year amend the budget by ordinance if such amendment will not increase the total of all budget expenditures. If such expenditures are necessary to protect public property or the health, safety or general welfare of the citizens of Keller, the total budget may be increased after notice and public hearing as prescribed for adoption of the original budget.  
Section 8.13. - Appropriation of excess revenue. 
If at any time the total accruing revenue of the city shall be in excess of the total estimated income thereof, as projected in the budget, the city council may by ordinance amend the budget so as to appropriate such excess revenue to such purposes as they may deem appropriate after notice and public hearing as required for adoption of the original budget.  
Section 8.14. - Accounting procedures. 
Accounting procedures shall be maintained by the city in order to establish and maintain budgetary control over each of its offices, departments, and agencies. Accounting records shall be maintained in accordance with generally accepted standards of accounting for municipalities.  
Section 8.15. - Independent audit. 
The city council shall cause an independent audit to be made of all the accounts of the city at least once annually, or such other times as may be deemed necessary, by a certified public accountant. The certified public accountant so selected shall have no personal interest, directly or indirectly, in the financial affairs of the city or any of its officers. Upon completion of the audit, the results shall be furnished to each member of the city council, and placed on file in the city secretary's office. The report of the auditor shall be prepared in accordance with generally accepted standards of financial reports for municipalities.  
Section 8.16. - Power to tax. 
The city council shall have the power under the provisions of state law to levy, assess and collect an annual tax upon taxable property within the city. 
If for any cause the city council shall fail to pass a tax ordinance for any one (1) year, levying taxes for that year, then and in that event the tax levying ordinance and rate established therein last passed shall and will be considered in force and effect.  
Section 8.17. - Defect shall not invalidate tax levy. 
Defects in the form or preparation of the budget or the failure to perform any procedural requirement shall not invalidate any tax levy or the tax roll.  
Section 8.18. - Bonds and evidences of indebtedness. 
In keeping with the Constitution of the State of Texas, and not contrary thereto, the City of Keller shall have the right to issue all tax bonds, general obligation and revenue bonds, funding and refunding bonds, certificates of obligations, time warrants and other evidences of indebtedness, authorized to be issued by home rule cities by the laws of the State of Texas or for any public purpose, so long as not prohibited by the general laws of the State of Texas, including, but not limited to bonds or other evidences of indebtedness to promote or finance economic development within the city. All general obligation bonds shall be submitted to the voters for approval.  
Section 8.19. - Manner of issuance. 
Bonds, certificates of obligations and time warrants of the City of Keller shall be issued in the manner provided by the laws of the State of Texas applicable to home rule cities.  
ARTICLE IX. - MISCELLANEOUS 
 
Section 9.01. - Present ordinances. 
All ordinances of the City of Keller now in existence and not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter shall remain in full force and effect until altered, amended or repealed by the city council. If parts of ordinances now in existence are inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter, then such parts are hereby repealed, but the remaining parts of such ordinance shall remain in full force and effect until altered, amended or repealed by the city council.  
Section 9.02. - Ordinances and resolutions. 
Each proposed ordinance or resolution shall be introduced in written or printed form.  
Section 9.03. - City exempt from appeal bonds. 
It shall not be necessary in any action, suit or proceeding in which the City of Keller is a part, for any bond, undertaking or security to be executed on behalf of said city, but all such actions, suits, appeals or proceedings shall be conducted in the same manner as if such bond, undertaking or security had been given, and said city shall be liable as if such obligation had been given and executed.  
Section 9.04. - Not subject to garnishment. 
No fund of the city or within custody of the city or any of its officials in any official capacity shall be subject to garnishment and the city shall never be required to answer in any garnishment proceedings.  
Section 9.05. - Special provision covering damage suits. 
Before the city shall be liable to damage claim or suit for personal injury or damage to property, the person who is injured or whose property is damaged, or someone on his/her behalf, shall give the city secretary notice in writing within thirty (30) days after the occurring of the alleged injury or damage, stating specifically in such notice when, where, and how the injury or damage was sustained, and setting forth the extent of the injury or damage as accurately as possible, and giving the names and addresses of all witnesses upon whose testimony such person is relying to establish the injury or damage.  
Section 9.06. - Preservation of contract rights. 
All contracts entered into by the City of Keller or for its benefit prior to the taking effect of this Charter shall continue in full force and effect. All rights, immunities, powers, privileges and franchises now possessed by said city shall also continue in full force and effect.  
Section 9.07. - Construction. 
The use of the singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular, and words used in the masculine gender include the feminine also, unless by reasonable construction, it appears that such was not the intention of the language of this Charter.  
Section 9.08. - Partial invalidity. 
If any section or part of a section of this Charter shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this Charter nor the context in which such section so held invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire section or part of a section may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the section or part of a section to which such holding shall directly apply.  
Section 9.09. - Amendment of Charter. 
This Charter may be amended by the voters of the city at any time in accordance with the provisions of state law and this Charter.  
Section 9.10. - Interim municipal government. 
From and after the date of the adoption of this Charter, the incumbent mayor and five (5) councilmembers, comprising the present city council, shall continue to hold their offices for the remainder of the terms to which they have been elected, and shall constitute the city council of the City of Keller.  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
 This table shows the location of amendments to the Charter of Nov. 2, 2010. 
Ordinance 
Number 	Adoption 
 Date 	Section 	 Section 
this Charter 
  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-100. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of the City of Keller, Texas," and may be so cited. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt a civil and criminal Code of Ordinances, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1176a.  
Sec. 1-200. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.  
Sec. 1-300. - Rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following rules shall be observed unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall mean the City of Keller in the County of Tarrant and State of Texas. 
City manager, city secretary, chief of police or other city officers. The words "city manager," "city secretary," "chief of police" or other city officers or departments shall be construed to mean the city manager, city secretary, chief of police or such other municipal officers or departments, respectively, of the City of Keller, Texas. 
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall not be counted. 
Council. Whenever the words "council" or "this council" or "the council" are used, they shall mean the city council of the City of Keller, Texas. 
County. The term "county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Tarrant, Texas. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships, associations and corporations as well as to males. 
Generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly indicated. 
Highway. The term "highway" shall include any street, alley, highway, avenue or public place or square, bridges, viaducts, tunnels, underpasses, overpasses and causeways in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural, and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, or the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature or subscription. The words "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when a person cannot write. 
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Texas. 
Street. The term "street" shall include any highway, alley, street, avenue or public place or square, bridges, viaducts, underpasses, overpasses, tunnels and causeways in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Written or in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year.  
Sec. 1-400. - Amendments or additions to Code. 
All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the city council. 
Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _______ of the Code of Ordinance, City of Keller, Texas, is hereby amended to read as follows: …" The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, Keller, Texas, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _______." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired.  
Sec. 1-500. - General penalty for violations of Code; continuing violations. 
Violation of any provision of this Code or any other ordinance of the city, which Code or other ordinance provision governs fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation including dumping of refuse, shall be punished by fine of not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Violations of all other provisions of this Code or any other ordinance of the city shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day any violation of an ordinance or this Code shall continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be so punishable hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 1, 8-15-89) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to prescribe penalties for violation of Code of Ordinances, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1176a, § 1.  
Sec. 1-510. - Civil penalties. 
Any person violating the provisions of any ordinance governed by the State of Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 54, Subchapter B of the Texas Revised Civil Statutes, shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day. 
(Ord. No. 597, § 2, 8-15-89)  
Sec. 1-600. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— The city council, § 3.01 et seq.; nominations and elections, § 4.01 et seq.; administration, § 5.01 et seq.; recall of officers, § 6.01 et seq. 
Cross reference— Board of parks and recreation, § 12-300 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-100. - Boundaries and map of city designated. 
The boundaries of the city are as set forth in the "Official Map of the City of Keller" which is on file in the office of the city secretary and will include all subsequent ordinances dealing with boundaries. 
Charter reference— Boundaries and annexations, § 1.01 et seq.  
Sec. 2-110. - Fiscal year established. 
The fiscal year for the city shall be and is hereby established as October 1 through September 30, effective January 1, 1984. 
Charter reference— Fiscal year established, § 8.02.  
Sec. 2-120. - Council meetings—Place and time designated. 
All of the meetings of the city council shall be held within the city at the city hall, or at such other place as shall be designated from time to time by the council. Regular meetings shall be held on the first and third Tuesdays of each month at 7:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 744, § 1, 7-19-94; Ord. No. 786, § 1, 7-6-95)  
Sec. 2-130. - Same—Governed by Robert's Rules of Order. 
The procedure at all meetings of the city council shall be in accordance with the provisions of Robert's Rules of Order.  
Sec. 2-140. - City seal. 
The city council shall adopt a city seal, and unless some other form of seal is adopted, the seal of the city shall be circular in form and shall have the words "THE CITY OF KELLER, TEXAS," subscribed around the circumference thereof.  
Sec. 2-150. - Deposit and withdrawal of city funds. 
The city council in its discretion may deposit the funds of the city in such bank or banks or trust companies as, in its discretion, is deemed advisable, and the withdrawals of all funds from such bank or banks or trust companies shall be made under the joint signature of any two (2) of the following officers: the city manager, the director of finance, the city secretary, and the finance/purchasing manager. 
( Ord. No. 1772, § 2, 1-19-16 )  
Sec. 2-160. - Bond may be required for certain employees. 
The city manager, upon approval of the city council, may require a bond of all city employees of such an amount to be determined at his discretion, but in no event shall such bond be less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).  
Sec. 2-170. - Social security for city employees—Execution of agreements. 
The city council, acting for and on behalf of the city, shall enter into all necessary agreements with the state department of public welfare for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of House Bill 603, Acts of the 52nd Legislature, R.S. 1951 and Public Law 734, 81st Congress, Ch. 809, 2nd, H.R. 6000, for the purpose of securing federal old age and survivor's insurance benefits for city employees. 
The mayor is hereby appointed as agent of the city council to execute all necessary agreements and instruments for and in behalf of the council of the city.  
Sec. 2-180. - Same—Duties of director of finance. 
The director of finance is hereby directed to be the person responsible for making assessments, collections, payments, and reports, as required by the state department of public welfare for the proper administration of the federal old age and survivor's insurance program.  
Sec. 2-190. - Residence requirements for appointees to boards and commissions. 
All persons appointed to the various boards and commissions of the City of Keller by the city council shall be resident citizens of the City of Keller at the time of their appointment, unless otherwise specified in the legislation setting up or creating such board or commission. This section shall include but not be limited to the planning and zoning commission, park and recreation board, zoning board of adjustment, electrical board, plumbing appeals and advisory board, building code board of adjustment and appeals, and library board. 
Cross reference— Planning and zoning commission, § 2-500 et seq.; zoning board of adjustment, § 2-600 et seq.; library board, § 2-1000 et seq.; board of parks and recreation, § 12-300 et seq.  
Sec. 2-200. - Reserved.  
Sec. 2-210. - Purchases and contracts. 
(a)  The city manager, or designee, is authorized to contract or purchase on behalf of the City of Keller (the "city") for the purchase of goods and services for all budgeted items without further city council approval. 
(b)  All purchases of goods and services shall be procured, including the requirements for competitive bidding, in accordance with Section 252 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended. 
(c)  The city council shall promulgate the purchasing policy for all purchases made by the city. The city council may amend the policy from time to time, provided such amendments are not contrary to Section 252 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended. At all times, the policy shall conform to applicable requirements of the Charter, City ordinances and other applicable State law. 
(d)  The city manager or designee is authorized to determine the purchase method for goods and services that provides the best value to the city in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 1069, § 2, 10-16-01; Ord. No. 1431, § 2, 10-21-08) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1069, § 2, adopted Oct. 16, 2001, repealed former §§ 2-220—-2-240 in their entirety and enacted a new § 2-210. Former §§ 2-210—2-240 pertained to the city purchasing agent and purchasing and derived from Ord. No. 519, §§ 1, 2, 10-6-87; Ord. No. 820, §§ 1—4, 5-21-96.  
Secs. 2-220—2-250. - Reserved.  
Sec. 2-260. - Retention of records. 
The schedule for the retention of records as established by the Texas Municipal Records Manual published by the Texas State Library, Local Records Division, as the same may from time to time be amended, is hereby established as the minimum time for such records to be maintained by the City of Keller. Such records shall thereafter be maintained only so long as may be required by law or may be deemed desirable by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 540, § 1, 5-17-88) 
Editor's note— Inclusion of nonamendatory Ord. No. 540, § 1, adopted May 17, 1988, as § 2-260 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Records management, § 2-1300 et seq.  
Sec. 2-270. - Administrative fees. 
(a)  All persons, organizations, firms or corporations applying for city services, activities or uses that by their nature require the applicant to pay a fee incident to such application shall pay the fee as prescribed by resolution adopted by the city council from time-to-time. The city council shall periodically review the need for and the amount of fees for city services, activities and uses shall adopt and revise same from time-to-time by resolution. 
(b)  Those fees adopted and revised from time-to-time by resolution pursuant to this section shall not be deemed inclusive of all fees as may be prescribed by the city. 
(c)  It shall be a violation of this section to conduct any activity or commence any uses for which the payment of an applicable fee is required until such fee has been paid. 
(Ord. No. 573, §§ 1, 2, 3-29-89; Ord. No. 832, § 1, 8-6-96; Ord. No. 875, § 1, 10-7-97; Ord. No. 968, § 2, 7-20-99; Ord. No. 1591, § 2, 3-16-12)  
Sec. 2-280. - Smoking in municipal buildings or facilities; bleachers in public parks; or grounds or facilities at Keller Sports Park except in the parking lots prohibited. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he or she smokes or possesses a burning tobacco, weed, or other plant product in any municipal building or facility; bleachers located in public parks; or any grounds or facilities at Keller Sports Park located at 265 Golden Triangle Boulevard except in the parking lots; that are owned, operated or managed by the City of Keller. 
(b)  The department head, so designated in writing by the city manager, having authority over a particular municipal facility or public park shall cause to be posted a conspicuous sign visible from the main entrance of a municipal facility, or a bleacher area, containing the words "NO SMOKING, City of Keller Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 653, § 1, 8-20-91; Ord. No. 731, § 1, 2-15-94; Ord. No. 907, § 1, 7-21-98; Ord. No. 1307, § 2, 1-17-06; Ord. No. 1772, § 2, 1-19-2016))  
Sec. 2-281. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of section 2-280 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon final conviction thereof fined an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each and every day any such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense and is punishable as such hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 653, § 2, 8-20-91) 
Note— See editor's note, § 2-280.  
ARTICLE II. - TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 2-300. - Buyback of authorized service credits. 
Pursuant to Section 853.003 of Subtitle G of Title 8, V.T.C.A., Government Code, as amended, the City of Keller, Texas hereby elects to allow any member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (TMRS) who is an employee of this city, on the 20th day of December, 2005, who has terminated a previous membership in said system by withdrawal of deposits while absent from service, but who has at least twenty-four (24) months of credited service as an employee of this city since resuming membership, to deposit with the system in a lump sum the amount withdrawn, plus a withdrawal charge of five (5) percent of such amount for each year from date of such withdrawal to date of redeposit, and thereupon such member shall be allowed credit for all service to which the member had been entitled at date of termination of earlier membership, with like effect as if all such service had been rendered as an employee of this city, whether so rendered or not. The city agrees to underwrite and hereby assumes the obligations arising out of the granting of all such credits, and agrees that all such obligations and reserves required to provide such credits shall be charged to this city's account in the municipality accumulation fund. The five (5) percent per annum withdrawal charge paid by the member shall be deposited to the credit of the city's account in said municipality accumulation fund; and the deposits of the amount previously withdrawn by the member shall be credited to his or her individual account in the employees' savings fund of the system. 
(Ord. No. 502, § 1, 3-17-87; Ord. No. 1302, § 2, 12-20-05)  
Sec. 2-310. - Additional rights, credits and benefits. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of sections 64.202(f), 64.204, 64.405, 64.406, and 64.410 of subtitle G of Title 110B, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, 1925, as amended by the 70th Legislature of the State of Texas, Regular Session, which subtitle shall herein be referred to as the "TMRS Act," the City of Keller, Texas, adopts the following provisions affecting participation of its employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement System (which retirement system shall herein be referred to as the "system"). 
(1)  Any employee of this city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a service retirement annuity, if the member has at least twenty (20) years of credited service in that system performed for one (1) or more municipalities that have participation dates after September 1, 1987, or have adopted a like provision under section 64.202(f) of the TMRS Act. 
(2)  If a "vested member," as that term is defined in section 64.204(b) of the TMRS Act, shall die before becoming eligible for service retirement and leaves surviving a lawful spouse whom the member has designated as beneficiary entitled to payment of the member's accumulated contributions in event of the member's death before retirement, the surviving spouse may be given written notice filed with the system elect to leave the accumulated deposits on deposit with the system subject to the terms and conditions of said section 64.204(b). If the accumulated deposits have not been withdrawn before such time as the member, if living, would have become entitled to service retirement, the surviving spouse may elect to receive, in lieu of the accumulated deposits, an annuity payable monthly thereafter during the lifetime of the surviving spouse in such amount as would have been payable had the member lived and retired at that date under a joint and survivor annuity (Option 1) payable during the lifetime of the member and continuing thereafter during the lifetime of the surviving spouse. 
(3)  At any time before payment of the first monthly benefit of an annuity, a surviving spouse to whom subsection (a)(2) applies may, upon written application filed with the system, receive payment of the accumulated contributions standing to the account of the member in lieu of any benefits otherwise payable under this section. In the event such a surviving spouse shall die before payment of the first monthly benefit of an annuity allowed under this section, the accumulated contributions credited to the account of the member shall be paid to the estate of such spouse. 
(4)  The rights, credits and benefits hereinabove authorized shall be in addition to the plan provisions heretofore adopted and in force at the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, pursuant to the TMRS Act. 
(5)  Any employee of this city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a "standard occupational disability annuity" under section 64.408 of the TMRS Act or an "optional occupational disability retirement annuity" under section 64.410 of the TMRS Act upon making application therefor upon such form and in such manner as may be prescribed by the board of trustees of the system, provided that the system's medical board has certified to said board of trustees: 
a.  That the member is physically or mentally disabled for further performance of the duties of the member's employment; 
b.  That the disability is likely to be permanent; and 
c.  That the member should be retired. 
Any annuity granted under this subsection shall be subject to the provisions of section 64.409 of the TMRS Act. 
(6)  The provisions relating to the occupational disability program as set forth in subsection (a)(5) above are in lieu of the disability program heretofore provided for under sections 64.301 to 64.308 of the TMRS Act. 
(b)  This section shall become effective on the first day of January, 1988, provided that it has previously been determined by the actuary for the system that all obligations of the city to the municipality accumulation fund, including obligations hereby undertaken, can be funded by the city within its maximum contribution rate and within its amortization period. 
(7)  On terms and conditions set out in Section 854.203 of Subtitle G of Title 8, V.T.C.A., Government Code, as amended, the City of Keller hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the Texas Municipal Retirement System to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of this city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service by such employees to this city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person. 
The amount of annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior and current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based, multiplied by seventy (70) percent of the percentage change in consumer price index for all urban consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to the December that is thirteen (13) months before the effective date of this article. 
An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced. 
If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the annuity will not be changed hereby. 
The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant is an obligation of this city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System. 
(Ord. No. 526, §§ 1, 2, 12-21-87; Ord. No. 662, § 2, 12-3-91; Ord. No. 722, § 2, 12-21-93; Ord. No. 1124, § 2, 11-19-02) 
Editor's note— Inclusion of nonamendatory Ord. No. 662, §§ 1—4, adopted Dec. 3, 1991, as §§ 2-310, 2-320 has been at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 2-320. - Authorization of updated service credits. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in sections 853.401 through 853.404 of Subtitle G of Title 8, V.T.C.A., Government Code, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the "TMRS Act"), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the "system") who has current service credit or prior service credit in the system in force and effect on the first day of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, by reason of service in the employment of the city, and on such date has at least thirty-six (36) months of credited service with the system, shall be and is hereby allowed "updated service credit" (as that term is defined in subsection (d) of section 853.402 of the TMRS Act). 
(b)  On the terms and conditions set out in section 853.601 of the TMRS Act, any member of the system who is eligible for updated service credits on the basis of service with the City of Keller, and who has unforfeited credit for prior service and/or current service with another participating municipality or municipalities by reason of previous service, and was a contributing member on the first day of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, shall be credited with updated service credits pursuant to, calculated in accordance with, and subject to adjustments as set forth in said 853.601, both as to the initial grant hereunder and all future grants under this section. 
(c)  The updated service credit hereby allowed and provided for shall be one hundred (100) per cent of the "base updated service credit" of the member (calculated as provided in subsection (c) of Section 853.402 of the TMRS Act. 
(d)  Each updated service credit allowed hereunder shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service. 
(e)  In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of Section 853.401 of the TMRS Act, the deposits required to be made to the system by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after the effective date of this ordinance [Ord. No. 883, effective 1-1-98] on the full amount of such person's compensation as an employee of the City of Keller. 
(f)  Increase in retirement annuities. 
(1)  On terms and conditions set out in Section 854.203 of the TMRS Act, the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the system to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of this city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service by such employees to this city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person. 
(2)  The amount of annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior and current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based, multiplied by seventy (70) percent of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to the December that is thirteen (13) months before the effective date of this section. 
(3)  An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced. 
(4)  If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the annuity will not be changed hereby. 
(5)  The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant is an obligation of this city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of the system. 
(g)  The initial allowance of updated service credits and increases in retirement annuities hereunder shall be effective on January 1, 2002, subject to approval by the board of trustees of the system. An allowance of updated service credits and increases in retirement annuities shall be made hereunder on January first of each subsequent year until this section ceases to be in effect under subsection (e) of Section 853.404 of the TMRS Act, provided that, as to such subsequent year, the actuary for the system has made the determination set forth in subsection (d) of Section 853.404 of the TMRS Act. 
(h)  Subject to approval by the board of trustees of the system, the updated service credits and increases in retirement annuities granted hereby shall be and become effective on the first day of January, 2002. 
(Ord. No. 527, §§ 1, 2, 12-21-87; Ord. No. 662, §§ 1, 3, 4, 12-3-91; Ord. No. 722, §§ 1, 2, 12-21-93; Ord. No. 843, §§ 1, 2, 11-5-96; Ord. No. 883, §§ 1—4, 12-2-97; Ord. No. 1033, § 2, 11-21-00; Ord. No. 1082, § 2, 12-18-01)  
Sec. 2-330. - Authorization of restricted prior service credit. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in Section 853.305 of Subtitle G of Title 8, V.T.C.A., Government Code, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the "TMRS Act"), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the "system") who is now or who hereafter becomes an employee of this city shall receive restricted prior service credit for service previously performed as an employee of any incorporated city or town in this state and for which the person has not otherwise received credited service in the system. The service credit hereby granted may be used only to satisfy length-of-service requirements for retirement eligibility, has no monetary value in computing the annuity payments allowable to the member, and may not be used in other computations, including computation of updated service credits. 
(b)  A member seeking to establish restricted prior service credit under this section must take the action required under said Section 853.305 while still an employee of this city. 
(Ord. No. 721, § 1, 12-21-93)  
Sec. 2-340. - Military service credit. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 853.502, Subchapter F of Chapter 853, Title 8, Government Code as amended, the city hereby elects to allow eligible members in its employment to establish credit in the system for active military service performed as a member of the armed forces or armed forces reserves of the United States or an auxiliary of the armed forces or armed forces reserves. Eligible members as used herein shall be those employees meeting the criteria set forth in sections 853.502(b) and 853.503 of said Subchapter F, and the amount and use of creditable military service shall be as further set forth in section 853.505. 
(b)  In order to establish credit for military service hereunder, a member must deposit with the system (in that member's individual account in the employees saving fund), an amount equal to the number of months for which credit is sought, multiplied by fifteen dollars ($15.00). The city agrees that its account in the municipality accumulation fund is to be charged at the time of the member's retirement with an amount equal to the accumulated amount paid by the member for military service credit, multiplied by the city's current service matching ratio in effect at the date the member applies for such military service credit. 
(Ord. No. 844, §§ 1, 2, 12-3-96)  
Section 2-350. - Employee deposit rate. 
All employees of the City of Keller shall be members of the Texas Municipal Retirement System when working in a position that normally requires at least one thousand (1,000) hours per year for a participating city. Such employees shall be required to contribute seven (7) percent of their base earnings into the system in compliance with the TMRS Act. 
(Ord. No. 1033, § 3, 11-21-00; Ord. No. 1082, § 3, 12-18-01; Ord. No. 1089, § 2, 5-2-02)  
ARTICLE V. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Subdivisions, Ch. 16; zoning, App. A. 
 
Sec. 2-500. - Creation composition; appointment of members; appointment of chairperson. 
There is hereby established the planning and zoning commission for the City of Keller, Texas, composed of seven (7) members. The city council may, but is not required to, appoint two (2) alternates for the regular members. Alternates may serve in the event of an absence by a commission member. Alternates shall be designated as first alternate and second alternate, and shall serve according to that order. Alternates may fill the remainder of a term vacated by a regular member. Members of the planning and zoning commission shall be residents and qualified voters of the City of Keller. All members shall be appointed by the city council by a majority vote. Each member appointed to the commission shall serve for a period of up to two (2) years with the term of places 1, 2, 3, 4, and alternate member 2 ending on November 30th of odd numbered years and the term of places 5, 6, 7, and alternate member 1 ending on November 30th of even numbered years or until their successors are fully qualified and duly appointed. Members and alternates shall serve without compensation. Members and alternates may be removed by a majority vote of the city council, with or without cause. At the time said annual appointments of the members are made by the city council, the city council may appoint the chairperson and vice-chairperson for the planning and zoning commission. Any member or alternate of the planning and zoning commission remaining absent for three (3) consecutive regular meetings of the commission will have their appointment declared vacated by a majority vote of the city council at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council. Any member or alternate of the commission remaining absent for four (4) consecutive regular meetings or a total of seven (7) regular meetings during their term on the commission shall be deemed to have vacated their appointment. 
(Ord. No. 576, § 1, 4-4-89; Ord. No. 637, § 6, 11-20-90; Ord. No. 661, § 3, 11-5-91; Ord. No. 698, § 2, 4-6-93; Ord. No. 802, § 1, 10-17-95; Ord. No. 1178, § 1, 1-20-04; Ord. No. 1186, § 2, 4-6-04; Ord. No. 1262, § 2, 5-17-05; Ord. No. 1701, § 2, 6-7-14; Ord. No. 1798, § 2, 7-5-16 ; Ord. No. 1879 § 2, 3-20-18 )  
Sec. 2-510. - Election of officers; meetings; quorum; adoption of procedural rules. 
If the city council does not appoint a chairperson and vice-chairperson on the date annual appointments are made pursuant to section 2-500, the planning and zoning commission shall, at the next regular meeting of the commission, elect from its members a chairperson and vice-chairperson for a term of one (1) year or until their successors have been fully qualified and duly appointed or elected. Any officer may be subsequently re-appointed or re-elected. Regular and special meetings of the commission shall be called by the city staff serving the commission; however, the commission shall meet not less than four (4) times per calendar year beginning January 1st of each year. A quorum will be established by the presence of at least four (4) members, including the chairperson. In the absence of the chairperson and/or vice-chairperson, the members constituting a quorum shall select from the members present a chairperson to conduct the meeting. The commission shall have the authority to adopt such rules and procedures as it may deem appropriate concerning the conduct of its meetings and procedures incidental to its activities, subject to the approval of the city council, and shall prescribe the time and place for its regular and special meetings. The commission may call a special meeting upon written request approved by the quorum of the commission that shall include the chairperson during a regular or special meeting of the commission. A commission member may request, in writing, at least seven (7) working days in advance of a scheduled regular or special commission meeting that an item be placed on the agenda. All meetings are to be conducted in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act. 
(Ord. No. 576, § 2, 4-4-89; Ord. No. 1178, § 2, 1-20-04; Ord. No. 1186, § 3, 4-6-04; Ord. No. 1798, § 2, 7-5-16 )  
Sec. 2-520. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The planning and zoning commission shall advise and recommend to the city council changes in zoning, approval of plats, amendments to the Unified Development Code and as may be assigned by the city council. A tie vote of the planning and zoning commissioners shall be considered a recommendation to deny the matter voted upon by the commission. 
(b)  At the direction of the city council, the commission shall serve as the impact fee advisory committee pursuant to Chapter 395 of the Texas Local Government Code. 
(c)  The planning and zoning commission shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To serve at the pleasure of the city council and shall have no advisory or recommending authority over any operating department of the city. 
(2)  Once a recommendation by the commission has been forwarded to the city council, the duties of the commission are considered complete unless otherwise directed by the city council. 
(3)  The commission may make inquiries of the city staff regarding city ordinances, comprehensive plans, other master plans, or matters relative to specific planning and zoning commission statutes of the State of Texas or pertaining to specific duties, powers, and assignments given by the city council. 
(4)  Shall make periodic review of the city's comprehensive land use and thoroughfare plan and be prepared to make such recommendations to the city council as deemed necessary to keep said plans consistent with and responsive to the needs and uses of the city. 
(5)  Shall serve in an advisory capacity on any land use planning-related item(s). 
(Ord. No. 698, § 1, 4-6-93; Ord. No. 1186, § 4, 4-6-04; Ord. No. 1729, § 2, 2-3-15)  
ARTICLE VI. - ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Zoning, App. A. 
 
Sec. 2-600. - Board of adjustment created. 
There is hereby created a board of adjustment to be composed of five (5) members and two (2) alternate members who shall be residents and qualified voters of the City of Keller and shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 576, § 3, 4-4-89)  
Sec. 2-610. - Terms of office; appointment of members; appointment of chairperson. 
Each member of the zoning board of adjustment shall serve for a period of two (2) years with the term of regular member places 2 and 4 and alternate number 2 ending on November 30th of even-numbered years and the term of regular member places 1, 3, and 5 and alternate number 1 ending on November 30th of odd-numbered years, or until their successors are fully qualified and duly appointed. All members shall be appointed by the city council by a majority vote. Members may be removed by a majority vote of the city council, with or without cause. Members may not serve on more than one appointed board or commission simultaneously. At the time said annual appointments of the members are made by the city council, the city council may appoint the chairperson for the zoning board of adjustment; however, if the city council does not appoint said chairperson on the date annual appointments are made, the board shall, at the next regular meeting of the board, elect from its members a chairperson for a term of one (1) year. A board member shall be removed as provided by state law. 
(Ord. No. 576, § 4, 4-4-89; Ord. No. 637, § 7, 11-20-90; Ord. No. 661, § 4, 11-5-91; Ord. No. 1178, § 4, 1-20-04; Ord. No. 1186, § 4, 4-6-04; Ord. No. 1716, § 2, 11-18-14; Ord. No. 1802, § 2, 7-19-16 ; Ord. No. 1879, § 3, 3-20-18 )  
Sec. 2-620. - Vacancies. 
Vacancies shall be filled by an alternate member for the unexpired term of a member whose term became vacant. Any member or alternate of the zoning board of adjustment remaining absent for three (3) consecutive regular meetings of the board will have their appointment declared vacated by a majority vote of the city council at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council. Any member or alternate of the board remaining absent for four (4) consecutive regular meetings or a total of seven (7) regular meetings during their term on the board shall be deemed to have vacated their appointment. Vacancies of an alternate member shall be filled by appointment of the city council by majority vote. 
(Ord. No. 576, § 5, 4-4-89; Ord. No. 637, § 8, 11-20-90; Ord. No. 698, § 3, 4-6-93; Ord. No. 802, § 2, 10-17-95; Ord. No. 1802, § 3, 7-19-16 )  
Sec. 2-630. - Organization; election of officers; meetings; quorum; adoption of procedural rules. 
If the city council does not appoint a chairperson on the date annual appointments are made pursuant to Section 2-610, the zoning board of adjustment shall, at the next regular meeting of the board, elect from its members a chairperson and a vice-chairperson for a term of one (1) year or until their successors have been fully qualified and duly appointed or elected. Any officer may subsequently be re-appointed or re-elected. The chairperson may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. The board shall designate the time of its meetings and shall conduct all meetings in the town hall of the City of Keller. Regular meetings of the board shall be called by the chairperson and at other times as may be determined by the board. A quorum will be established by the presence of at least four (4) members, including the chairperson. In the absence of the chairperson and/or vice-chairperson the members constituting a quorum shall select, from the members present, a chairperson to conduct the meeting. All cases must be heard by at least four (4) members, including the chairperson. The board of adjustment shall adopt its own rules of procedure, subject to approval of the city council, and shall keep a record of proceedings in accordance with state law showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent, or failing to vote, indicating such facts; and shall keep records of examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be duly filed in the office of the zoning board of adjustment and shall be of public record in accordance with state law. The official office of the zoning board of adjustment is the office of the city secretary. All meetings are to be conducted in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act. 
(Ord. No. 576, § 6, 4-4-89; Ord. No. 1178, § 5, 1-20-04; Ord. No. 1186, § 6, 4-6-04)  
Sec. 2-640. - Powers and duties. 
The zoning board of adjustment shall have the powers and exercise the duties as set forth in Chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code and to hear and decide other matters authorized by the ordinances of the City of Keller, Texas, and pursuant to the rules and procedures established by the ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 637, § 9, 11-20-90; Ord. No. 1186, § 7, 4-6-04)  
Secs. 2-650—2-750. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1186, §§ 7, 8, adopted April 6, 2004, repealed former sections 2-650—2-750 in their entirety which pertained to procedures of the zoning board of adjustment and derived from this codification.  
ARTICLE VIII. - CLAIMS 
 
Sec. 2-800. - Claims administration. 
Upon receipt of any notice of claim, the city secretary shall send a copy to the city attorney who shall request a report from such departments as may seem advisable and shall make such claims against third party sureties, insurers, contractors, and tortfeasors as he may deem appropriate. Upon receipt of necessary reports, investigations and documentation, the city attorney shall reduce his recommendations to writing for submission to the city council.  
Sec. 2-810. - Authority of city attorney to pay claims. 
The city attorney shall submit his recommendations to the city council and discuss the same in an executive session. Unless any councilperson indicates a desire that a claim be taken up in a public meeting, the city attorney is authorized to cause payment of claims in such amounts as he shall recommend, but not exceeding two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).  
Sec. 2-811. - Notice required. 
The City of Keller shall never be liable for any claim for property damage or for personal injury, whether such personal injury results in death or not, unless the person damaged or injured, or someone in his behalf, or in the event the injury results in death, the person or persons who may have a cause of action under the law by reason of such death injury, shall within thirty (30) days from the date the damage or injury was received give notice in writing to the city secretary of the following facts: 
(1)  The date and time when the injury or damage occurred and the place where the injured person or property was at the time when the injury was received. 
(2)  The nature of the damage or injury sustained. 
(3)  The apparent extent of the damage or injury sustained. 
(4)  A specific and detailed statement of how and under what circumstances the damage or injury occurred. 
(5)  The amount for which each claimant will settle. 
(6)  The actual place of residence of each claimant by street, number, city and state on the date the claim is presented. 
(7)  In the case of personal injury or death, the names and addresses of all persons who, according to the knowledge or information of the claimant, witnessed the happening of the injury or any part thereof and the names of the doctors, if any, to whose care the injured person is committed. 
(8)  In the case of property damage, the location of the damaged property at the time the claim was submitted along with the names and addresses of all persons who witnessed the happening of the damage or any part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 408, § 1, 2-19-85)  
Sec. 2-812. - Proof of notice. 
No suit of any nature whatsoever shall be instituted or maintained against the city unless the plaintiff therein shall aver and prove that previous to the filing of the original petition the plaintiff gave notice as required herein, and that the same was by vote of the city council refused. 
(Ord. No. 408, § 1, 2-19-85)  
Sec. 2-813. - Serving of notice. 
All notices required by this article shall be effectuated by serving them upon the city secretary at the following location: 158 South Main Street, Keller, Texas 76248; and all such notices shall be effective only when actually received by the person named above. 
(Ord. No. 408, § 1, 2-19-85)  
Sec. 2-814. - Article not to be waived. 
Neither the mayor, a city councilmember, nor any other officer or employee of the city shall have the authority to waive any of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 408, § 1, 2-19-85)  
Sec. 2-815. - Notice to be sworn, verified. 
The written notice required under this article shall be sworn to by the person claiming the damage or injuries or by someone authorized by him to do so on his behalf. Failure to swear to the notice as required herein shall not render the notice fatally defective, but failure to so verify the notice may be considered by the city council as a factor relating to the truth of the allegations and the weight to be given to the allegations contained therein. 
(Ord. No. 408, § 1, 2-19-85)  
ARTICLE X. - LIBRARY BOARD 
 
Sec. 2-1000. - Creation; composition; appointment of members; appointment of chairperson. 
There is hereby established a library board for the City of Keller, Texas composed of seven (7) members. The city council may, but is not required to, appoint two (2) alternates for the regular members. Alternates may serve in the event of an absence by a board member. Alternates shall be designated as first alternate and second alternate, and shall serve according to that order. Alternates may fill the remainder of a term vacated by a regular member. Members and alternates shall serve without compensation. Members of the library board shall be residents and qualified voters of the City of Keller. All members shall be appointed by the city council by a majority vote. Each member of the board shall serve for a period of two (2) years with the term of places 1, 2, 3, 6 and Alternate Member 1 ending on November 30th of even-numbered years and the term of places 4, 5, 7, and alternate member 2 ending on November 30th of odd-numbered years or until their successors are fully qualified and duly appointed. Members and alternates may be removed by a majority vote of the city council, with or without cause. Members may not serve on more than one (1) appointed board or commission simultaneously. At the time annual appointments of members are made by the city council, the city council may appoint the chairperson and vice-chairperson for the library board. Any member may be subsequently reappointed or re-elected. Any member or alternate of the library board remaining absent for three (3) consecutive regular meetings of the board will have their appointment declared vacated by a majority vote of the city council at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council. Any member or alternate of the board remaining absent for four (4) consecutive regular meetings or a total of seven (7) regular meetings during their term on the board shall be deemed to have vacated their appointment. 
(Ord. No. 576, § 7, 4-4-89; Ord. No. 637, § 4, 11-20-90; Ord. No. 661, § 2, 11-5-91; Ord. No. 698, § 4, 4-6-93; Ord. No. 802, § 3, 10-17-95; Ord. No. 1178, § 6, 1-20-04; Ord. No. 1186, § 9, 4-6-04; Ord. No. 1716, § 2, 11-18-14; Ord. No. 1745, § 2, 7-7-15; Ord. No. 1794, § 2, 7-5-16 ; Ord. No. 1879, § 4, 3-20-18 )  
Sec. 2-1010. - Meetings; quorum; agenda. 
Regular and special board meetings shall be called by the city staff serving the board; however, the board shall meet not less than four (4) times per calendar year beginning January 1st of each year. In addition, the board may call a special meeting upon written request approved by the quorum of said board that shall include the chairperson, during a regular or special meeting of the board. A quorum will be established by the presence of at least four (4) members, including the chairperson. In the absence of the chairperson and/or vice-chairperson the members constituting a quorum shall select, from the members present, a chairperson to conduct the meeting. A board member may request, in writing, at least seven (7) working days in advance of a scheduled board meeting that an item be placed on the agenda. All meetings are to be conducted in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act. 
(Ord. No. 1186, § 10, 4-6-04)  
Sec. 2-1020. - Duties and responsibilities. 
The public library board shall have the duties and responsibilities as follows: 
(1)  To serve at the pleasure of the city council and shall have no advisory or recommending authority over any operating department of the city. 
(2)  Once a recommendation by the board has been forwarded to the city council, the duties of the board regarding said recommendation are considered complete unless otherwise directed by the city council. 
(3)  The board may make inquiries of the city staff regarding city ordinances, master plans, or matters pertaining to specific board duties and assignments given by the city council. 
(4)  Act in an advisory capacity to the city council in matters pertaining to the city's public library program. 
(5)  Study and encourage development of adequate public library facilities for the residents of the city. 
(6)  Make recommendations on public library services for consideration by the city council. 
(7)  Assist in interpreting the policies and functions of a public library for its patrons. 
(8)  Solicit public library gifts, revenues, bequests, endowments, or property, subject to the approval and acceptance by the city council. 
(9)  Receive public comments, suggestions, concerns, and recommendations involving the city's public library services and facilities. 
(Ord. No. 637, § 5, 11-20-90; Ord. No. 1186, § 11, 4-6-04)  
Sec. 2-1030. - Election of officers; adoption of procedural rules. 
If the city council does not appoint a chairperson and/or vice-chairperson on the date annual appointments are made pursuant to section 2-1000, the public library board shall, at the next regular meeting of the board, elect from its members a chairperson and vice-chairperson for a term of one (1) year. It shall be the duty of the chairperson to preside at all meetings of the board and the duty of the vice-chairperson to serve in the place of the chairperson in his or her absence from the board meetings, or if the chairperson is no longer able to serve, to assume the responsibilities of the chairperson until a new chairperson is appointed or elected. The board may appoint one (1) of its members to serve as secretary of the board. It shall be the duty of the secretary to maintain a record of all proceedings of the public library board meetings. Officers shall serve a term of one (1) year or until their successors have been fully qualified and duly appointed or elected. Any officer may be subsequently re-appointed or re-elected. 
(Ord. No. 576, § 8, 4-4-89; Ord. No. 1178, § 7, 1-20-04; Ord. No. 1186, § 12, 4-6-04; Ord. No. 1794, § 3, 7-5-16 )  
ARTICLE XI. - PUBLIC ARTS BOARD[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1186, §§ 13, 14, adopted April 6, 2004, repealed former Art. XI, §§ 2-1100—2-1140 in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Art. XI pertained to the impact fee advisory committee and derived from the following: 
Ord. No. 	Section 	Date 
576 	12 	 4- 4-89 
637 	10 	11-20-90 
661 	 5 	11- 5-91 
695 	 1 	 3-16-93 
726 	 1 	 1- 4-94 
 
 
Sec. 2-1100. - Creation; composition; appointment of members; appointment of chairperson. 
There is hereby established a public arts board for the City of Keller, Texas composed of seven (7) members. The city council may, but is not required to, appoint two (2) alternates for the regular members. Alternates may serve in the event of an absence by a board member. Alternates shall be designated as first alternate and second alternate, and shall serve according to that order. Alternates may fill the remainder of a term vacated by a regular member. Members of the public arts board shall be residents and qualified voters of the city. The composition of the board shall consist of at least two (2) members representing the local artistic community or an arts-related field of which one (1) shall be a practicing artist or curator. All members shall be appointed by the city council by a majority vote. Each member of the board shall serve for a period of two (2) years with the term of places 1, 2, 3, and alternate member 1 ending on November 30th of even-numbered years and the term of places 4, 5, 6, 7, and alternate member 2 ending on November 30th of odd-numbered years or until their successors are fully qualified and duly appointed. Members and alternates shall serve without compensation. Members and alternates may be removed by a majority vote of the city council, with or without cause. Members may not serve on more than one (1) appointed board or commission simultaneously. At the time annual appointments of members are made by the city council, the city council may appoint the chairperson and vice-chairperson for the public arts board; however, if the city council does not appoint said chairperson and vice-chairperson on the date annual appointments are made, the public arts board shall, at the next regular meeting of the board, elect from its members a chairperson and vice-chairperson for a term of one (1) year or until their successors have been fully qualified and duly appointed or elected. Any officer may be subsequently reappointed or re-elected. Any member or alternate of the board remaining absent for three (3) consecutive regular meetings of the board will have their appointment declared vacated by a majority vote of the city council at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council. Any member or alternate of the public arts board remaining absent for four (4) consecutive regular meetings or a total of seven (7) regular meetings during their term on the board shall be deemed to have vacated their appointment. 
(Ord. No. 1186, § 14, 4-6-04; Ord. No. 1716, § 3, 11-18-14; Ord. No. 1796, § 2, 7-5-16 ; Ord. No. 1879, § 5, 3-20-18 )  
Sec. 2-1110. - Meetings; quorum; agenda. 
Regular and special board meetings shall be called by the city staff serving the public arts board; however, the board shall not meet less than four (4) times per calendar year beginning January 1st of each year. In addition, the board may call a special meeting upon written request approved by the quorum of said board that shall include the chairperson, during a regular or special meeting of the board. A quorum will be established by the presence of at least four (4) members, including the chairperson. In the absence of the chairperson and/or vice-chairperson, the members constituting a quorum shall select, from the members present, a chairperson to conduct the meeting. A board member may request, in writing, at least seven (7) working days in advance of a scheduled board meeting that an item be placed on the agenda. All meetings are to be conducted in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act. 
(Ord. No. 1186, § 14, 4-6-04)  
Sec. 2-1120. - Duties and responsibilities. 
The public arts board shall have the duties and responsibilities as follows: 
(1)  To serve at the pleasure of the city council and shall have no advisory or recommending authority over any operating department of the city. 
(2)  Once a recommendation by the board has been forwarded to the city council, the duties of the board regarding said recommendation are considered complete unless otherwise directed by the city council. 
(3)  The board may make inquiries of the city staff regarding city ordinances or matters pertaining to specific board duties and assignments given by the city council. 
(4)  Implement the public arts program and policy. 
(5)  Recommend to the city council the commissioning of works of art by various artists that would complement the public arts program. 
(6)  Recommend to the city council proposed artwork for allocation of public arts funds in accordance with the city's budget guidelines. 
(7)  Recommend the placement of artwork as governed by the arts policy. 
(8)  Recommend the type(s) of acquisition procedures necessary for a specific arts project as described in the arts policy. 
(9)  Develop an inventory of publicly accessible spaces for placement of public art. 
(10)  Review proposals from artists and artworks and make recommendations to the city council on changes, additions, deletions thereon, and on final acceptance or rejection of said proposals. 
(11)  Consult with city departments and the city council as appropriate throughout each public arts project proposal and implementation process, in order to ensure that the policy is implemented effectively. 
(12)  Encourage participation by citizens in the process of acquiring, placing, and commissioning public art. 
(13)  Submit to the city council for approval any proposed change to established policies and procedures in order to maintain consistency of review and implementation of the public arts policy. 
(Ord. No. 1186, § 14, 4-6-04)  
ARTICLE XII. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 484, adopted Nov. 25, 1986, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1—8 as Art. XII, §§ 2-1200—2-1270, was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 2-1200. - Organization. 
There exists the office of emergency management director of the City of Keller, which shall be held by the mayor in accordance with state law. 
(a)  An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director. 
(b)  The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this article. He/she may delegate authority for execution of these duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the director. 
(c)  The operational emergency management organization of the City of Keller shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan. 
(Ord. No. 484, § 1, 11-25-86)  
Sec. 2-1210. - Emergency management director—Powers and duties. 
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following: 
(a)  Conduct an ongoing survey of actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property within the city and an ongoing program of identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur. 
(b)  Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the City of Keller, and shall recommend for adoption by the city council mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation of such plan. 
(c)  Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven (7) days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city secretary. 
(d)  Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations or directives which are necessary for carrying out the purposes of this article. Such proclamations, regulations, or directives shall be disseminated promptly by means calculated to bring their contents to the attention of the general public and, unless circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city secretary. 
(e)  Direction and control of the operations of the Keller emergency management organization as well as the training of emergency management personnel. 
(f)  Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization of the city. 
(g)  Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal emergency management organizations. 
(h)  Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city to aid in carrying out the provisions of the emergency management plan. 
(i)  Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which the city is located and with other municipalities within the county, for the county-wide coordination of emergency management efforts. 
(j)  Supervision of, and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city. 
(k)  Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes. 
(l)  Survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for herein. 
(m)  Other requirements as specified in Texas Disaster Act 1975 (V.T.C.S. article 6889-7). 
(Ord. No. 484, § 2, 11-25-86)  
Sec. 2-1220. - Emergency management plan. 
A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan shall set forth the form of the organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign responsibilities, tasks, duties, and powers, and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this article. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the State Division of Emergency Management of the State of Texas. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the State Division of Emergency Management. When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan shall be considered supplementary to this article and have the effect of law during the time of disaster. 
(Ord. No. 484, § 3, 11-25-86)  
Sec. 2-1230. - Interjurisdictional program. 
The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge of County of Tarrant and the mayors of the other cities in said county in the formation of an emergency management council for the County of Tarrant and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of a joint emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a county-wide program of emergency management insofar as said program may affect the City of Keller. 
(Ord. No. 484, § 4, 11-25-86)  
Sec. 2-1240. - Override. 
At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 484, § 5, 11-25-86)  
Sec. 2-1250. - Liability. 
This article is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and safety, and neither the City of Keller, the agents and representatives of said city, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the City of Keller a license or privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack or natural or man-made disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
(Ord. No. 484, § 6, 11-25-86)  
Sec. 2-1260. - Commitment of funds. 
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this article without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council unless during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life or property. 
(Ord. No. 484, § 7, 11-25-86)  
Sec. 2-1270. - Offenses; penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article, or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this article. 
(b)  It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the City of Keller, unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials. 
(c)  Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal, or the termination of a warning, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article and shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this article. 
(d)  Convictions for violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 484, § 8, 11-25-86)  
Sec. 2-1280. - Standard of care. 
Every officer, agent or employee of the city and every officer, agent or employee of an authorized provider of emergency services, including, but not limited to, every unit of government or subdivision thereof, while responding to emergency calls or reacting to emergency situations, regardless of whether any declaration of emergency has been declared or proclaimed by a unit of government or subdivision thereof, is hereby authorized to act or not to act in such a manner to effectively deal with the emergency. An action or inaction is "effective" if it in any way contributes or can reasonably be thought by the provider of such emergency service to contribute to preserving any lives or property. This section shall prevail over every other ordinance of the city and, to the extent to which the city has the authority to authorize, over any other law establishing a standard of care in conflict with this section. Neither the city nor the employee, agent or officer thereof, or other unit of government or subdivision thereof or its employees, agents or officers shall be liable for failure to use ordinary care in such emergency. It is the intent of city government, by passing this ordinance, to assure effective action in emergency situations by those entrusted with the responsibility of saving lives and property by protecting such government units from liability, and their employees, agents and officers from non-intentional tort liability to the fullest extent permitted by statutory and constitutional law, this article shall be liberally construed to carry out the intent of city government. 
(Ord. No. 852, § 1, 3-18-97)  
Sec. 2-1290. - Adoption of National Incident Management System (NIMS). 
The city council of the City of Keller, Texas hereby approves the adoption of the National Incident Management System (NIMS) as the standard for incident management by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1275, 9-6-05)  
ARTICLE XIII. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 637, § 12, adopted Nov. 30, 1990, repealed Art. XIII, §§ 2-1300—2-1340, of this chapter, which pertained to the humanities board and derived from Ord. No. 575, § 1, adopted April 4, 1989, Ord. No. 619, § 1, adopted June 5, 1990, added new provisions to Ch. 2 as §§ 2-1300—2-1390, pertaining to records management; § 3 of said ordinance has been included as § 2-1395 at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Retention of records, § 2-260. 
 
Sec. 2-1300. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commission. The Texas State Library and Archives Commission. 
Custodian. The appointed or elected public officer who by the state constitution, state law, ordinance, or administrative policy is in charge of an office that creates or receives local government records. For the purpose of this article, a custodian is a department head, under the administration of the city manager or the city council, who is responsible for all records in his/her department. 
Director and librarian. The executive and administrative officer of the Texas State Library and Archives Commission. 
Essential record. Any local government record necessary to the resumption or continuation of government operations in an emergency or disaster, to the re-creation of the legal and financial status of the city, or the protection and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state. 
Governing body. The city council of the City of Keller. 
Local government record. Any document, paper, letter, book, map, photograph, sound or video recording, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic medium, or other information recording medium, regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by local city government offices or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law, including an ordinance, or in the transaction of public business are hereby declared to be records of the City of Keller, and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this article and the provisions of the Act. The term does not include: 
(a)  Extra identical copies of documents created only for convenience of reference or research by officers of employees of the City of Keller. 
(b)  Notes, journals, diaries, and similar documents created by an officer or employee of Keller for the employee's personal convenience; 
(c)  Blank forms; 
(d)  Stocks of publications; 
(e)  Library and museum materials acquired solely for the purposes of reference or display; or 
(f)  Copies of documents in any media furnished to members of the public to which they are entitled under Article 6252-17a, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, or other state law. 
Office. Any office, department, division, program, commission, bureau, board, committee, or similar entity of the City of Keller. 
Permanent record. A record of permanent value. Any local government record for which the retention period on a records retention schedule issued by the commission is given as permanent. 
Record. A record of the City of Keller. 
Records control schedule. A document prepared by or under the authority of a records management officer listing the records maintained by the City of Keller, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that the records management program in Keller or state law may require. 
Records management. The application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation, and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the management of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and space-effective storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems. 
Records retention schedule. A document issued by the commission establishing mandatory retention periods for local government records. 
Retention period. The minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction. 
(Ord. No. 619, § 1, 6-5-90)  
Sec. 2-1310. - Establishment and administration of records management program. 
(a)  The office of city secretary is authorized to establish and administer the records management program for the City of Keller, Texas, pursuant to legal, fiscal, administrative, and archival requirements and the city secretary or his/her designee is hereby named records management officer. To this end, the city secretary will implement, but not be limited to, a program to encompass such areas of records management as are required to preserve and keep in order all books, papers, documents, records and files of the city council and of the executive departments to achieve the following goals: 
(1)  Release space and reduce the need for storage and filing equipment; 
(2)  Establish an efficient retrieval operation for both active and inactive municipal records; 
(3)  Provide for routine disposition of paperwork; 
(4)  Maintain total security over municipal records; 
(5)  Communicate the need of an effective records management program; and 
(6)  Secure a central records storage facility which can be operated and maintained by records management staff. 
(Ord. No. 619, § 1, 6-5-90)  
Sec. 2-1320. - Purpose of records management program. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Records Management Program of the City of Keller, Texas," providing for the proper and efficient management of the municipal records of the City of Keller, Texas. 
Since the citizens of Keller have a right to expect efficient and cost-effective government and recognizing the importance of local government records in the lives of all citizens, the efficient management of city records is necessary to the effective and economic operation of the city, the preservation of records of permanent value is necessary to provide the people of the state with resources concerning their history and document their rights of citizenship and property, and the establishment of uniform standards and procedures for the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, or other disposition of city records is necessary to fulfill the higher public purpose. 
(Ord. No. 619, § 1, 6-5-90)  
Sec. 2-1330. - City records declared public property. 
All city records as defined in this article are hereby declared to be property of the City of Keller, Texas. No city official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right to such records even though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 619, § 1, 6-5-90)  
Sec. 2-1340. - Policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City of Keller to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all city records through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their ultimate disposition. 
(Ord. No. 619, § 1, 6-5-90)  
Sec. 2-1350. - Duties of records management officer. 
The records management officer shall have the following duties, and others as assigned by the city council and as provided by state law: 
(1)  Assist in establishing and developing policies and procedures for a records management program for the city, which program shall include basic files management and records disposition policies, systems, standards and procedures; 
(2)  Administer the records management program and provide assistance to custodians for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of recordkeeping; 
(3)  In cooperations with the custodians of the records: 
a.  Prepare and file with the director and librarian before January 2, 1995, the records control schedules and the list of obsolete records, required by the Act; 
b.  Prepare and file with the director and librarian amended schedules as needed to reflect new records created or received by the city; 
c.  Prepare or direct the preparation of requests for authorization to destroy records not on an approved control schedule as provided by the Act, of requests to destroy the originals of permanent records that have been microfilmed, and of electronic storage authorization requests; 
(4)  In cooperation with custodians, identify and take adequate steps to preserve city records that are of permanent value; 
(5)  In cooperation with custodians, identify and take adequate steps to protect essential city records; 
(6)  In cooperation with custodians, ensure the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction of records is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the city's records management program and requirements of state law; 
(7)  Report annually to the city council on program effectiveness; 
(8)  Provide records management advise and assistance to all city offices and departments, by preparation of manuals of procedure and policies and by on-site consultation. 
(9)  Carry out destruction and transfers that are required by records schedules and carry out microphotography tasks when staff and central facility becomes available; 
(10)  Design and manage the operations of a records center for the lost cost storage of inactive records and as a future site for a centralized micrographics program; 
(11)  Develop a citywide forms design and control system; 
(12)  Establish in cooperation with other responsible town officials a disaster plan for each city office and department to insure maximum availability of records for re-establishing operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense; 
(13)  Bring to the attention of the city manager any office not in compliance with laws or ordinances regarding public access to information or protection of privacy; 
(14)  Disseminate to the city council and custodians information concerning state laws, administrative rules, and the policies of the city relating to local government records through a records manual which may be amended from time to time and other means of communication; and 
(15)  In cooperation with custodians, establish procedures to insure that the handling of records in any context of the records management program by the records management officer is carried out with due regard for the duties and responsibilities of custodians that may be imposed by law and the confidentiality of information in records to which access is restricted by law. 
(Ord. No. 619, § 1, 6-5-90)  
Sec. 2-1360. - Duties and responsibilities of the city council. 
The city council shall: 
(1)  Establish, promote, and support an active and continuing program for the efficient and economical management of all City of Keller records; 
(2)  Cause policies and procedures to be developed for the administration of the program under the direction of records management officer; 
(3)  Facilitate the creation and maintenance of city records containing adequate and proper documentation of the organization, functions, policies, decisions, procedures, and essential transactions of the city and designed to furnish the information necessary to protect the legal and financial rights of the city, the state, and persons affected by the activities of the city government; 
(4)  Facilitate the identification and preservation of city records that are of permanent value; 
(5)  Facilitate the identification and protection of essential city records; 
(6)  Cooperate with the commission in its conduct of statewide records management surveys; and, 
(7)  Review of a records control schedule or amended schedule by the officers of the city as it considers necessary. 
(Ord. No. 619, § 1, 6-5-90)  
Sec. 2-1370. - Duties and responsibilities of custodians. 
(a)  Custodians of records in the city shall: 
(1)  Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures established by the local government for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out requirements under the Act; 
(2)  Adequately document the transaction of city business and the services, programs, and duties for which the custodian and the custodian's staff are responsible; 
(3)  Maintain the records in the custodian's care and carry out their preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the city's records management program and the requirements of the Act and rules adopted thereunder; and 
(4)  Designate records officers within their offices and provide the records management officer the names of the designees and all persons working under their supervision, such records officers to report directly to the custodian in their department on matters relating to the records management program and have full access to all files in their respective departments. 
(b)  State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a custodian of local government records does not exempt the custodian or the records in the custodian's care from the application of this article and rules adopted by the state under the Local Government Records Act of 1989 and may not be used by the custodian as a basis for refusal to participate in the City of Keller records management program, the establishment of which is required by state law. 
(Ord. No. 619, § 1, 6-5-90)  
Sec. 2-1380. - Microfilming of records. 
For the benefit of this section, "microfilm" means roll microfilm, microfiche, and all other formats produced by any method of microphotography or other means of miniaturization on film. 
For the benefit of this section, "microfilming" means the methods, procedures, and processes used to produce roll microfilm, microfiche, or other microphotographic formats. 
All microfilming activities by custodians must be carried out on or after April 1, 1990, under rules established by the Commission which rules will establish standards and procedures for the microfilming of city records under Chapter 204 of the Act. All microfilm produced before June 1, 1990, under law prior to the Act is validated to the extent the microfilm was produced in the manner and according to the standards prescribed by prior law. 
All City of Keller procedures and materials used for microfilm and microfilming city records shall be done and acquired under the aegis of state law, and the city will be subject to all the law, rules, standards and procedures as outlined in the Act. 
(Ord. No. 619, § 1, 6-5-90)  
Sec. 2-1390. - Electronic storage of records. 
For the purpose of this section, "electronic storage" means the maintenance of local government record data in the form of digital electronic signals on a computer hard disk, magnetic tape, optical disk, or similar machine-readable medium. 
For the purpose of this section, "source document" means the local government record from which local government record data is obtained for electronic storage. The term does not include backup copies of the data in any media generated from electronic storage. 
Any city record data may be stored electronically in addition to or instead of source documents in paper or other media, subject to the requirements of the Act and rules adopted under it. 
The city will be subject to rules established by the Commission for standards and procedures for electronic storage and will be subject to the provisions of Chapter 205 of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 619, § 1, 6-5-90)  
Sec. 2-1395. - Violations; penalty. 
Any individual, association or corporation violating any portion or provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction therefor, shall be punished by the assessment of a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00), and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during on or which a violation occurs or continues 
(Ord. No. 619, § 3, 6-5-90)  
ARTICLE XIV. - MUNICIPAL COURT OF RECORD[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Nonamendatory Ord. No. 687, §§ 1—8, adopted 11-3-92, has been included herein as a new Art. XIV, §§ 2-1400—2-1460, at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 2-1400. - Established. 
The city council hereby establishes its municipal court as a municipal court of record in order to provide a more efficient disposition of appeals from municipal court and in order to more effectively enforce its ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 687, § 1, 11-3-92)  
Sec. 2-1410. - Authority. 
This municipal court of record is established pursuant to the authority granted in Subchapter (P) of Chapter 30 of the Government Code of the State of Texas, and the terms set forth therein are hereby adopted governing the operation of said court. 
(Ord. No. 687, § 1, 11-3-92)  
Sec. 2-1420. - Selection of judges; term of office. 
(a)  The judges of the municipal court of record shall be appointed by the governing body of the city for a term of two (2) years. 
(b)  The judges of the municipal court of record shall be appointed in accordance with Contract Number 12-18, Interlocal Agreement for Combined Municipal Court Services for the Cities of Keller and Colleyville, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 687, §§ 3, 4, 11-3-92; Ord. No. 1045, § 2, 3-6-01; Ord. No. 1522, § 1, 8-31-10; Ord. No. 1630, § 2, 11-6-12)  
Sec. 2-1430. - Qualifications for judges. 
A municipal judge in the City of Keller court of record must be a licensed attorney in the State of Texas and in good standing with the Texas State Bar Association, including having two (2) or more years of experience in the practice of law in the State of Texas. A person may not accept another public or judicial office that interferes with the performance of the municipal judge's duties while serving as a municipal judge for the City of Keller court of record. 
(Ord. No. 687, § 5, 11-3-92; Ord. No. 768, § 1, 3-7-95; Ord. No. 1522, § 2, 8-31-10)  
Sec. 2-1435. - Appointment of muncipal court judge. 
The municipal court judge shall be appointed by the governing body in accordance with Contract Number 12-18, Interlocal Agreement for Combined Municipal Court Services for the Cities of Keller and Colleyville, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 1522, § 3, 8-31-10; Ord. No. 1630, § 3, 11-6-12)  
Sec. 2-1440. - Clerk of court. 
In accordance with Contract Number 12-18, Interlocal Agreement for Combined Municipal Court Services for the Cities of Keller and Colleyville, Texas, a clerk of the municipal court of record, who shall be known as the municipal court clerk shall be appointed. 
(Ord. No. 687, § 6, 11-3-92; Ord. No. 749, § 1, 9-6-94; Ord. No. 799, § 1, 6-3-95; Ord. No. 1630, § 4, 11-6-12)  
Sec. 2-1460. - Court reporter. 
In accordance with Contract Number 12-18, Interlocal Agreement for Combined Municipal Court Services for the Cities of Keller and Colleyville, Texas, an official court reporter to preserve a record in cases tried shall be appointed. The court reporter is not required to record testimony in a trial unless the judge or one (1) of the parties requests a record. 
(Ord. No. 687, § 6, 11-3-92; Ord. No. 1630, § 5, 11-6-12)  
Sec. 2-1470. - Effective date. 
The municipal court of the City of Keller shall become a court of record from and after the first day of March, 1993. 
(Ord. No. 687, § 7, 11-3-92)  
Sec. 2-1480. - Collection fee. 
The Keller Municipal Court of Record may add a collection fee in the maximum amount allowed and within the conditions set forth by state law for all debts and accounts receivable such as unpaid fines, fees, court costs, forfeited bonds and restitution on each item that is ordered paid by the municipal court that is past due by a period of time as allowed by state law. 
(Ord. No. 1488, § 2, 2-16-10)  
ARTICLE XV. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT BOARD[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 735, § 1, adopted March 1, 1994, amended the Code by adding a new Art. XIV, §§ 2-1400—2-1430. In order to prevent the duplication of section numbers, the editor has redesignated such provisions as Art. XV, §§ 2-1500—2-1530. 
 
Sec. 2-1500. - Creation; composition; appointment of members; appointment of chairperson. 
There is hereby established an economic development board for the City of Keller, Texas composed of seven (7) active members and two (2) advisory members. The city council may, but is not required to, appoint two (2) alternates for the regular members. Alternates may serve in the event of an absence by a board member. Alternates shall be designated as first alternate and second alternate, and shall serve according to that order. Alternates may fill the remainder of a term vacated by a regular member. Members of the economic development board shall be residents or owners of businesses that reside in the city limits and consist of the mayor and one (1) city council member; one (1) Greater Keller Chamber of Commerce Board member as selected by the Greater Keller Chamber of Commerce Board; four (4) residents and/or Keller business owners. The two (2) advisory members shall be one (1) commercial broker and one (1) financial representative and do not need to reside or own a business in the City of Keller, Texas. All members of the Keller economic development board shall be appointed by the city council by a majority vote. Each member of the board shall serve for a period of two (2) years with the term of places 1, 2, 3, 4, advisory member 1 and alternate member 2 ending on November 30th of odd numbered years and the term of places 5, 6, 7, advisory member 2, and alternate member 1 ending on November 30th of even numbered years or until their successors are fully qualified and duly appointed. Members and alternates may be removed by a majority vote of the city council, with or without cause. Citizen members may not serve on more than one (1) appointed board or commission simultaneously. The mayor shall serve as the chairperson for the economic development board. Any member or alternate of the board remaining absent for three (3) consecutive regular meetings of the board will have their appointment declared vacated by majority vote of the city council at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council. Any member or alternate of the board remaining absent for four (4) consecutive regular meetings or a total of seven (7) regular meetings during their term on the board shall be deemed to have vacated their appointment. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 1, 3-1-94; Ord. No. 802, § 6, 10-17-95; Ord. No. 1129, § 2, 12-3-02; Ord. No. 1178, § 8, 1-20-04; Ord. No. 1186, § 15, 4-6-04; Ord. No. 1523, § 2, 8-31-10; Ord. No. 1703, § 2, 7-15-14; Ord. No. 1795, § 2, 7-5-16; Ord. No. 1795, § 2, 7-5-16 ; Ord. No. 1879, § 6, 3-20-18 )  
Sec. 2-1510. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1523, § 3, adopted Aug. 31, 2010, repealed former § 2-1510 in its entirety which pertained to election of officers and adoption of procedural rules for the economic development board and derived from Ord. No. 735, § 1, 3-1-94; Ord. No. 1178, § 9, 1-20-04; Ord. No. 1186, § 16, 4-6-04.  
Sec. 2-1520. - Meetings; quorum; agenda. 
Regular and special board meetings shall be called by the city staff serving the board; however, the board shall meet not less than nine (9) times per calendar year beginning January 1 of each year. In addition, the board may call a special meeting upon written request approved by the quorum of said board that shall include the chairperson, during a regular or special meeting of the board. A quorum will be established by the presence of at least four (4) members. In the absence of the chairperson the members constituting a quorum shall select, from the members present, a chairperson to conduct the meeting. A board member may request to the chairperson, in writing, at least seven (7) working days in advance of a scheduled board meeting that an item be placed on the agenda. All meetings are to be conducted in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 1, 3-1-94; Ord. No. 1129, § 3, 12-3-02; Ord. No. 1186, § 17, 4-6-04; Ord. No. 1507, § 2, 6-1-10; Ord. No. 1523, § 4, 8-31-10; Ord. No. 1703, § 3, 7-15-14)  
Sec. 2-1530. - Duties and responsibilities. 
The economic development board shall have the duties and responsibilities as follows: 
(1)  To provide direct communication between the business community and City of Keller staff and city council. 
(2)  To create a forum for the business community to advise the city council and City of Keller staff on the local economy and local commercial developments. 
(3)  To assist City of Keller staff with the recruitment, retention and expansion of businesses in Keller and to promote the Keller economy. 
(4)  At the direction of city council, the board may make recommendations regarding economic development policies. 
(5)  Serve as liaisons with agencies, groups and civic clubs concerning economic development. 
(6)  Submit periodic reports, including any special reports, as requested by city council. 
(7)  Other duties and responsibilities as provided by a charge from city council which may be adopted and/or amended by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 1, 3-1-94; Ord. No. 1129, § 4, 12-3-02; Ord. No. 1186, § 18, 4-6-04; Ord. No. 1507, § 3, 6-1-10; Ord. No. 1523, § 5, 8-31-10; Ord. No. 1703, § 4, 7-15-14)  
ARTICLE XVI. - NAMING OF PUBLIC LANDS, STREETS, AND FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 2-1600. - Definitions. 
Public land. Lands which are owned or managed by the City of Keller for the long-term benefit of the community. These lands may be within or outside of the corporate limits. Examples include, but are not limited to developed and undeveloped parks, open space, and plazas. 
Public facilities. Physical facilities owned or managed by the City of Keller for the long-term benefit of the community. Examples include Town Hall, Library, The Keller Pointe, Police and Courts Building, and Fire Stations. 
Streets. Existing public streets which have been named and are owned or managed in some manner by the City of Keller. This article is not applicable to new streets being constructed. 
(Ord. No. 1447, § 2, 4-7-09)  
Sec. 2-1610. - Guidelines. 
(a)  Qualifying names: Should provide some form of individual identity related to one of the following: 
(1)  Geographic location; 
(2)  An outstanding feature; 
(3)  Adjoining subdivision; 
(4)  Commonly recognized historical event, group, or individual; 
(5)  Historical sites; 
(6)  Individual(s) or group(s) who make significant financial contributions to acquisition and/or development; 
a.  The name of a special benefactor may be considered either living or deceased. 
b.  Financial contributions from benefactors must exceed the minimum amount required for purchasing authorization by the city council and account for a minimum of fifty-one (51) percent of the project cost. Acquisitions and/or developments resulting from contributions valued at less than this amount will not be affixed with names. 
(7)  Individual(s) who provided extraordinary service to community or country as a whole; 
a.  Individual died in the line of duty serving the City of Keller or the United States of America or died while performing a heroic act. 
b.  The individuals name is not eligible for consideration until five (5) years after their death except where the individual was a recipient of the Medal of Honor, Distinguished Service Cross, Navy Cross, Air Force Cross, Distinguished Service Medal, or Silver Star, in which case the five-year waiting period shall be waived. 
c.  Individual must not have been convicted of a felony. 
d.  Individual must have been a Keller resident for ten (10) years or more. 
e.  Application must be accompanied by a biographical sketch providing evidence of such service and rationale supporting the nomination. 
f.  A letter of support from a spouse or immediate family member may be required at the discretion of the city. 
(b)  Other considerations: 
(1)  The renaming of parks and facilities is strongly discouraged. 
(2)  Parks and facilities named by deed restriction or grant approval cannot be considered for renaming. 
(3)  A park, facility, or street named for an individual should not be changed unless it is found that the individual's personal character is, or was, such that the continued use of their name for a park, facility, or street would not be in the best interest of the community. 
(4)  Street names to be considered shall not duplicate or cause confusion with the names of existing streets. Portions of streets shall not be considered for renaming. Street names that are spelled differently but sound the same (phonetically similar) shall be avoided. 
(Ord. No. 1447, § 2, 4-7-09)  
Sec. 2-1620. - Procedures. 
(a)  Initiation of proposed name. 
(1)  In order for a naming or renaming proposal to be considered the following must occur: 
a.  The recommended name must qualify according to section 2-1610, and; 
b.  Be formally submitted to the city secretary or the appropriate department as listed on the naming application form, completed in its entirety, accompanied by a petition containing a minimum of thirty (30) signatures and addresses of Keller residents in support of the naming proposal, and; 
c.  If intended for the renaming of a street the petition must contain signatures of support from a minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of the owners of all property located on the street in question; 
d.  That the sponsoring party must be a citizen of the City of Keller, and; 
e.  If it is a renaming proposal the sponsoring party shall enter into a written agreement with the city, contingent upon approval of the proposed naming by the city council, to incur all costs associated with renaming including signage, brochures, publications and administrative fees should such cost exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00); however, in appropriate cases the city council at their discretion shall have the authority to waive this requirement of the sponsoring party. 
(2)  Consideration of naming proposals by city council may be initiated by any citizen, council advisory committee, board or city task force, or elected or appointed official. 
(3)  Naming proposals will be directed through the appropriate department: 
a.  Parks and open space. Parks and recreation department; 
b.  Library. Library department; 
c.  Street re-naming. Planning and development department; 
d.  All others. City manager's office. 
(4)  Prior to naming proposals being forwarded to city council for consideration, naming proposals shall be formally reviewed by the appropriate advisory board(s) or task force(s) in public meetings with opportunity provided for citizen input requested through advanced meeting notification. 
a.  If all of the above conditions are met, public notice of the proposed name change will be published on the city's website during a minimum period of sixty (60) days prior to the advisory board, task force, or city council public meeting, whichever happens first. Citizen comments must be in writing and postmarked or e-mail dated within the sixty-day public notice period. 
b.  At the end of the sixty-day public notice period, the assigned staff member shall list within thirty (30) days the item on the appropriate agenda (either board or city council) and submit to the board or council a summary of the comments and recommendations received for their review. 
(5)  Utilizing the process listed above, the city council, through the city manager's office, may solicit public input prior to making a decision on a naming or renaming request not assigned to a board or task force for initial review. 
(b)  Council review: 
(1)  Staff reports shall be prepared that fully document input received from citizens, board or task force discussions, and a specific naming recommendation(s). 
(2)  The item will be placed on the city council meeting agenda for review and consideration. Minutes from board or task force meetings which include a naming recommendation will be submitted as part of the staff report to city council for their review. 
a.  City council, after consideration, by motion and majority vote may: 
1.  Formally approve a naming proposal; 
2.  Formally deny a naming proposal; or 
3.  Conduct a special public hearing at a future meeting date. 
(3)  If additional public input is needed, the city council, prior to making a formal decision on a naming proposal may conduct a public hearing no sooner than thirty (30) days following the council meeting at which recommendations were received by the council. Public hearing notification shall be posted at least ten (10) days in advance via the city's web site. 
(4)  The purpose of the public hearing is to provide opportunity for additional public input directly to the city council. 
a.  City council will do one of two (2) things following a special public hearing: 
1.  Formally approve a naming proposal; or 
2.  Formally deny a naming proposal. 
(c)  Memorial/dedication recognitions: Memorial/dedication recognitions to include proposed items such as park amenities (benches, bridges, pavilions, playgrounds, tables, and garden areas), meeting rooms, and conference rooms shall be addressed under a separate city document entitled Donation Policy. 
(Ord. No. 1447, § 2, 4-7-09)  
Chapter 3 - ANIMALS, FOWL, INSECTS AND REPTILES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1675, § 2, adopted Jan. 7, 2014 repealed former Ch. 3, §§ 3-100—3-480, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Ch. 3 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 579, § 1, 4-18-89; Ord. No. 663, § 1, 12-17-91; Ord. No. 719, §§ 1—10, 12-7-93; Ord. No. 963, § 2, 7-6-99; Ord. No. 1078, §§ 2—4, 12-4-01; Ord. No. 1114, §§ 2—11, 9-3-02; Ord. No. 1159, § 2—7, 10-7-03. 
Cross reference— Vicious animals preventing refuse collection § 7-210; disposal of heavy dead animals, § 7-220. 
 
Sec. 3-100. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, for the purpose of this chapter, shall have the following meanings: 
Adequate fencing. A fence which contains livestock or any other animal upon the owner's or occupier's property and prevents same from escaping. 
Animal. Unless otherwise stated, includes any living creature including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, cows, horses, birds, fish, mammals, reptiles, insects, fowl and livestock, but specifically excluding human beings. 
Animal control authority. Means a municipal or county animal control office with authority over the area in which the dog is kept or the county sheriff in an area that does not have an animal control office. 
Animal control officer. The person or persons designated by the chief of police to represent and act for the city in the impoundment of animals, controlling of stray animals and as otherwise required in this chapter. 
Animal shelter. Colleyville, Keller, Southlake Regional Animal Services and Adoption Center 
At large. An animal that is not confined to the premises of its owner by a containment device of sufficient strength and/or height to prevent an animal from escaping therefrom, inside the house or other enclosure, or secured on said premises by a leash of sufficient strength to prevent the animal from escaping from said premises, and so arranged that the animal will remain upon said premises when the leash is stretched to full length in any direction. An animal shall not be considered "at large" when held and controlled by some person by means of a leash or chain of proper strength and length to control the action of the animal or while confined within a vehicle. 
Auction. Any place or facility where animals are bought, sold or traded, except for those facilities otherwise defined in this chapter. This definition does not apply to individual sales of animals by owners. 
Cats. The word "cats" when used herein shall mean cats of all ages, both male and female. 
Collar. Any neck restraint constructed of nylon, leather, or similar material, specifically designed to be used for an animal. 
Custodian. A person or agency which feeds, shelters, harbors, owns, has possession or control of, or has the responsibility to control an animal. 
Dangerous animal. 
(1)  Makes an unprovoked attack on a person or animal that causes bodily injury and occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the animal was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the animal from leaving the enclosure on its own; or 
(2)  Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the animal was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the animal from leaving the enclosure on its own and those acts cause a person to reasonably believe that the animal will attack and cause bodily injury to that person. 
Dogs. The word "dogs" when used herein shall mean dogs of all ages, both male and female. 
Exotic animals. Any animal not normally considered domesticated including, but not limited to, nonvenomous snakes, nonvenomous lizards, or any other wild animal not capable of doing serious bodily harm to humans as determined by the City. 
Fowl. Chickens, turkeys, pheasant, peacocks, quail, geese, ducks or similar feathered animals, regardless of age, sex or breed. 
Livestock. Horses, mules, donkeys, cattle, goats, sheep, Asian pot bellied pigs, swine, ostriches, emus and llamas, regardless of age, sex or breed. 
Local rabies control authority (LRCA). The officer designated by the municipal or county governing body under the Texas Health and Safety Code, § 826.017. 
Nuisance. Whatever is dangerous to human life or health. Whatever renders the ground, the water, the air or food, a hazard or injury to human life or health or that is or threatens to become detrimental to the public health, or contributes to urban blight or decay. 
Owner. Any person who has care, custody, and control of any animal, harbors or keeps any animal in his possession, or who permits any animal to remain on or about his premises. 
Pet shop. Any person, partnership or corporation, whether operated separately or in connection with another business enterprise except a licensed kennel, that buys, sells or boards any species of pets. 
Possession. Actual care, custody, control or management of a certain animal. 
Premises. 
(1)  A parcel of land (one (1) or more contiguous lots) owned, leased or controlled by one (1) or more persons; or 
(2)  A building or part of a building. 
Prohibited animals or hazardous animal. Any animal not normally considered domesticated and capable of (or inclined to do) serious bodily harm to humans or other animals or fowl as determined by the city. These animals include (but are not limited to) any venomous lizard or snake, boa constrictor, python, emperor scorpion, bat, raccoon, skunk, fox, bear, elephant, kangaroo, non-human primate, including monkey and chimpanzee, antelope, deer, wolf or wolf-hybrid, lion, tiger, ocelot, bobcat or any other large cat, alligator, crocodile, feral swine, and their allies. 
Properly fitted. With respect to a collar, a collar that measures the circumference of a dog's neck plus approximately one inch. 
Restraint. A chain, rope, tether, leash, cable, or other device that attaches a dog to a stationary objector trolley system. 
Secure enclosure. Means a fenced area or structure that is: 
(1)  Locked; 
(2)  Capable of preventing the entry of the general public, including children; 
(3)  Capable of preventing the escape or release of the animal; and 
(4)  Clearly marked as containing a dangerous animal. 
Stray animal. An animal which is not on a leash or enclosed in a fenced yard. 
Vaccination. An injection of any vaccine for rabies approved by the state veterinarian and administered or supervised by a licensed veterinarian. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-110. - Animals in residential areas; limitations. 
(a)  The owner and any person having control over any animal or fowl shall keep the same confined within a building or adequate fencing at all times. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to permit any animal to: 
(1)  Roam, wander upon or remain upon any public property or street, while unattended by the owner or person having control; or 
(2)  Go upon or remain upon any private property without the consent of the owner of the property. 
(c)  Any owner or person having control of any animal or fowl shall keep all hay, grain and feed used in connection with the maintenance thereof enclosed in such manner that the same is not accessible to rats, flies, mosquitoes or other rodents or insects. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-120. - Vaccination required before license issued. 
(a)  All dogs and cats within the city, four (4) months of age or older, shall be licensed yearly; however, before the license shall be issued, the owner of the dog or cat must present to the Animal Shelter a certificate from a licensed veterinarian showing that said dog or cat has been vaccinated within the preceding twelve (12) months with a one-year serum, or within the preceding thirty-six months with a three-year serum. Such vaccination certificate shall reflect the name of the owner, his address, a description of the dog or cat, the date of the vaccination, the number of the vaccination tag, and the kind of vaccination used. The veterinarian shall provide the owner with a metal tag, on one (1) side of which is stamped the words "Vaccinated Against Rabies", the date of the vaccination, veterinarian, business name, and control number. This tag shall be securely attached to the collar or harness of the dog or cat at all times, and will aid in the identification of the animal. 
(b)  To aid in identification of the pet owner and return of the animal in the event of impoundment, all dogs and cats must be licensed and registered with the city. Upon presentation of a certificate of vaccination and a completed application for a license to the animal shelter, an animal control officer will file the application and certificate for retention by the animal control officer and issue the owner of the dog or cat a metal city tag to be securely attached to the collar or harness of the dog or cat. The tag must be worn at all times. If the original current registration tag is lost or destroyed, the owner must obtain a duplicate by paying a fee. Registration shall be renewed annually. If there is a change in ownership, the new owner shall have the registration transferred to his name within ten (10) days. All fees for registration, duplicate tags, and registration transfer shall be the fees designated by the City of Keller fee ordinance. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to own, keep, possess, harbor, or allow to remain upon the premises under his control any dog or cat without having proof that such animal is immunized against rabies as required by this section. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to fish, birds, ungulates, or any of the following list of animals: hamsters, guinea pigs, rabbits, rats, mice, gerbils, or any animal other than a dog or cat which in the opinion of the licensed veterinarian would be endangered by rabies vaccination. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-130. - Animals running at large. 
Any person owning, possessing or keeping an animal or animals within the city, whether vaccinated or unvaccinated, licensed or unlicensed, shall not allow such animal or animals to be at large within the city limits of the City of Keller. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-140. - Impounding of animals. 
The animal control officer shall take into custody any domestic animal found at large in the city, and shall impound the animal in the animal shelter. Such impounded animal shall be held for a period of three (3) days, and at the end of that time, if the animal has not been redeemed, and the proper fee paid as described herein, the animal may be adopted or disposed of in a humane and proper method. Every reasonable effort by the animal control officer, to include but not limited to, contacting the animal owner by telephone, email, or any other available means of contact will be made in an effort to contact the owner of an impounded animal. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-150. - Authority to kill, impound or destroy animals. 
The animal control officer shall have the authority to do the following: 
(a)  Kill an animal which poses an imminent danger to a person or property and a real or apparent necessity exists for the destruction of the animal. 
(b)  Impound an animal which is diseased and endangers the health and welfare of another animal or person. 
(c)  Destroy an impounded animal if the animal control officer determines that recovery of the animal is doubtful due to injury or disease. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-160. - Impoundment fees; dog or cat. 
(a)  The owner of an impounded animal shall pay a fee to redeem such animal from the city. The fee is designated within fee schedule. 
(b)  Any person claiming a dog or cat that has not been vaccinated or fails to have proof of vaccination within the last year may be cited for failing to vaccinate under section 3-120 of this Code of Ordinances. Before the release of the dog or cat, the owner shall sign a promise in writing that the dog or cat will be vaccinated for rabies immediately upon release from the animal shelter. The animal control officer shall keep such statement on file until receiving proof of vaccination. 
(c)  If an owner does not redeem an animal within the time period set forth in section 3-140, the animal shall be subject to adoption or other disposition. Any animal that is subject to adoption shall meet all the procedures set forth in section 3-180, including payment of fees, vaccination, and alteration by spaying or neutering, as required. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-162. - Prohibited animals or hazardous animal. 
(a)  No person or entity shall be allowed to keep, display, or exhibit any prohibited animal or hazardous animal within the city, or allow such activity to occur, except as provided by this section. 
(b)  A temporary permit may be issued to temporarily house and display a prohibited animal or hazardous animal for educational purposes, provided the following conditions are met: 
(c)  No person or entity shall be allowed to keep, display, or exhibit any prohibited animal or hazardous animal without first registering the animal with the animal control authority. 
(1)  Application. 
a.  Deadline. An application for that purpose must be submitted to the animal control authority no less than ten (10) working days prior to the intended time for the exhibit; 
b.  Contents of application. The application form shall include the name, address and telephone number(s) of the applicant; the applicant's ownership interest in the animal and the educational display or program; the proposed location and duration of the educational display or program and the name, address and telephone number(s) of the owner or lessee of that location; a general description of the animal, including age, date-of birth if known, the classification of the animal, and a description of the confinement plan; and any information about the vicious or dangerous propensities of such animal, including any prior history of any incidents; and a description of the exhibit or program, including any confinement plan and housing arrangements for the animal. 
(2)  Insurance. Applicant must have liability insurance and must provide proof of liability insurance coverage or financial responsibility in an amount of at least two hundred fifty thosand dollars ($250,000.00) which amount may be increased if needed to cover damages, injury, or death resulting from the animal(s) to be in effect during the duration of the temporary permit. 
(3)  Approval. Approval of the application for a temporary permit is within the sole discretion of the city manager or designee. 
(4)  Terms of permit. The applicant must abide by all terms of the permit. 
(5)  Revocation of permit. The permit may be revoked if it is determined that the applicant did not fully and truthfully disclose all required information, or if the applicant does not abide by the terms of the temporary permit, or if it is reasonably necessary to protect against an immediate threat or danger to the public health or safety. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-165. - Impoundment fees for livestock, fowl or prohibited animals. 
The owner of any impounded livestock, fowl or prohibited animal shall pay whatever fee as may be charged by Tarrant County in order to redeem such animal from the county. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-170. - Euthanasia. 
If the lawful owner of animal requests euthanasia, the owner must first sign the required forms before destruction. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-175. - Deadly force. 
Deadly force may be used against any animal presenting an imminent risk of death or serious bodily injury. Usage of non-deadly force methods to control an animal, such as apprehension or tranquilizing, shall not be required if such methods would add to or prolong the risk of death or serious bodily injury to persons or animals. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-180. - Adoption. 
A person who desires to adopt an animal from the animal shelter shall: 
(1)  Pay an adoption and alteration fee as designated in Appendix A; and 
(2)  Pay any license fee if required; and 
(3)  Have the animal vaccinated for rabies, (when required) within five (5) days after adoption; and 
(4)  Have the animal spayed or neutered within fourteen (14) days after adoption, providing the animal is of the proper age for such procedure; and 
(5)  Any person desiring adoption shall also sign a promise in writing that the animal will be vaccinated and spayed or neutered within the time periods as outlined in subsections (3) and (4) of this wection. 
The animal control officer shall make the final determination whether an animal is healthy enough for adoption. However, such a decision by the animal control officer to permit adoption of a particular animal shall not constitute a warranty, expressed or implied, of the health or age of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-190. - Report of rabies cases required; confinement of dog, cat or other animal. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owner, custodian or veterinarian to report to the Colleyville, Keller, Southlake Regional Animal Services all cases of rabies or suspected rabies which the owner, custodian or veterinarian knows or should know. Any animal that has or is suspected of having rabies, that has symptoms of rabies, has been exposed to rabies or some other facts suggest that rabies is a concern in regard to the animal shall be quarantined as required by law and direction of the designated LRCA for the Colleyville, Keller, Southlake Regional Animal Services. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-200. - Confinement required of a dog, cat or other animal that has bitten a person. 
(a)  When an animal has bitten, scratched or otherwise attacked a person, that person or anyone having knowledge of such incident, shall immediately notify the Colleyville, Keller, Southlake Regional Animal Services, and such animal shall be confined in the animal shelter or at a veterinary hospital for a period of not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days, as specified by the Colleyville, Keller, Southlake Animal Services. 
(b)  If, after the confinement period, the owner fails to pick up the animal, the owner may be informally given a courtesy notice by the city by telephone or email and shall be formally notified by the city by either certified mail, personal delivery, or other method designed to provide notice to the owner as well as proof of such notice. The owner may be grated five (5) additional days to pick up the animal at a charge as indicated in the fee schedule. Five (5) days after the end of the confinement period, if the animal is not picked up by the owner, the animal control officer may place the animal for adoption or other form of disposition of the animal, pursuant to the terms of this chapter. 
(c)  At the option of the animal control officer, and if all conditions of state law, as currently exist or as may be amended, and regulations are met, the animal control officer may allow for home quarantine, so long as all conditions required by the animal control officer are met. If all conditions are not met, the animal control officer may require that the animal be brought to the animal shelter or a veterinarian for the remainder of the quarantine period. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-210. - Quarantine fee. 
The owner of any dog, cat or other animal held in quarantine for observation purposes shall be charged a quarantine fee as designated in the fee ordinance. This fee is in addition to any impoundment fee(s). 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-220. - Dangerous animals; procedures and hearing. 
(a)  Report of attack. The animal control department may receive a report concerning a dog or animal, which has bitten or attacked a human or animal. A complainant, who wishes the matter be heard, must file with the Colleyville Keller Municipal Court, a written sworn complaint that must contain the following known information: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number of the complainant and any other witnesses; 
(2)  Date, time and location of incident(s); 
(3)  A complete description of the dog or animal (breed, if known, as well as color and size); 
(4)  Name, address and telephone numbers of owners, if known, or the premises where the dog or animal is located; 
(5)  A statement that the dog or animal has bit or attacked a person or animal; 
(6)  A statement that the dog or animal has exhibited vicious propensities in its past conduct; and 
(7)  Any other facts and circumstances relating to the incident. 
(b)  Procedure after complaint is filed. After a sworn affidavit (complaint) is filed, the Colleyville, Keller, Southlake Regional Animal Services shall investigate the complaint to determine if the dog or animal is dangerous. 
(1)  Animal service findings. The Colleyville, Keller, Southlake Regional Animal Services shall make a finding regarding whether or not the dog or animal is dangerous. If the dog or animal is found to be dangerous, animal services shall notify the owner of the determination by personal service or certified mail - return receipt request. The notification will advise the owner of the right to appeal and will require that the owner perform the following requirements within thirty (30) days from receipt of the notice: 
a.  Register the dangerous dog or animal with the animal control department. 
b.  Restrain the dangerous dog or animal at all times on a leash, in the immediate control of an adult, who is at least seventeen (17) years of age, or in a secure enclosure. 
c.  Obtain and provide proof to the Colleyville, Keller, Southlake Regional Animal Services of liability insurance coverage or provide proof of such liability insurance or proof of current financial responsibility, in an amount of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) to cover damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous dog or animal causing bodily injury or other damage to a person. 
d.  Post on all fences that face public areas, signs that state in bold letters "DANGEROUS ANIMAL." All signs must be obtained from and approved by the animal control department. 
e.  Require that the dangerous dog or animal wear an orange collar and red tag at all times. All collars and tags must be obtained from and approved by the animal control department. 
(2)  Appeal of determination. The owner of a dangerous dog or animal may appeal animal services determination to the municipal court no later than the fifteenth (15th) calendar day after being notified of the animal service determination. The municipal court of respective jurisdiction shall conduct a hearing within fifteen (15) days, to determine if the dog or animal is dangerous. At such hearing the municipal court may receive testimony concerning the incident under investigation, and/or consider the affidavits and/or complaints on file, to determine if the dog or animal is dangerous. If the dog or animal is found dangerous, the municipal court shall, for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare of the community, mandate compliance with subsection (b)(1)a., b., and c., d., and e. determine whether the dog or animal should be removed from the corporate city limits of Colleyville, Keller or Southlake, humanely destroyed by animal services, a veterinarian, or released to an animal rescue organization. 
(3)  Procedure when no appeal. 
a.  If the owner of the dangerous dog or animal does not comply with subsection (b)(1)a., b., or c. above, within thirty (30) days of being notified the animal has been found dangerous, nor has appealed pursuant to section (b)(2) above, the owner shall surrender the animal to the animal control department. If the owner does not surrender the animal, then the animal control officer shall obtain from the municipal court, a warrant, authorizing the animal control department to seize the animal. Thereafter, the animal control department shall seize the animal, or order its seizure, and provide a secure and humane place for the impoundment of the animal. 
b.  If the owner complies with subsection (b)(1)a., b., and c., above, before the eleventh (11th) day on which the dangerous dog or animal was seized or was surrendered to the animal control officer, the municipal court shall order the return of the dangerous dog or animal. 
c.  If the owner has not complied with subsection(b)(1)a., b., and c., above, before the eleventh (11th) day on which the dangerous dog or animal was seized or surrendered to the animal control department, the municipal court shall, for the protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community, determine whether the animal should be removed from the corporate city limits of the city, humanely destroyed by the animal control department, a veterinarian, or released to an animal rescue organization. 
d.  The owner of an impounded dangerous dog or animal shall be held responsible for any cost or fee assessed by the city related to the seizure, impoundment, and destruction of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-230. - Failure to release or remove dog. 
A person commits an offense if he knowingly possesses and fails to release to the animal control officer a dog that has been charged by sworn affidavit as provided in section 3-220 of this chapter. A person commits an offense if the person knowingly possesses and fails to remove a dog determined to be dangerous under section 3-220 "Dangerous animals; procedures and hearing" of this chapter from the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-240. - Public nuisances. 
No person shall willfully or knowingly keep or harbor on his premises or elsewhere any animal, livestock, or fowl of any kind that makes or creates an unreasonable disturbance to the neighbors or the occupants of adjacent premises or persons living in the vicinity thereof. Unreasonable disturbance includes, but is not limited to, animal making or creating prolonged noises by howling, barking, bawling or otherwise. It shall create a presumption that a person has knowledge that the animal under their control is making or creating an unreasonable disturbance if such person shall have been notified by the Animal Control Officer or any peace officer of such disturbance and: 
(a)  Failed or refused to correct such disturbance; or 
(b)  Prevent its recurrence. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any owner of any animal to maintain yards, pens, stables, sheds, coops, or other enclosures in which any animal is confined in such a manner as to give off odors offensive to persons of ordinary sensibilities residing in the vicinity, or to breed or attract flies, mosquitoes, or other noxious insects or rodents, or in any manner to endanger the public health, safety or welfare, or to create a public nuisance. 
(2)  Manure and droppings shall be removed from pens, stables, yards, coops, and other enclosures regularly and handled or disposed of in such a manner as to keep the premises free of any nuisance. 
(3)  Mound storage of droppings of manure between such removals shall be permitted, only under such conditions as to protect against the breeding of flies, rodents, and to prevent the migration of fly larvae (maggots) into the surrounding soil. 
(4)  The feeding of vegetables, meat scraps or garbage to livestock shall be done only in impervious containers or on an impervious platform. 
(5)  Watering troughs or tanks shall be provided by the owner, which shall be equipped with adequate facilities for draining the overflow so as to prevent the breeding of flies, mosquitoes, or other insects. 
(6)  No putrescible material shall be allowed to accumulate on the premises; and all such material used to feed which is unconsumed shall be removed and disposed of by sanitary means. 
(7)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any animal which repeatedly trespasses on public property, attacks other animals, or causes damage to public or private property. 
(8)  No person shall willfully or knowingly allow a stray animal to remain on their premises. Any person willfully or knowingly who feeds or waters stray animals, or in any way encourages a stray animal to remain on their property, shall be in violation of this chapter. All provisions of this chapter shall apply to that person. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-250. - Violations; enforcement. 
The animal control officer shall have the authority to issue citations for any violation of this chapter: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person upon being issued a citation to give the animal control officer any personal identification information other than his true name and address. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to fail to appear in accordance with the terms of a citation issued by the animal control officer. 
(3)  If the person being cited is not present, the animal control officer may send the citation to the alleged offender by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, whereupon service shall be deemed complete. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the animal control officer in the performance of his duties. 
(5)  The animal control officer shall have the right of ingress and egress on private property for the purpose of apprehending animals at large. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-260. - Authority to carry tranquilizer guns. 
When acting in the course and scope of his employment, the animal control officer shall be and is hereby authorized to carry on his person or in his city vehicle loaded tranquilizer guns approved by the support services commander who oversees animal control as designated by the City of Keller Chief of Police and not in violation of any provision of the Texas Penal Code or any other applicable federal, state or local law, as currently written or as may be amended. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-270. - Confinement of animals by individuals. 
If an animal is found upon the premises of another, the occupant of the premises may confine the animal only for so long as reasonably necessary to notify animal services and have the animal impounded. In attempting to confine the animal, the occupant shall not use any means or force that could constitute cruelty to an animal or behave in a cruel manner (as defined by the Texas Penal Code) toward the animal. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-280. - Abandonment of animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any animal within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-290. - Confinement of animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to confine or allow to be confined any animal in a motor vehicle or trailer under such conditions or for such a period of time as may endanger the health or well-being of the animal due to heat, lack of food or water or any other circumstance which causes suffering, disability or death of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-300. - Limitation upon the number of animals allowed. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor more than four dogs or cats, or combination of both, two (2) months of age or older on any lot or lots located within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-310. - Poisoning of animals prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall, in any place accessible to birds, dogs, cats or other animals, with the intent to kill or harm such animals, place any substance which has in any manner been treated with any poisonous substance. 
(b)  The above subsection does not apply to the elimination of rodents, such as mice or rats, provided that a person is required to not allow the placement of harmful or poisonous substances in places where domestic animals might ingest the harmful or poisonous substance, even if the purpose of the substance is to eliminate rodents. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-320. - Fight upon exhibition. 
No person shall maintain any place where fowl or any animals are suffered to fight upon exhibition, or for sport upon wager. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-330. - Unlawful restraint of dog. 
(a)  Prohibited acts. An owner may not leave a dog outside and unattended by use of a restraint that unreasonably limits the dog's movement: 
(1)  Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.; 
(2)  Within five hundred (500) feet of the premises of a school; or 
(3)  In the case of extreme weather conditions, including conditions in which: 
a.  The actual or effective outdoor temperatures is below 32 degrees Fahrenheit; or 
b.  A heat advisory has been issued for the jurisdiction by the National Weather Service. 
(b)  Restraints. In this section, a restraint shall be presumed to unreasonably limit a dog's movement if the restraint: 
(1)  Uses a collar that is a pinch-type, prong-type, or choke-type or that is not properly fitted to the dog; 
(2)  Is a length shorter than the greater of: 
a.  Five (5) times the length of the dog, as measured from the tip of the dog's nose to the base of the dog's tail; or 
b.  Ten (10) feet. 
(3)  Is in an unsafe condition; or 
(4)  Causes injury to the dog. 
(c)  Exceptions. Subsection (a) does not apply to: 
(1)  A dog restrained to a running line, pulley or trolley system and that is not restrained to the running line, pulley, or trolley system by means of a pinch-type, prong-type, choke-type or improperly fitted collar; 
(2)  A dog restrained in compliance with the requirements of a camping or recreational area as defined by a federal, state or local authority or jurisdiction; 
(3)  A dog restrained for a reasonable period, not to exceed three (3) hours in a twenty-four-hour period and no longer than is necessary to allow the owner to complete the temporary task that requires the dog to be restrained, but those three (3) hours cannot be within the prohibited times of 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. set forth above; a dog restrained while the owner is engaged in, or actively training for, an activity that is conducted pursuant to a valid license issued by the State if the activity for which the license is issued is associated with the use or presence of a dog. 
(d)  Penalty. 
(1)  A person commits an offense if the person knowingly violates this section. 
(2)  A peace officer or animal control officer who has probable cause to believe that an owner is violating this Section shall provide the owner with a written statement of that fact. The statement must be signed by the officer and plainly state the date on which and the time at which the statement is provided to the owner. 
(3)  A person commits an offense if the person is provided with a statement described in subsection (d)(2) and fails to comply with this section within twenty-four (24) hours of the time the owner is provided with a statement. A first time offense under this section is a class C misdemeanor. If a person has been previously convicted of this offense, the person shall be prosecuted under state law, providing for a more serious penalty. 
(4)  If a person fails to comply with this section with respect to more than one dog, the person's conduct with respect to each dog constitutes a separate offense. 
(5)  A person may be prosecuted under this law or any other law or both. 
(e)  This section does not prohibit a person from walking a dog with a hand-held leash. 
(f)  This section does not authorize a person to allow a dog to run at large. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-340. - Food and shelter. 
No person shall fail to provide any animal in his charge or custody with sustenance, drink and protection from the elements, or cause any of these acts to be done. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-350. - Fowl. 
(a)  It shall be legal to house any fowl within city limits, including, but not limited to roosters, ducks, turkeys, geese, pigeons, or guineas. 
(1)  This section applies to properties less than [zoning district] SF-20 in size: 
a.  Shall be allowed to be kept under the following conditions: 
b.  Only female chickens; 
c.  In order to keep chickens on property zoned for single family residential use, the property must be zoned SF 8.4 or greater in size; 
d.  No more than twelve (12) chickens may be kept in SF 8.4 zoning or greater and twelve (12) chickens may be kept for additional each one-quarter (¼) acre; 
e.  Chickens must be in a secure pen, coop, or enclosed yard, and pen, coop or fence must be of secure construction and strength to keep the chickens from running at large. A pen or coop must be at least five (5) feet from any property line. 
f.  All provisions of section 3-240 apply. 
g.  This section does not enlarge any of the uses allowed for single family zoning, including, but not limited to, any use of residential property for commercial farming purposes, which remains expressly forbidden. 
(b)  No person shall butcher or display the carcass of an animal in an area that is in the view of the public. This prohibition does not apply to cooking fowl or meat on a grill, barbecue or other outdoor cooking apparatus. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-360. - Sale of baby fowl, ducks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, lease, rent or in any way transfer, barter or give away baby fowl or ducklings as pets or novelties, whether dyed or not dyed, colored or otherwise artificially treated; provided, however, this section shall not be construed to prohibit the display or sale of natural chicks or ducklings in proper breeding facilities for hatcheries or stores engaged in the business of selling the same to be raised for legitimate commercial purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-370. - Guard dogs. 
Every person having care, control or custody of any dog which has received guard dog training must register such dog with the animal shelter. The owners of such dog must place an identification collar identifying the dog as a trained guard dog on said dog, and this collar must be worn at all times. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-380. - Disposition of nursing baby animals. 
Any nursing baby animal impounded without the mother, or where the mother cannot or refuses to provide nutritious milk, may be immediately euthanized to prevent further suffering. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-390. - Bees. 
It shall be unlawful to keep bees in such a manner as to deny the reasonable use and enjoyment of adjacent property, or endanger the personal health or welfare of the inhabitants of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-400. - Disposal of dead animals. 
It shall be the responsibility of the owners of livestock to properly dispose of all dead animals within a twenty-four-hour period. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to dispose of dead dogs, cats, etc., on his property or property owned by him within twelve (12) hours. The animal control officer has the authority to pick up any dead animal found on public property and dispose of it and assist a citizen with the same, if requested. After twenty-four (24) hours, the animal control officer may enter private property and remove any dead animal which the property owner has failed to dispose of. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-410. - Fees for removal of dead animals. 
There shall be a fee for the removal of a deceased animal from private property. The fee shall be determined as designated in the fee ordinance. These fees are to be paid by the person or persons owning the animal or having possession thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-420. - Livestock. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep on premises under the person's control any livestock without providing adequate fences or barriers that will prevent such livestock from leaving the property of the person having control of such animal. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-430. - Livestock at large; impoundment. 
The animal control officer shall take into custody any livestock found at large in the city. The animal control officer shall have the discretion of impounding the livestock and transporting to a storage facility or containing the livestock at the location until the owner of the livestock can be located and recover the livestock. Discretion shall be based on such practical considerations as number of livestock, apprehension, containment and hazards to the community. 
Due to such considerations as number of livestock involved, size and difficulty of livestock handled, and transportation requirement, the animal control officer may use a livestock collection and holding service franchised with the City of Keller or a Tarrant County constable to collect and hold livestock found at large. Disposition of the livestock will be determined by the Tarrant County constable. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-440. - Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-450. - Places prohibited to livestock. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or allow any type of livestock upon any public school grounds, college grounds, public park, property or municipal grounds within the city, except those designated as bridle paths or other designated riding or exhibiting areas for livestock or with the effective consent of an employee with the power and authority to authorize such activity. On streets, horses shall be ridden as close as possible to the curb, and in no event shall horses be allowed on state highways. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or allow any type of livestock upon the property of another within the city, except with the express consent of the owner or person in charge of such property obtained prior thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-460. - Trapping of animals. 
Traps can be checked out from the animal shelter when traps are available. Traps will only be emptied Monday through Saturday during animal services operating hours. All trapped animals should be called into dispatch no later than 12:00 noon, the day the animal is trapped. No animals are to be trapped for more than a twenty-four-hour period in any trap. Any person who traps any animal in a city issued trap can have the on duty animal control officer empty the trap at no charge. Any person who traps any animal in a non-city issued trap can choose to have the trap emptied by the on duty animal control officer for a fee as set out in the city's fee schedule [Appendix C] payable only in form of a check, made payable to the Colleyville, Keller, Southlake Regional Animal Services. All traps that require the animal control officer to remove and transport the trap in order to safely remove the trapped animal can be picked up at the animal shelter during animal services operating hours. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-470. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall, for each violation, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and each violation shall be construed to constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Sec. 3-480. - Cruelty to animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly abuse, neglect, or otherwise mistreat an animal. Violations under this section will be investigated as violations of Texas Penal Code statutes 42.09, 42.091, or 42.092, as currently written or an may be amended. 
(Ord. No. 1675, § 2, 1-7-14)  
Chapter 4 - BUILDINGS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1956 , § 2, adopted November 19, 2019, amended Ch. 4 by repealing Art. I, §§ 4-100—4-131; Art. II, §§ 4-200—4-270; and Art. IV, §§ 4-400—4-470, and enacted a new Art. I to read as set out herein. Former Arts. I, II, and IV pertained to the building code; regulations of swimming pools; and substandard buildings regulations, and derived from Ord. No. 429, § 1, adopted July 16, 1985; Ord. No. 784, §§ 2—10, adopted June 20, 1995; Ord. No. 857, § 1, adopted May 20, 1997; Ord. No. 876, § 1, adopted Oct. 7, 1997; Ord. No. 896, § 1, adopted May 5, 1998; Ord. No. 906, § 1, adopted July 21, 1998; Ord. No. 919, §§ 1—3, adopted Oct. 6, 1998; Ord. No. 1088, §§ 2, 3, adopted Jan. 15, 2002; Ord. No. 1121, § 2, adopted Nov. 5, 2002; Ord. No. 1282, § 2, adopted Sept. 20, 2005; Ord. No. 1438, § 2, adopted Feb. 3, 2009; Ord. No. 1543, § 2, adopted March 15, 2011; Ord. No. 1627, § 2, adopted Oct. 16, 2012; and Ord. No. 1779 , § 2, adopted March 15, 2016. 
Cross reference— Subdivisions, Ch. 16; building permits in subdivision, §§ 16-270, 16-280; issuance of building permits to subdividers, § 16-1060; water and sewers, Ch. 19; building sewers to conform to building and plumbing codes, § 19-450; zoning, Ch. 20; sign regulations, § 20-700 et seq.; accessory building and use regulations, § 20-800. 
 
ARTICLE I. - TECHNICAL CODES 
 
Sec. 4-100. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this code is to provide the City of Keller with minimum standards to protect health, life and property; to preserve good government, order and security of the city and its residents; to provide for the issuance of building construction permits, the collection of permit fees, and the inspection of construction activities by the office of the building official for compliance with applicable codes. 
(Ord. No. 784, § 2, 6-20-95; Ord. No. 1956 , § 2, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 4-105. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building official. The chief inspection officer of the city, his assistants and such other individuals designated by the city manager to carry out such duties. 
Contractor means a person, firm, association, or corporation that performs work for hire within the city for which a permit is required including, but not limited to, work that is required or useful for the construction, repair, alteration, removal, or demolition of a structure, sign, street or of an appurtenance that connects to the city's water or sewer service. A contractor also includes a subcontractor who is required to obtain a permit before performing work. 
Certified pool operator. Shall be understood to mean a person who possesses a valid pool operator's certificate from a course approved by the city. 
City. Shall be understood to mean authorized representatives of the City of Keller, which shall include the director and representatives of the Tarrant County Public Health Department. 
Director. Shall be understood to mean Director of the Tarrant County Public Health Department, who shall be an authorized representative of the city with respect to public pool and spa inspections and permitting. 
Electrical contractor means a contractor who performs work subject to regulation under the National Electrical Code, as published by the National Fire Protection Association and adopted by the city. 
Irrigation contractor means a contractor who performs work as an irrigator as defined in V.T.C.A. 
Mechanical contractor means an air conditioning and refrigeration contractor as defined in Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 8861. 
Plumbing contractor means a contractor who performs work on plumbing as defined in Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6243-101. 
Pool. Shall be understood to mean any manmade permanently installed or non-portable structure, basin, chamber, or tank containing an artificial body of water that is used for swimming, diving, aquatic sports, or other aquatic activity other than a residential pool and that is operated by an owner, lessee, operator, licensee or concessionaire, regardless of whether a fee is charged for use. The pool may be either publicly or privately owned. The term does not include a spa or a decorative fountain that is not used as a pool. 
Private residential pool. Shall be understood to mean a pool that is located on private property that is intended for use by one (1) single family and their invited guests, located on property used for the placement of a single-family residence. 
Private residential spa. Shall be understood to mean a spa that is located on private property that is intended for use by one (1) single family and their invited guests, located on property used for the placement of a single-family residence. 
Public interactive water feature and fountain (PIWF). Shall be understood to mean any indoor or outdoor installation maintained for public recreation that includes water sprays, dancing water jets, waterfall, dumping buckets, or shooting water cannons in various arrays for the purpose of wetting the persons playing in the spray streams. 
Regulatory authority. Shall be understood to mean the director and representatives of the Tarrant County Public Health Department. 
Spa. Shall be understood to mean a constructed permanent or portable structure that is two (2) feet or more in depth and that has a surface area of two hundred fifty (250) square feet or less or a volume of three thousand two hundred fifty (3,250) gallons or less and that is intended to be used for bathing or other recreational uses and is not drained and refilled after each use. It may include, but not limited to, hydrojet circulation, hot water, cold water, mineral baths, air induction bubbles, or any combination thereof. A spa does not refer to a business establishment, such as a day spa or a health spa. Industry terminology for a spa includes, but is not limited to, "hydrotherapy pool", "whirlpool", "hot spa", "hot tub", etc. A spa does not include a private residential spa. 
Substandard or dilapidated building. Any structure in which there exists any of the following listed conditions: 
a.  Lack of or defective toilet facilities required by other city codes. 
b.  Lack of or defective required plumbing. 
c.  Lack of hot or cold running water to plumbing fixtures or sprinkler systems required by other city codes. 
d.  Lack of adequate heating facilities. 
e.  Lack of or defective required ventilation or ventilating equipment. 
f.  Required space dimensions less than required by city codes. 
g.  Inadequate lighting. 
h.  Dampness of interior areas. 
i.  Infestation by insects, vermin or rodents. 
j.  General dilapidation or improper maintenance. 
k.  Lack of connection to required sewage disposal system. 
l.  Lack of adequate garbage and rubbish storage and removal facilities. 
m.  Partial destruction or damage by fire unrepaired for more than ninety (90) days. 
n.  Deteriorated or inadequate foundation. 
o.  Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports. 
p.  Flooring or floor supports of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety. 
q.  1.  Members of walls, partitions, or other vertical supports that split, lean, list or buckle due to defective material or deterioration. 
2.  Members of walls, partitions, or other vertical supports that split, lean, list or buckle due to defective material or deterioration. 
3.  Members of walls, partitions, or other vertical supports that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety. 
4.  Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other horizontal members which sag, split or buckle due to defective materials or deterioration. 
5.  Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports, or other horizontal members that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety. 
r.  1.  Fireplaces or chimneys which list, bulge or settle due to defective material or deterioration. 
2.  Fireplaces or chimneys which are of insufficient size or strength to carry imposed loads with safety. 
3.  Heating flues and exhausts which list, bulge or settle due to defective material or deterioration. 
s.  Hazardous wiring. All wiring except that which conformed with all applicable laws in effect at the time of installation and which has been maintained in good condition and is being used in a safe manner. 
t.  Hazardous plumbing. All plumbing except that which conformed with all applicable laws in effect at the time of installation and which has been maintained in good condition and which is free of cross connections and siphonage between fixtures. 
u.  Hazardous mechanical equipment. All mechanical equipment, including vents, except that which conformed with all applicable laws in effect at the time of installation and which has been maintained in good and safe condition. 
v.  Faulty weather protection, which shall include but not be limited to the following: 
1.  Deteriorated, crumbling or loose plaster. 
2.  Deteriorated or ineffective water-proofing of exterior walls, roof, foundations or floors, including broken windows or doors. 
3.  Defective or lack of weather protection for exterior wall coverings, including lack of paint, or weathering due to lack of paint or other approved protective covering. 
4.  Broken, rotted, split or buckled exterior wall coverings or roof coverings. 
w.  Fire hazard. Any building or portion thereof, device, apparatus, equipment, combustible waste or vegetation which, in the opinion of the chief of the fire department or his deputy, is in such a condition as to cause a fire or explosion or provide a ready fuel to augment the spread and intensity of fire or explosion arising from any cause. 
x.  Faulty materials of construction. All materials of construction except those which are specifically allowed or approved by this Code, and which have been adequately maintained in good and safe condition. 
y.  Hazardous or insanitary premises. Those premises on which an accumulation of weeds, vegetation, junk, dead organic matter, debris, garbage, offal, rat harborages, stagnant water, combustible materials, and similar materials or conditions constitute fire, health or safety hazards. 
z.  Inadequate maintenance. Any building or portion thereof which is determined to be an unsafe building in accordance with this Code. 
aa.  Inadequate fire-protection or fire-fighting equipment. All buildings or portions thereof which are not provided with the fire-resistive construction or fire-extinguishing systems or equipment required by this Code, except those buildings or portions thereof which conformed with all applicable laws at the time of their construction and whose fire-resistive integrity and fire-extinguishing systems or equipment have been adequately maintained and improved in relation to any increase in occupant load, alteration or addition, or any change in occupancy. (Ord. No. 1627, § 2, 10-16-12; Ord. No. 1956 , § 2, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 4-110. - Technical codes adopted. 
The following codes, as published by the International Code Council, a copy of which shall be filed in the office of Community Development and available for public inspection, are hereby adopted with all amendments and specified appendices by the city: 
a.  2018 International Building Code (IBC). 
b.  2018 International Residential Code (IRC). 
c.  2018 International Fire Code (IFC) including Appendices B, C, D, E, F, H, I, J, K, L, and N as amended in Sec. 4-150, below. 
d.  2018 International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC). 
e.  2017 National Electric Code (NEC). 
f.  2018 International Plumbing Code (IPC). 
g.  2018 International Mechanical Code (IMC). 
h.  2018 International Energy Conservation Code (IECC). 
i.  2018 International Existing Building Code (IEBC) 
j.  2018 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code (ISPSC) 
k.  2018 International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC). 
( Ord. No. 1956 , § 2, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 4-115. - General exceptions and amendments applicable to all technical codes. 
(a)  In all code editions, the "name of jurisdiction" where mentioned, shall mean the City of Keller, Texas. 
(b)  All references in the technical codes to flood-related issues shall also include reference to the City of Keller Storm Water Management Ordinance. 
(c)  All references to "board of appeals" shall mean the City of Keller Zoning Board of Adjustment and their adopted regulations. 
(d)  All references to the "department of building safety" and various other types of inspection agencies shall mean the City of Keller Building Services Department. 
(e)  Where used, the term "code official" or similar related titles shall mean the Community Development Director or his appointed representative(s) or the Fire Marshal or his appointed representative(s), whichever is applicable to the code in question. 
(f)  Where used, the term "fire marshal," "fire official," or "chief of the bureau of fire prevention" shall mean the fire marshal or his appointed representative(s). 
(g)  Decisions and interpretations of code issues by the code official or fire official are final unless otherwise provided as part of the Board of Adjustment process. 
(h)  Where mentioned, the phrases "permit fees," "permit schedule" or similar terms shall refer to the City of Keller Fee Schedule approved annually by the City Council and impact fees as periodically adopted by the City Council. 
(i)  Permits are not transferable from one property owner to another. 
(j)  All references in the technical codes that refer to accessibility or ADA issues shall use the State of Texas Architectural Barrier Standards when the state standard is more restrictive. 
(k)  Notices or citations sent by certified mail that have return receipts stamped unclaimed or undeliverable shall be deemed to have been delivered. 
(l)  Citations may be issued for violations of the provisions of all adopted and amended technical codes. The maximum fine per violation is two-thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per day, with each day that the violation exists or continues being a separate violation. 
(m)  All general contractors, contractors of major trades and contractors with state licenses shall register with the city prior to starting any work in the City. A copy of their liability insurance or a surety bond in the amount of three-hundred thousand dollars ($300,000) per occurrence is required. 
(n)  All new subdivisions shall have underground electric services to structures. 
(o)  References in the various codes to "atmospheric-type vacuum breaker," "pressure-type vacuum breaker" and "reduced pressure principle backflow preventer" for lawn irrigation systems shall be replaced with "double-check backflow preventer assembly or a Reduced Pressure Zone (RPZ) assembly." 
(p)  Whenever a provision of this section or any other provision of this article, or any provision in any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind contains any restrictions covering any of the same subject matter, whichever restrictions are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements shall govern. Any provisions of this section that are in conflict with state law shall be governed by the state law to the extent of the conflict only. 
(q)  Certificates of occupancy may be revoked at any time and utilities ordered disconnected by the building official or the fire marshal for nonconformance with city or state codes or ordinances. 
(r)  No water heaters shall be permitted in attic spaces with the single exception of tankless water heaters. 
(s)  The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration, repair or related work, of any building or structure in residential or nonresidential districts, excluding any inside work done in an enclosed building or structure in nonresidential districts, is prohibited other than between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., on weekdays and 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekends, except in the case of urgent necessity and in the interest of public safety, for which a permit shall be obtained from the building official. 
(t)  When extreme temperatures pose challenges for concrete pours during daylight hours, the Community Development Director or designee may permit overnight pours subject to Police Department prior approval. 
(u)  Building permit fees are set by the city's fees schedule [Appendix C of this Code]. 
(v)  All contractors shall register with the City as follows: 
(1)  Registration. 
a.  Required application form and contents. All contractors must register with the city before performing work within the city. This registration shall be valid until December 31 of the year in which fees have been paid. Application for registration and renewal must be on a form provided by the city and contain the following information: 
1.  Full name and copy of current drivers license or other approved picture identification of person seeking registration under which the person does business; 
2.  Permanent business or residential address; 
3.  Business telephone and fax numbers; 
4.  Proof of license as required and a list of all licensed employees as required; and 
5.  Other information determined to be necessary to identify or locate the contractor. 
b.  Required licenses for approval. Before registration may be approved for an irrigation, mechanical, electrical or plumbing contractor, the contractor must show proof of a current state license authorizing the contractor to practice his trade in this state as an irrigator, air conditioning and refrigeration contractor, electrician, or plumber. 
c.  Fee. Contractors must pay an annual registration fee as determined by the City Council. Exceptions to this are homeowners doing work on their single-family residences that they have declared as their homestead. 
(2)  Issuance of permits. A permit shall not be issued to a contractor or for work to be done by a contractor who is not currently registered with the city. 
(3)  Suspension. 
a.  Reasons. A contractor's registration may be suspended for any of the following reasons: 
1.  The contractor fails to apply for and obtain the requisite building permit. 
2.  The contractor fails to request and obtain a final inspection prior to the expiration of the permit. 
3.  The contractor allows use or occupancy of the structure for which a permit was obtained without first obtaining the required authorization from the city. 
4.  The contractor has been found to be grossly negligent in the performance of his work. 
5.  The expiration, suspension, or revocation of any required license. 
b.  Reinstatement. A contractor whose registration has been suspended may reapply for registration if: 
1.  All circumstances leading to the suspension have been corrected; 
2.  The contractor reapplies for registration; and 
3.  The registration fee is paid in full. 
(w)  Swimming pool provisions: 
(1)  Permit for construction. No swimming pool shall be constructed in the city in the future unless a building permit shall be issued by the building inspector. The building inspector shall not issue a building permit for a swimming pool unless the plans shall include a fence or an enclosure which complies with the terms of this section. 
(2)  Designation of health authority. The City of Keller designates the Tarrant County Health Department as its health authority for the purpose of insuring minimum standards of environmental health and sanitation within the scope of that department's function. 
(3)  Pool/spa permits. 
a.  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a public pool, spa or interactive water feature in the city without a current and valid pool, spa or interactive water feature permit. 
b.  Posting. A valid permit shall be posted in public view in a conspicuous place at the public swimming pool for which it is issued or on file in a secure area of the permitted facility's premises. 
c.  Nontransference. Permits issued under the provisions of this article are not transferable. Upon change of ownership of a business, the new business owner will be required to meet current standards as defined in city ordinances and state law before a permit will be issued. The new owner shall notify the city within ten (10) days after assuming ownership of the pool, spa or interactive water feature. 
d.  Multiple permits. A separate permit shall be required for every public pool, spa or interactive water feature except public pools or spas or interactive water features on a single water filtration system require one (1) permit. 
e.  Denial of permit. A permit may be denied if the city, upon inspection, determines that the requestor has failed to comply with approved plans and specifications adopted in accordance with these rules. 
f.  Inspections for permits. An inspection shall be required annually to qualify for a permit. A permit is valid for one (1) year from the date of issuance. 
(4)  Public pool, spa, or interactive water feature manager certification. 
a.  Requirement. The person in charge of pool, spa or interactive water feature operations at a class C pool as defined by the adopted regulations, shall have at least one (1) certified pool, spa or interactive water feature operator employed to maintain the pool, spa or interactive water feature for each apartment complex or municipal location. The certificate must be kept on premises to facilitate inspections. 
b.  Termination of certified pool, spa or interactive water feature operator. In the event that a certified pool, spa or interactive water feature operator is terminated or transferred, the business shall have sixty (60) days from the operator's termination or transfer date to designate a new certificate holder. This requirement is applicable even if pool, spa or interactive water feature maintenance operations are contracted to an outside company. (Ord. No. 1627, § 2, 10-16-12) 
(x)  Substandard building provisions: The purpose of this article is to require the repair or removal of dilapidated or substandard structures. (Ord. No. 429, § 1, 7-16-85) 
(1)  Form of notice of lien. 
A sworn account of the expense incurred by the city in the repair, removal or demolition of any building done pursuant to the provisions of this Code shall be filed by the building official with the city secretary. The city secretary shall file such notice of the city's assessment and lien in the Deed Records of Tarrant County, Texas. Such notice shall read substantially as follows: 
"State of Texas 
County of Tarrant 
Notice of Lien 
___________, Building Official for the City of Keller, makes oath and says that the City of Keller has incurred an expense of $___________ in improving property known and described as ___________. Such expense was incurred to eliminate violations of the city's Housing Code after notices pursuant to ordinance and to Article 1175, Section 35, V.A.T.S. were served on the record owner thereof, ___________, after public hearing before the city council as required by law. 
This assessment shall constitute a first and prior lien, subject only to tax and paving liens. 
No building permit or certificate of occupancy will be issued on this property unless and until this lien is paid, together with eight (8) per cent per annum interest from the date such expenses were incurred. No utility service of any kind will be available to such property until this lien is paid. 
___________ 
Building Official 
Keller, Texas 
Sworn To and Subscribed before me by the said ___________, this ________ day of ________, 19___, to certify which witness my hand and seal of office. 
_______" 
(y)  Prohibitions against service to property with lien. No utility service, building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be allowed for any such property until any such lien is released by the city and the assessment is paid. 
(Ord. No. 429, § 1, 7-16-85; Ord. No. 857, § 1, 5-20-97; Ord. No. 919, § 3, 10-6-98; Ord. No. 1282, § 2, 9-20-05; Ord. No. 1627, § 2, 10-16-12; Ord. No. 1956 , § 2, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 4-120. - Specific Amendments to the 2018 International Building Code. 
Section 101.4; change to read as follows: 
101.4 Referenced codes. The other codes listed in Sections 101.4.1 through 101.4.8 and referenced elsewhere in this code, when specifically adopted, shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the Electrical Code shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted. 
Section 101.4.8; add the following: 
101.4.8 Electrical. The provisions of the Electrical Code shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
Section 103 and 103.1; amend to insert the Department Name 
[Building Services] 
103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. The [Building Services] is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official. 
Section [A] 104.2.1 Determination of substantially improved or substantially damaged existing buildings and structures in flood hazard areas. (Jurisdictions may consider the option to amend or delete depending on local enforcement and flood hazard ordinances.) 
Section 104.10.1; Flood hazard areas. (Jurisdictions may consider the option to amend or delete depending on local enforcement and flood hazard ordinances.) 
Section 105.2 Work exempt from permit; under sub-title entitled "Building" delete items 1, 2, 10 and 11 and re-number as follows: 
Building: 
1.  (Remainder Unchanged) 
2.  (Remainder Unchanged) 
3.  (Remainder Unchanged) 
4.  (Remainder Unchanged) 
5.  (Remainder Unchanged) 
6.  ( Remainder Unchanged) 
7.  (Remainder Unchanged) 
8.  (Remainder Unchanged) 
9.  (Remainder Unchanged) 
10.  (Remainder Unchanged) 
Section 109; add Section 109.7 to read as follows: 
109.7 Re-inspection Fee. A fee as established by city council resolution may be charged when: 
1.  The inspection called for is not ready when the inspector arrives; 
2.  No building address or permit card is clearly posted; 
3.  City approved plans are not on the job site available to the inspector; 
4.  The building is locked or work otherwise not available for inspection when called; 
5.  The job site is red-tagged twice for the same item; 
6.  The original red tag has been removed from the job site. 
7.  Failure to maintain erosion control, trash control or tree protection. 
Any re-inspection fees assessed shall be paid before any more inspections are made on that job site. 
Section 109; add Section 109.8, 109.8.1, 109.8.2 and 109.9 to read as follows: 
109.8 Work without a permit. 
109.8.1 Investigation. Whenever work for which a permit is required by this code has been commenced without first obtaining a permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. 
109.8.2 Fee. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by this code or the city fee schedule as applicable. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt the applicant from compliance with all other provisions of either this code or the technical codes nor from penalty prescribed by law. 
109.9 Unauthorized cover up fee. Any work concealed without first obtaining the required inspection in violation of Section 110 shall be assessed a fee as established by the city fee schedule. 
Section 110.3.5; Lath, gypsum board and gypsum panel product inspection; Delete exception 
Section 202; amend definition of Ambulatory Care Facility as follows: 
AMBULATORY CARE FACILITY. Buildings or portions thereof used to provide medical, surgical, psychiatric, nursing or similar care on a less than 24-hour basis to individuals who are rendered incapable of self-preservation by the services provided . This group may include but not be limited to the following: 
- Dialysis centers 
- Sedation dentistry 
- Surgery centers 
- Colonic centers 
- Psychiatric centers 
Section 202; add definition of Assisting Living Facilities to read as follows. 
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES. A building or part thereof housing persons, on a 24-hour basis, who because of age, mental disability or other reasons, live in a supervised residential environment which provides personal care services. The occupants are capable of responding to an emergency situation without physical assistance from staff. 
Section 202; change definition of "Atrium" as follows: 
ATRIUM. An opening connecting three or more stories… {Balance remains unchanged} 
Section 202; amend definition of "Repair Garage" as follows: 
REPAIR GARAGE. A building, structure or portion thereof used for servicing or repairing motor vehicles. This occupancy shall also include garages involved in minor repair, modification and servicing of motor vehicles for items such as lube changes, inspections, windshield repair or replacement, shocks, minor part replacement and other such minor repairs. 
Section 202; amend definition of SPECIAL INSPECTOR to read as follows: 
SPECIAL INSPECTOR. A qualified person employed or retained by an approved agency who shall prove to the satisfaction of the registered design professional in responsible charge and the Building Official as having the competence necessary to inspect a particular type of construction requiring special inspection. 
Section 303.1.3; add a sentence to read as follows: 
303.1.3 Associated with Group E occupancies. A room or space used for assembly purposes that is associated with a Group E occupancy is not considered a separate occupancy except when applying the assembly requirements of Chapters 10 and 11. 
Section 304.1; add the following to the list of occupancies: 
Fire stations 
Police stations with detention facilities for 5 or less 
Section 307.1.1; add the following sentence to Exception 4: 
4. Cleaning establishments… {Text unchanged} …with Section 707 or 1-hour horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 or both. See also IFC Chapter 21, Dry Cleaning Plant provisions. 
Section 403.1, Exception 3; change to read as follows: 
The open air portion of a building [remainder unchanged] 
Section 403.3, Exception; delete item 2. 
Section 403.3.2; change to read as follows: 
[F] 403.3.2 Water supply to required fire pumps. In buildings that are more than 120 feet (36.5 m) in building height, required fire pumps shall be supplied by connections to no fewer than two water mains located in different streets. Separate supply piping shall be provided between each connection to the water main and the pumps. Each connection and the supply piping between the connection and the pumps shall be sized to supply the flow and pressure required for the pumps to operate. 
Section 404.5; delete Exception. 
Section 406.3.3.1 Carport separation; add sentence to read as follows: 
A fire separation is not required between a Group R-2 and U carport provided that the carport is entirely open on all sides and that the distance between the two is at least 10 feet (3048 mm). 
Section 423 STORM SHELTERS; Section 423.2 Construction. Amend to read as follows: 
In addition to other applicable requirements in this code, storm shelters shall be constructed in accordance with ICC 500 and/or state law. Buildings or structures that are also designated as emergency shelters shall also comply with TABLE 1604.5 as Risk Category IV structures and/or state law. 
Table 506.2; delete sentence from table 
Section 506.3.1; add sentence to read as follows: 
506.3.1 Minimum percentage of perimeter. [Existing Text remains] 
In order to be considered as accessible, if not in direct contact with a street or fire lane, a minimum 10-foot wide pathway meeting fire department access from the street or approved fire lane shall be provided. 
Section 602.1.1; add sentence to read as follows: 
602.1.1 Minimum Requirements. [Existing Text to remain] 
Where a building contains more than one distinct type of construction, the building shall comply with the most restrictive area, height, and stories, for the lesser type of construction or be separated by fire walls. 
Section 708.4.2; change sentence to read as follows: 
708.4.2 Fireblocks and draftstops in combustible construction. [Body of text unchanged] 
Exceptions: 
1.  Buildings equipped with an automatic sprinkler system installed throughout in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, or in accordance with Section 903.3.1.2 provided that sprinkler protection is provided in the space between the top of the fire partition and the underside of the floor or roof sheathing, deck or slab above as required for systems complying with Section 903.3.1.1. Portions of buildings containing concealed spaces filled with noncombustible insulation as permitted for sprinkler omission shall not apply to this exception for draftstopping. [Remainder unchanged] 
Section 718.3; change sentence to read as follows: 
718.3 Draftstopping in floors. [Body of text unchanged] 
Exceptions: Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. and provided that in combustible construction, sprinkler protection is provided in the floor space. 
Section 901.6.1; add Section 901.6.1.1 to read as follows: 
901.6.1.1 Standpipe Testing. Building owners/managers must maintain and test standpipe systems as per NFPA 25 requirements. The following additional requirements shall be applied to the testing that is required every 5 years: 
1.  The piping between the Fire Department Connection (FDC) and the standpipe shall be backflushed or inspected by approved camera when foreign material is present or when caps are missing, and also hydrostatically tested for all FDC's on any type of standpipe system. Hydrostatic testing shall also be conducted in accordance with NFPA 25 requirements for the different types of standpipe systems. 
2.  For any manual (dry or wet) standpipe system not having an automatic water supply capable of flowing water through the standpipe, the tester shall connect hose from a fire hydrant or portable pumping system (as approved by the fire code official) to each FDC, and flow water through the standpipe system to the roof outlet to verify that each inlet connection functions properly. Confirm that there are no open hose valves prior to introducing water into a dry standpipe. There is no required pressure criteria at the outlet. Verify that check valves function properly and that there are no closed control valves on the system. 
3.  Any pressure relief, reducing, or control valves shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of NFPA 25. All hose valves shall be exercised. 
4.  If the FDC is not already provided with approved caps, the contractor shall install such caps for all FDC's as required by the fire code official. 
5.  Upon successful completion of standpipe test, place a blue tag (as per Texas Administrative Code, Fire Sprinkler Rules for Inspection, Test and Maintenance Service (ITM) Tag) at the bottom of each standpipe riser in the building. The tag shall be check-marked as "Fifth Year" for Type of ITM, and the note on the back of the tag shall read "5 Year Standpipe Test" at a minimum. 
6.  The procedures required by Texas Administrative Code Fire Sprinkler Rules with regard to Yellow Tags and Red Tags or any deficiencies noted during the testing, including the required notification of the local Authority Having Jurisdiction (fire code official) shall be followed. 
7.  Additionally, records of the testing shall be maintained by the owner and contractor, if applicable, as required by the State Rules mentioned above and NFPA 25. 
8.  Standpipe system tests where water will be flowed external to the building shall not be conducted during freezing conditions or during the day prior to expected night time freezing conditions. 
9.  Contact the fire code official for requests to remove existing fire hose from Class II and III standpipe systems where employees are not trained in the utilization of this firefighting equipment. All standpipe hose valves must remain in place and be provided with an approved cap and chain when approval is given to remove hose by the fire code official. 
Section 903.1.1; change to read as follows: 
903.1.1 Alternative Protection. Alternative automatic fire-extinguishing systems complying with Section 904 shall be permitted in addition to automatic sprinkler protection where recognized by the applicable standard, or as approved by the fire code official. 
Section 903.2; add paragraph to read as follows and delete the exception: 
Automatic Sprinklers shall not be installed in elevator machine rooms, elevator machine spaces, and elevator hoistways, other than pits where such sprinklers would not necessitate shunt trip requirements under any circumstances. Storage shall not be allowed within the elevator machine room. Signage shall be provided at the entry doors to the elevator machine room indicating "ELEVATOR MACHINERY - NO STORAGE ALLOWED." 
Section 903.2.9; add Section 903.2.9.3 to read as follows: 
903.2.9.3 Self-Service Storage Facility. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all self-service storage facilities. 
Section 903.2.11; change 903.2.11.3 and add 903.2.11.7, 903.2.11.8, and 903.2.11.9 as follows: 
903.2.11.3 Buildings 35 feet or more in height. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout buildings that have one or more stories, other than penthouses in compliance with Section 1510 of the International Building Code, located 35 feet (10 668 mm) or more above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access, measured to the finished floor. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Open parking structures in compliance with Section 406.5 of the International Building Code, having no other occupancies above the subject garage. 
903.2.11.7 High-Piled Combustible Storage. For any building with a clear height exceeding 12 feet (4572 mm), see Chapter 32 to determine if those provisions apply. 
903.2.11.8 Spray Booths and Rooms. New and existing spray booths and spraying rooms shall be protected by an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system. 
903.2.11.9 Buildings Over 6,000 sq. ft. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all buildings with a building area 6,000 sq. ft. or greater and in all existing buildings that are enlarged to be 6,000 sq. ft. or greater. For the purpose of this provision, fire walls shall not define separate buildings. 
Exception: Open parking garages in compliance with Section 406.5 of the International Building Code. 
Section 903.3.1.1.1; change to read as follows: 
903.3.1.1.1 Exempt Locations. When approved by the fire code official, automatic sprinklers shall not be required in the following rooms or areas where such ...{text unchanged}… because it is damp, of fire-resistance-rated construction or contains electrical equipment. 
1.  Any room where the application of water, or flame and water, constitutes a serious life or fire hazard. 
2.  Any room or space where sprinklers are considered undesirable because of the nature of the contents, when approved by the fire code official. 
3.  Generator and transformer rooms, under the direct control of a public utility, separated from the remainder of the building by walls and floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies having a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours. 
5.  Elevator machine rooms, machinery spaces, and hoistways, other than pits where such sprinklers would not necessitate shunt trip requirements under any circumstances. 
6.  {Delete.} 
Section 903.3.1.2.3; delete sections and replace as follows: 
[F] Section 903.3.1.2.3 Attached Garages and Attics. Sprinkler protection is required in attached garages, and in the following attic spaces: 
1.  [Remainder Unchanged] 
2.  [Remainder Unchanged ] 
3.  Attic spaces of buildings that are two or more stories in height above grade plane or above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access. 
4.  Group R-4, Condition 2 occupancy attics not required by Item 1 or 3 to have sprinklers shall comply with one of the following: 
[Remainder Unchanged] 
Section 903.3.1.3; change to read as follows: 
903.3.1.3 NFPA 13D Sprinkler Systems. Automatic sprinkler systems installed in one- and two-family dwellings; Group R-3; Group R-4, Condition 1; and townhouses shall be permitted to be installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13D or in accordance with state law. 
Section 903.3.1.4; add to read as follows: 
[F] 903.3.1.4 Freeze protection. Freeze protection systems for automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be in accordance with the requirements of the applicable referenced NFPA standard and this section. 
903.3.1.4.1 Attics. Only dry-pipe, preaction, or listed antifreeze automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be allowed to protect attic spaces. 
Exception: Wet-pipe fire sprinkler systems shall be allowed to protect non-ventilated attic spaces where: 
1.  The attic sprinklers are supplied by a separate floor control valve assembly to allow ease of draining the attic system without impairing sprinklers throughout the rest of the building, and 
2.  Adequate heat shall be provided for freeze protection as per the applicable referenced NFPA standard, and 
3.  The attic space is a part of the building's thermal, or heat, envelope, such that insulation is provided at the roof deck, rather than at the ceiling level. 
903.3.1.4.2 Heat trace/insulation. Heat trace/insulation shall only be allowed where approved by the fire code official for small sections of large diameter water-filled pipe. 
Section 903.3.5; add a second paragraph to read as follows: 
Water supply as required for such systems shall be provided in conformance with the supply requirements of the respective standards; however, every water-based fire protection system shall be designed with a 10 psi safety factor. Reference Section 507.4 for additional design requirements. 
Section 903.4; add a second paragraph after the exceptions to read as follows: 
Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for fire department hose connection valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the central station upon tampering. 
Section 903.4.2; add second paragraph to read as follows: 
The alarm device required on the exterior of the building shall be a weatherproof horn/strobe notification appliance with a minimum 75 candela strobe rating, installed as close as practicable to the fire department connection. 
Section 905.2; change to read as follows: 
905.2 Installation Standard. Standpipe systems shall be installed in accordance with this section and NFPA 14. Manual dry standpipe systems shall be supervised with a minimum of 10 psig and a maximum of 40 psig air pressure with a high/low alarm. 
Section 905.3; add Section 905.3.9 and exception to read as follows: 
905.3.9 Buildings Exceeding 10,000 sq. ft. In buildings exceeding 10,000 square feet in area per story and where any portion of the building's interior area is more than 200 feet (60960 mm) of travel, vertically and horizontally, from the nearest point of fire department vehicle access, Class I automatic wet or manual wet standpipes shall be provided. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Automatic dry, semi-automatic dry, and manual dry standpipes are allowed as provided for in NFPA 14 where approved by the fire code official. 
2.  R-2 occupancies of four stories or less in height having no interior corridors. 
Section 905.4, change Item 1, 3, and 5, and add Item 7 to read as follows: 
1.  In every required exit stairway, a hose connection shall be provided for each story above and below grade plane. Hose connections shall be located at the main floor landing between stories, unless otherwise approved by the fire code official. 
2.  {No change.} 
3.  In every exit passageway, at the entrance from the exit passageway to other areas of a building. 
Exception: Where floor areas adjacent to an exit passageway are reachable from an exit stairway hose connection by a {No change to rest.} 
4.  {No change.} 
5.  Where the roof has a slope less than four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33.3-percent slope), each standpipe shall be provided with a two-way hose connection located to serve the roof or at the highest landing of an exit stairway with stair access to the roof provided in accordance with Section 1011.12. 
6.  {No change.} 
7.  When required by this Chapter, standpipe connections shall be placed adjacent to all required exits to the structure and at two hundred feet (200') intervals along major corridors thereafter, or as otherwise approved by the fire code official. 
Section 905.9; add a second paragraph after the exceptions to read as follows: 
Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for fire department hose connection valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the central station upon tampering. 
Section 907.1; add Section 907.1.4 to read as follows: 
907.1.4 Design Standards. Where a new fire alarm system is installed, the devices shall be addressable. Fire alarm systems utilizing more than 20 smoke detectors shall have analog initiating devices. 
Section 907.2.1; change to read as follows: 
907.2.1 Group A. A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.5 shall be installed in Group A occupancies having an occupant load of 300 or more persons, or where the occupant load is more than 100 persons above or below the lowest level of exit discharge. Group A occupancies not separated from one another in accordance with Section 707.3.10 of the International Building Code shall be considered as a single occupancy for the purposes of applying this section. Portions of Group E occupancies occupied for assembly purposes shall be provided with a fire alarm system as required for the Group E occupancy. 
Exception: {No change.} 
Activation of fire alarm notification appliances shall: 
1.  Cause illumination of the means of egress with light of not less than 1 foot-candle (11 lux) at the walking surface level, and 
2.  Stop any conflicting or confusing sounds and visual distractions. 
Section 907.2.3; change to read as follows: 
907.2.3 Group E. A manual fire alarm system that initiates the occupant notification signal utilizing an emergency voice/alarm communication system meeting the requirements of Section 907.5.2.2 and installed in accordance with Section 907.6 shall be installed in Group E educational occupancies. When automatic sprinkler systems or smoke detectors are installed, such systems or detectors shall be connected to the building fire alarm system. An approved smoke detection system shall be installed in Group E day care occupancies. Unless separated by a minimum of 100' open space, all buildings, whether portable buildings or the main building, will be considered one building for alarm occupant load consideration and interconnection of alarm systems. 
Exceptions: 
1.  {No change.} 
1.1. Residential In-Home day care with not more than 12 children may use interconnected single station detectors in all habitable rooms. (For care of more than five children 2 1/2 or less years of age, see Section 907.2.6.) {No change to remainder of exceptions.} 
Section 907.2.12, Exception 3; change to read as follows: 
2.  Open air portions of buildings with an occupancy in Group A-5 in accordance with Section 303.1 of the International Building Code; however, this exception does not apply to accessory uses including but not limited to sky boxes, restaurants, and similarly enclosed areas. 
Section 907.4.2; add Section 907.4.2.7 to read as follows: 
907.4.2.7 Type. Manual alarm initiating devices shall be an approved double action type. 
Section 907.6.1; add Section 907.6.1.1 to read as follows: 
907.6.1.1 Wiring Installation. All fire alarm systems shall be installed in such a manner that a failure of any single initiating device or single open in an initiating circuit conductor will not interfere with the normal operation of other such devices. All signaling line circuits (SLC) shall be installed in such a way that a single open will not interfere with the operation of any addressable devices (Class A). Outgoing and return SLC conductors shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 72 requirements for Class A circuits and shall have a minimum of four feet separation horizontal and one foot vertical between supply and return circuit conductors. The initiating device circuit (IDC) from a signaling line circuit interface device may be wired Class B, provided the distance from the interface device to the initiating device is ten feet or less. 
Section 907.6.3; delete all four Exceptions. 
Section 907.6.6; add sentence at end of paragraph to read as follows: 
See 907.6.3 for the required information transmitted to the supervising station. 
Section 910.2; change Exception 2 and 3 to read as follows: 
2.  Only manual smoke and heat removal shall be required in areas of buildings equipped with early suppression fast-response (ESFR) sprinklers. Automatic smoke and heat removal is prohibited. 
3.  Only manual smoke and heat removal shall be required in areas of buildings equipped with control mode special application sprinklers with a response time index of 50(m*S) 1/2 or less that are listed to control a fire in stored commodities with 12 or fewer sprinklers. Automatic smoke and heat removal is prohibited. 
Section 910.2; add subsections 910.2.3 with exceptions to read as follows: 
910.2.3 Group H. Buildings and portions thereof used as a Group H occupancy as follows: 
1.  In occupancies classified as Group H-2 or H-3, any of which are more than 15,000 square feet (1394 m 2 ) in single floor area. 
Exception: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only noncombustible materials. 
2.  In areas of buildings in Group H used for storing Class 2, 3, and 4 liquid and solid oxidizers, Class 1 and unclassified detonable organic peroxides, Class 3 and 4 unstable (reactive) materials, or Class 2 or 3 water-reactive materials as required for a high-hazard commodity classification. 
Exception: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only noncombustible materials. 
Section 910.3; add section 910.3.4 to read as follows: 
910.3.4 Vent Operation. Smoke and heat vents shall be capable of being operated by approved automatic and manual means. Automatic operation of smoke and heat vents shall conform to the provisions of Sections 910.3.2.1 through 910.3.2.3. 
910.3.4.1 Sprinklered buildings. Where installed in buildings equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall be designed to operate automatically. 
The automatic operating mechanism of the smoke and heat vents shall operate at a temperature rating at least 100 degrees F (approximately 38 degrees Celsius) greater than the temperature rating of the sprinklers installed. 
Exception: Manual only systems per Section 910.2. 
910.3.4.2 Nonsprinklered Buildings. Where installed in buildings not equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall operate automatically by actuation of a heat-responsive device rated at between 100°F (56°C) and 220°F (122°C) above ambient. 
Exception: Listed gravity-operated drop out vents. 
Section 910.4.3.1; change to read as follows: 
910.4.3.1 Makeup Air. Makeup air openings shall be provided within 6 feet (1829 mm) of the floor level. Operation of makeup air openings shall be automatic. The minimum gross area of makeup air inlets shall be 8 square feet per 1,000 cubic feet per minute (0.74 m2 per 0.4719 m3/s) of smoke exhaust. 
Section 912.2; add Section 912.2.3 to read as follows: 
912.2.3 Hydrant Distance. An approved fire hydrant shall be located within 100 feet of the fire department connection as the fire hose lays along an unobstructed path. 
Section 913.2.1; add Section 913.2.1.1 and exception to read as follows: 
913.2.1.1 Fire Pump Room Access. When located on the ground level at an exterior wall, the fire pump room shall be provided with an exterior fire department access door that is not less than 3 ft. in width and 6 ft. - 8 in. in height, regardless of any interior doors that are provided. A key box shall be provided at this door, as required by IFC Section 506.1. 
Exception: When it is necessary to locate the fire pump room on other levels or not at an exterior wall, the corridor leading to the fire pump room access from the exterior of the building shall be provided with equivalent fire resistance as that required for the pump room, or as approved by the fire code official. Access keys shall be provided in the key box as required by IFC Section 506.1. 
Section 1006.2.2.7; add Section 1006.2.2.7 as follows: 
1006.2.2.7 Electrical Rooms. For electrical rooms, special exiting requirements may apply. Reference the electrical code as adopted. 
Section 1009.8; add the following Exception 7: 
1009.8 Two Way Communication. A two-way communication system complying with Sections 1009.8.1 and 1009.8.2 shall be provided at the landing serving each elevator required to be accessible on each accessible floor that is one or more stories above or below the level of exit discharge. 
Exceptions: 
7.  Buildings regulated under State Law and built in accordance with State registered plans, including variances or waivers granted by the State, shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of Section 1009 and chapter 11. 
Section 1010.1.9.5 Bolt Locks; amend exceptions 3 and 4 as follows: 
Exceptions: 
3.  Where a pair of doors serves an occupant load of less than 50 persons in a Group B, F, M or S occupancy. (Remainder Unchanged) 
4.  Where a pair of doors serves a Group A, B, F, M or S occupancy (remainder unchanged) 
Section 1020.1 Construction; add exception 6 to read as follows: 
7.  In group B occupancies, corridor walls and ceilings need not be of fire-resistive construction within a single tenant space when the space is equipped with approved automatic smoke-detection within the corridor. The actuation of any detector must activate self-annunciating alarms audible in all areas within the corridor. Smoke detectors must be connected to an approved automatic fire alarm system where such system is provided. 
Section 1029.1.1.1 Spaces under grandstands and bleachers; delete this section. 
Section 1101.1 Scope; add exception to Section 1101.1 as follows: 
Exception: Components of projects regulated by and registered with Architectural Barriers Division of Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
Section 2901.1; add a sentence to read as follows: 
[P] 2901.1 Scope. {existing text to remain} The provisions of this Chapter are meant to work in coordination with the provisions of Chapter 4 of the International Plumbing Code. Should any conflicts arise between the two chapters, the Building Official shall determine which provision applies. 
Section 2902.1; add a second paragraph to read as follows: 
In other than E Occupancies, the minimum number of fixtures in Table 2902.1 may be lowered, if requested in writing, by the applicant stating reasons for a reduced number and approved by the Building Official. 
Table 2902.1; add footnote g to read as follows: 
g.  Drinking fountains are not required in M Occupancies with an occupant load of 100 or less, B Occupancies with an occupant load of 25 or less, and for dining and/or drinking establishments. 
Add new Section 2902.1.4 to read as follows: 
2902.1.4 Additional fixtures for food preparation facilities. In addition to the fixtures required in this Chapter, all food service facilities shall be provided with additional fixtures set out in this section. 
2902.1.4.1 Hand washing lavatory. At least one hand washing lavatory shall be provided for use by employees that is accessible from food preparation, food dispensing and ware washing areas. Additional hand washing lavatories may be required based on convenience of use by employees. 
2902.1.4.2 Service sink. In new or remodeled food service establishments, at least one service sink or one floor sink shall be provided so that it is conveniently located for the cleaning of mops or similar wet floor cleaning tool and for the disposal of mop water and similar liquid waste. The location of the service sink(s) and/or mop sink(s) shall be approved by the <Jurisdiction's> health department. 
Section 3001.2 Emergency Elevator Communication Systems for the deaf, hard of hearing and speech impaired; delete this section. 
Section 3002.1 Hoistway Enclosure Protection required. Add exceptions to Section 3002.1 as follows: 
Exceptions: 
4.  Elevators completely located within atriums shall not require hoistway enclosure protection. 
5.  Elevators in open or enclosed parking garages that serve only the parking garage, shall not require hoistway enclosure protection. 
Section 3005.4 Machine rooms, control rooms, machinery spaces and control spaces; delete text as follows: 
Revise text to read: 
Elevator machine rooms, control rooms, control spaces and machinery spaces shall be enclosed with fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both. 
(Remainder unchanged) 
Section 3005.4 Machine rooms, control rooms, machinery spaces and control spaces; 
Delete exceptions and add two new exceptions to Section 3005.4 as follows: 
Exceptions: 
1.  Elevator machine rooms, control rooms, machinery spaces and control spaces completely located within atriums shall not require enclosure protection. 
2.  Elevator machine rooms, control rooms, machinery spaces and control spaces in open or enclosed parking garages that serve only the parking garage, shall not require enclosure protection. 
Section 3005.7 add a Section 3005.7 as follows: 
3005.7 Fire Protection in Machine rooms, control rooms, machinery spaces and control spaces. 
3005.7.1 Automatic sprinkler system. The building shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, except as otherwise permitted by Section 903.3.1.1.1 and as prohibited by Section 3005.7.2.1. 
3005.7.2.1 Prohibited locations. Automatic sprinklers shall not be installed in machine rooms, elevator machinery spaces, control rooms, control spaces and elevator hoistways. 
3005.7.2.2 Sprinkler system monitoring. The sprinkler system shall have a sprinkler control valve supervisory switch and water-flow initiating device provided for each floor that is monitored by the building's fire alarm system. 
3005.7.3 Water protection. An approved method to prevent water from infiltrating into the hoistway enclosure from the operation of the automatic sprinkler system outside the elevator lobby shall be provided. 
3005.7.4 Shunt trip. Means for elevator shutdown in accordance with Section 3005.5 shall not be installed. 
Section 3005.8; add Section 3005.8 as follows: 
3005.8 Storage. Storage shall not be allowed within the elevator machine room, control room, machinery spaces and or control spaces. Provide approved signage at each entry to the above listed locations stating: "No Storage Allowed. 
Section 3006.2, Hoistway opening protection required; Revise text as follows: 
5.  The building is a high rise and the elevator hoistway is more than 55 feet (16 764 mm) in height. The height of the hoistway shall be measured from the lowest floor at or above grade to the highest floors served by the hoistway. 
( Ord. No. 1956 , § 2, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 4-130. - Specific Amendments to the 2018 International Residential Code. 
Section R102.4; change to read as follows: 
R102.4 Referenced codes and standards. The codes, when specifically adopted, and standards referenced in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference and as further regulated in Sections R102.4.1 and R102.4.2. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference made to NFPA 70 or the Electrical Code shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted. 
Section R103 and R103.1 amend to insert the Department Name 
[Building Services] 
R103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. The [Building Services] is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official. 
Section R104.10.1 Flood Hazard areas; delete this section. 
Section R105.3.1.1& R106.1.4; delete these sections. 
Section R110 (R110.1 through R110.5); delete the section. 
Section R202; change definition of "Townhouse" to read as follows: 
TOWNHOUSE. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of three or more attached units separated by property lines in which each unit extends from foundation to roof and with a yard or public way on at least two sides. 
Table R301.2 (1); fill in as follows: 
GROUND SNOW LOAD 	WIND DESIGN 	SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY f 
A 	SUBJECT TO 
DAMAGE FROM 	WINTER DESIGN TEMP e 	ICE BARRIER UNDER-LAYMENT h 	FLOOD HAZARDS g 	AIR FREEZING INDEX i 	MEAN ANNUAL TEMP j 
	SPEED d (MPH) 	Topographic Effects k 	Special Wind Region L 	Windborne Debris Zone m 		Weathering 
a 	Frost Line Depth b 	Termite c 					
5 lb/ft 	115 
(3 sec-gust)/ 76 
fastest 
mile 	No 	No 	No 	Moderate 	6" 	Very Heavy 	22 0 F 	No 	Local Code 	150 	64.9 0 F 	
 
***Table R301.2 (1); fill in as follows: 
Delete remainder of table Manual J Design Criteria and footnote N 
Section R302.1; add exception #6 to read as follows: 
Exceptions: {previous exceptions unchanged} 
6.  Open non-combustible carport structures may be constructed when also approved within adopted ordinances. 
Section R302.3; add Exception #3 to read as follows: 
Exceptions: 
1.  {existing text unchanged} 
2.  {existing text unchanged} 
3.  Two-family dwelling units that are also divided by a property line through the structure shall be separated as required for townhouses. 
Section R302.5.1; change to read as follows: 
R302.5.1 Opening protection. Openings from a private garage directly into a room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted. Other openings between the garage and residence shall be equipped with solid wood doors not less than 13/8 inches (35 mm) in thickness, solid or honeycomb core steel doors not less than 13/8 inches (35 mm) thick, or 20-minute fire-rated doors. 
Section R303.3, Exception; amend to read as follows: 
Exception: {existing text unchanged} Spaces containing only a water closet or water closet and a lavatory may be ventilated with an approved mechanical recirculating fan or similar device designed to remove odors from the air. 
Section R313.2 One and Two Family Dwellings; Delete this section and subsection in their entirety. 
Section R315.2.2 Alterations, repairs and additions; amend to read as follows: 
Exception: 
1.  [existing text remains] 
2.  Installation, alteration or repairs of all electrically powered mechanical systems or plumbing appliances. 
Section R322 Flood Resistant Construction; deleted section. 
Section R401.2; amended by adding a new paragraph following the existing paragraph to read as follows. 
Section R401.2. Requirements. {existing text unchanged} … 
Every foundation and/or footing, or any size addition to an existing post-tension foundation, regulated by this code shall be designed and sealed by a Texas-registered engineer. 
Section R602.6.1; amend the following: 
R602.6.1 Drilling and notching of top plate. When piping or ductwork is placed in or partly in an exterior wall or interior load-bearing wall, necessitating cutting, drilling or notching of the top plate by more than 50 percent of its width, a galvanized metal tie not less than 0.054 inch thick (1.37 mm) (16 Ga) and 5 inches (127 mm) wide shall be fastened across and to the plate at each side of the opening with not less than eight 10d (0.148 inch diameter) having a minimum length of 1 ½ inches (38 mm) at each side or equivalent. Fasteners will be offset to prevent splitting of the top plate material. The metal tie must extend a minimum of 6 inches past the opening. See figure R602.6.1. {remainder unchanged} 
Figure R602.6.1; delete the figure and insert the following figure: 
 
Add section R703.8.4.1.2 Veneer Ties for Wall Studs; to read as follows: 
R703.8.4.1.2 Veneer Ties for Wall Studs. In stud framed exterior walls, all ties may be anchored to studs as follows: 
1.  When studs are 16 in (407 mm) o.c., stud ties shall be spaced no further apart than 24 in (737 mm) vertically starting approximately 12 in (381 mm) from the foundation; or 
2.  When studs are 24 in (610 mm) o.c., stud ties shall be spaced no further apart than 16 in (483 mm) vertically starting approximately 8 in (254 mm) from the foundation. 
Section R902.1; amend and add exception #5 to read as follows: 
R902.1 Roofing covering materials. Roofs shall be covered with materials as set forth in Sections R904 and R905. Class A, B, or C roofing shall be installed. {remainder unchanged} 
Exceptions: 
1.  {text unchanged} 
2.  {text unchanged} 
3.  {text unchanged} 
4.  {text unchanged} 
5.  Non-classified roof coverings shall be permitted on one-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed (area defined by jurisdiction). 
Chapter 11 [RE] - Energy Efficiency is deleted in its entirety; Reference the 2018 IECC for energy code provisions and recommended amendments 
Section M1305.1.2; change to read as follows: 
M1305.1.2 Appliances in attics. Attics containing appliances shall be provided . . . {bulk of paragraph unchanged} . . . side of the appliance. The clear access opening dimensions shall be a minimum of 20 inches by 30 inches (508 mm by 762 mm), and large enough to allow removal of the largest appliance. As a minimum, for access to the attic space, provide one of the following: 
1.  A permanent stair. 
2.  A pull down stair with a minimum 300 lb (136 kg) capacity. 
3.  An access door from an upper floor level. 
Exceptions: 
1.  The passageway and level service space are not required where the appliance can be serviced and removed through the required opening. 
2.  Where the passageway is unobstructed…{remaining text unchanged} 
Section M1411.3; change to read as follows: 
M1411.3 Condensate disposal. Condensate from all cooling coils or evaporators shall be conveyed from the drain pan outlet to a sanitary sewer through a trap, by means of a direct or indirect drain. {remaining text unchanged} 
Section M1411.3.1, Items 3 and 4; add text to read as follows: 
M1411.3.1 Auxiliary and secondary drain systems. {bulk of paragraph unchanged} 
1.  {text unchanged} 
2.  {text unchanged} 
3.  An auxiliary drain pan… {bulk of text unchanged}… with Item 1 of this section. A water level detection device may be installed only with prior approval of the building official. 
4.  A water level detection device… {bulk of text unchanged}… overflow rim of such pan. A water level detection device may be installed only with prior approval of the building official. 
Section M1411.3.1.1; add text to read as follows: 
M1411.3.1.1 Water-level monitoring devices. On down-flow units …{bulk of text unchanged}… installed in the drain line. A water level detection device may be installed only with prior approval of the building official. 
M1503.6 Makeup Air Required; amend and add exception as follows: 
M1503.6 Makeup air required. Where one or more gas, liquid or solid fuel-burning appliance that is neither direct-vent nor uses a mechanical draft venting system is located within a dwelling unit's air barrier, each exhaust system capable of exhausting in excess of 400 cubic feet per minute (0.19 m 3 /s) shall be mechanically or passively provided with makeup air at a rate approximate to the difference between exhaust air rate and 400 cubic feet per minute. Such makeup air systems shall be equipped with not fewer than one damper complying with Section M1503.6.2. 
Exception: Makeup air is not required for exhaust systems installed for the exclusive purpose of space cooling and intended to be operated only when windows or other air inlets are open. Where all appliances in the house are of sealed combustion, power-vent, unvented, or electric, the exhaust hood system shall be permitted to exhaust up to 600 cubic feet per minute (0.28 m3/s) without providing makeup air. Exhaust hood systems capable of exhausting in excess of 600 cubic feet per minute (0.28 m3/s) shall be provided with a makeup air at a rate approximately to the difference between the exhaust air rate and 600 cubic feet per minute. 
Section M2005.2; change to read as follows: 
M2005.2 Prohibited locations. Fuel-fired water heaters shall not be installed in a room used as a storage closet. Water heaters located in a bedroom or bathroom shall be installed in a sealed enclosure so that combustion air will not be taken from the living space. Access to such enclosure may be from the bedroom or bathroom when through a solid door, weather-stripped in accordance with the exterior door air leakage requirements of the International Energy Conservation Code and equipped with an approved self-closing device. Installation of direct-vent water heaters within an enclosure is not required. 
Section G2408.3 (305.5)Private Garages; delete this section in its entirety. 
Section G2415.2.1 (404.2.1) CSST; add a second paragraph to read as follows: 
Both ends of each section of medium pressure gas piping shall identify its operating gas pressure with an approved tag. The tags are to be composed of aluminum or stainless steel and the following wording shall be stamped into the tag: 
"WARNING: 1/2 to 5 psi gas pressure - Do Not Remove" 
Section G2415.12 (404.12) and G2415.12.1 (404.12.1); change to read as follows: 
G2415.12 (404.12) Minimum burial depth. Underground piping systems shall be installed a minimum depth of 18 inches (457 mm) below grade, 
G2415.12.1 (404.12.1) Individual Outdoor Appliances; Delete in its entirety 
Section G2417.1 (406.1); change to read as follows: 
G2417.1 (406.1) General. Prior to acceptance and initial operation, all piping installations shall be inspected and pressure tested to determine that the materials, design, fabrication, and installation practices comply with the requirements of this code. The permit holder shall make the applicable tests prescribed in Sections 2417.1.1 through 2417.1.5 to determine compliance with the provisions of this code. The permit holder shall give reasonable advance notice to the building official when the piping system is ready for testing. The equipment, material, power and labor necessary for the inspections and test shall be furnished by the permit holder and the permit holder shall be responsible for determining that the work will withstand the test pressure prescribed in the following tests. 
Section G2417.4; change to read as follows: 
G2417.4 (406.4) Test pressure measurement. Test pressure shall be measured with a monometer or with a pressure-measuring device designed and calibrated to read, record, or indicate a pressure loss caused by leakage during the pressure test period. The source of pressure shall be isolated before the pressure tests are made. 
Section G2417.4.1; change to read as follows: 
G2417.4.1 (406.4.1) Test pressure. The test pressure to be used shall be no less than 3 psig (20 kPa gauge), or at the discretion of the Code Official, the piping and valves may be tested at a pressure of at least six (6) inches (152 mm) of mercury, measured with a manometer or slope gauge, For tests requiring a pressure of 3 psig, diaphragm gauges shall utilize a dial with a minimum diameter of three and one half inches (3 ½"), a set hand, 1/10 pound incrementation and pressure range not to exceed 6 psi for tests requiring a pressure of 3 psig. For tests requiring a pressure of 10 psig, diaphragm gauges shall utilize a dial with a minimum diameter of three and one-half inches (3 ½"), a set hand, a minimum of 2/10 pound incrementation and a pressure range not to exceed 20 psi. For welded piping, and for piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48 kPa) (1/2 psi) and less than 200 inches of water column pressure (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall not be less than ten (10) pounds per square inch (69.6 kPa). For piping carrying gas at a pressure that exceeds 200 inches of water column (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall be not less than one and one-half times the proposed maximum working pressure. 
Diaphragm gauges used for testing must display a current calibration and be in good working condition. The appropriate test must be applied to the diaphragm gauge used for testing 
Section G2417.4.2; change to read as follows: 
G2417.4.2 (406.4.2) Test duration. The test duration shall be held for a length of time satisfactory to the Building Official, but in no case for less than fifteen (15) minutes. For welded piping, and for piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48 kPa), the test duration shall be held for a length of time satisfactory to the Building Official, but in no case for less than thirty (30) minutes. 
Section G2420.1 (406.1); add Section G2420.1.4 to read as follows: 
G2420.1.4 Valves in CSST installations. Shutoff valves installed with corrugated stainless steel (CSST) piping systems shall be supported with an approved termination fitting, or equivalent support, suitable for the size of the valves, of adequate strength and quality, and located at intervals so as to prevent or damp out excessive vibration but in no case greater than 12-inches from the center of the valve. Supports shall be installed so as not to interfere with the free expansion and contraction of the system's piping, fittings, and valves between anchors. All valves and supports shall be designed and installed so they will not be disengaged by movement of the supporting piping. 
Section G2420.5.1 (409.5.1); add text to read as follows: 
G2420.5.1 (409.5.1) Located within the same room. The shutoff valve…{bulk of paragraph unchanged}… in accordance with the appliance manufacturer's instructions. A secondary shutoff valve must be installed within 3 feet (914 mm) of the firebox if appliance shutoff is located in the firebox. 
Section G2421.1 (410.1); add text and Exception to read as follows: 
G2421.1 (410.1) Pressure regulators. A line pressure regulator shall be … {bulk of paragraph unchanged}… approved for outdoor installation. Access to regulators shall comply with the requirements for access to appliances as specified in Section M1305. 
Exception: A passageway or level service space is not required when the regulator is capable of being serviced and removed through the required attic opening. 
Section G2422.1.2.3 (411.1.3.3) Prohibited locations and penetrations; delete Exception 1 and Exception 4. 
Section G2445.2 (621.2); add Exception to read as follows: 
G2445.2 (621.2) Prohibited use. One or more unvented room heaters shall not be used as the sole source of comfort heating in a dwelling unit. 
Exception: Existing approved unvented room heaters may continue to be used in dwelling units, in accordance with the code provisions in effect when installed, when approved by the Building Official unless an unsafe condition is determined to exist as described in International Fuel Gas Code Section 108.7 of the Fuel Gas Code. 
Section G2448.1.1 (624.1.1); change to read as follows: 
G2448.1.1 (624.1.1) Installation requirements. The requirements for water heaters relative to access, sizing, relief valves, drain pans and scald protection shall be in accordance with this code. 
Section P2603; add to read as follows: 
P2603.3 Protection against corrosion. Metallic piping, except for cast iron, ductile iron and galvanized steel, shall not be placed in direct contact with steel framing members, concrete or cinder walls and floors or other masonry. Metallic piping shall not be placed in direct contact with corrosive soil. Where sheathing is used to prevent direct contact, the sheathing shall have a thickness of not less than 0.008 inch (8 mil) (0.203 mm) and the sheathing shall be made of approved material. Where sheathing protects piping that penetrates concrete or masonry walls or floors, the sheathing shall be installed in a manner that allows movement of the piping within the sheathing. 
Section P2603.5.1 Sewer Depth; change to read as follows: 
P2603.5.1 Sewer depth. Building sewers that connect to private sewage disposal systems shall be a minimum of [number] inches (mm) below finished grade at the point of septic tank connection. Building sewers shall be a minimum of 12 inches (304 mm) below grade. 
Section P2604; add to read as follows: 
P2604.2.1 Plastic sewer and DWV piping installation. Plastic sewer and DWV piping installed underground shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions. Trench width shall be controlled to not exceed the outside the pipe diameter plus 16 inches or in a trench which has a controlled width equal to the nominal diameter of the piping multiplied by 1.25 plus 12 inches. The piping shall be bedded in 4 inches of granular fill and then backfilled compacting the side fill in 6-inch layers on each side of the piping. The compaction shall be to minimum of 85 percent standard proctor density and extend to a minimum of 6 inches above the top of the pipe. 
Section P2801; change to read as follows: 
P2801.6 Required pan. 
Where a storage tank-type water heater or a hot water storage tank is installed in a location where water leakage from the tank will cause damage, the tank shall be installed in a pan constructed of one of the following: 
1.  Galvanized steel or aluminum of not less than 0.0236 inch (0.6010 mm) in thickness. 
2.  Plastic not less than 0.036 inch (0.9 mm) in thickness. 
3.  Other approved materials. 
Section P2801.6.1; change to read as follows: 
Section P2801.6.1 Pan size and drain. The pan shall be not less than 1 1/2 inches (38 mm) in depth and shall be of sufficient size and shape to receive all dripping or condensate from the tank or water heater. The pan shall be drained by an indirect waste pipe having a diameter of not less than 3/4 inch (19 mm). Piping for safety pan drains shall be of those materials listed in Table P2906.5. 
Multiple pan drains may terminate to a single discharge piping system when approved by the administrative authority and permitted by the manufactures installation instructions and installed with those instructions. {existing text unchanged} 
Section P2804.6.1; change to read as follows: 
Section P2804.6.1 Requirements for discharge piping. The discharge piping serving a pressure relief valve, temperature relief valve or combination thereof shall: 
1.  Not be directly connected to the drainage system. 
2.  Discharge through an air gap. 
3.  Not be smaller than the diameter of the outlet of the valve served and shall discharge full size to the air gap. 
4.  Serve a single relief device and shall not connect to piping serving any other relief device or equipment. 
Exception: Multiple relief devices may be installed to a single T & P discharge piping system when approved by the administrative authority and permitted by the manufactures installation instructions and installed with those instructions. 
5.  Discharge to an approved location or to the outdoors. 
[remainder unchanged] 
Section P2902.5.3; change to read as follows: 
P2902.5.3 Lawn irrigation systems. The potable water supply to lawn irrigation systems shall be protected against backflow by an atmospheric-type vacuum breaker, a pressure-type vacuum breaker, a double-check assembly or a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. A valve shall not be installed downstream from an atmospheric vacuum breaker. Where chemicals are introduced into the system, the potable water supply shall be protected against backflow by a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. 
Section P3003.9; change to read as follows: 
P3003.9.2 Solvent cementing. Joint surfaces shall be clean and free from moisture. A purple primer that conforms to ASTM F 656 shall be applied. Solvent cement not purple in color and conforming to ASTM D 2564, CSA B137.3, CSA B181.2 or CSA B182.1 shall be applied to all joint surfaces. The joint shall be made while the cement is wet and shall be in accordance with ASTM D 2855. Solvent cement joints shall be permitted above or below ground. 
Section P3111 Combination waste and vent systems; delete this section in its entirety. 
Section P3112.2 Vent Collection; delete and replace with the following: 
P3112.2 Installation. Traps for island sinks and similar equipment shall be roughed in above the floor and may be vented by extending the vent as high as possible, but not less than the drainboard height and then returning it downward and connecting it to the horizontal sink drain immediately downstream from the vertical fixture drain. The return vent shall be connected to the horizontal drain through a wye-branch fitting and shall, in addition, be provided with a foot vent taken off the vertical fixture vent by means of a wye-branch immediately below the floor and extending to the nearest partition and then through the roof to the open air or may be connected to other vents at a point not less than six (6) inches (152 mm) above the flood level rim of the fixtures served. Drainage fittings shall be used on all parts of the vent below the floor level and a minimum slope of one-quarter (1/4) inch per foot (20.9 mm/m) back to the drain shall be maintained. The return bend used under the drain-board shall be a one (1) piece fitting or an assembly of a forty-five (45) degree (0.79 radius), a ninety (90) degree (1.6 radius) and a forty-five (45) degree (0.79 radius) elbow in the order named. Pipe sizing shall be as elsewhere required in this Code. The island sink drain, upstream of the return vent, shall serve no other fixtures. An accessible cleanout shall be installed in the vertical portion of the foot vent. 
( Ord. No. 1956 , § 2, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 4-135. - Specific Amendments to the 2018 International Fire Code. 
The following sections of the 2018 Edition of the International Fire Code, the provisions of which shall be controlling within the limits of the City of Keller, are hereby amended for the purpose of consistency with specific past practices and the recommendations of the North Central Texas Council of Governments Fire Advisory Board: 
General Terms 
(1)  Code official or fire code official. The fire chief or designee, Fire Marshal or designee, or member of the fire department, charged with the duties of administration and enforcement of this code, or a duly authorized representative. 
(2)  Jurisdiction. All references to "jurisdiction" shall mean the City of Keller, Tarrant County Texas. 
(3)  Chief. All references to "Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention" shall be replaced with Fire Marshal." 
(4)  Fire Marshal. All references to "Fire Marshal" shall include the Fire Marshal's designee. 
Section 101.1 shall be amended to read as follows: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the fire code of the City of Keller, hereinafter referred to as "this Code." 
Section 102.1 shall be amended to read as follows: 
102.1 Construction and design provisions is amended by adding 102.1 #3 and 102.1.1 to read as follows: 
Section 102.1 #3 Existing structures, facilities, and conditions when required in Chapter 11 or in specific sections of this code. 
Section 102.1.1 Reconstruction and Remodel. A building that is being altered, remodeled or reconstructed where the cost of construction is equal to or greater than 50% of the appraised value of the structure, shall comply with current fire codes in regards to: 
(1)  Panic hardware 
(2)  Fire alarms 
(3)  Exit lights 
(4)  Emergency lighting 
(5)  Exits and exit ways 
(6)  Fire protection systems 
Section 102.7 is amended by deleting and replacing with a new Section 102.7, to read as follows: 
Section 102.7 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 80 of the International Fire Code (IFC) and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standards shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the ICC Electrical Code shall mean the Electrical Code, as adopted. 
102.7.1 Conflicts. Where conflicts occur between provisions of this code and referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. 
102.7.2 Provisions in referenced codes and standards. Where the extent of the reference to a referenced code or standard includes subject matter that is within the scope of this code and any adopted amendments, the provisions of this code and any adopted amendments, as applicable, shall take precedence over the provisions in the referenced code or standard. 
Section 102.7.3 shall be added to read as follows: 
102.7.3 The most currently published editions of NFPA shall be the Referenced Codes adopted. Specific reference is made for the adoption of NFPA 3: Standard for Commissioning of Fire Protection Life Safety Systems, and NFPA 17A including all associated appendices, specifically Appendix B and NFPA 96: Standard for Ventilation Control and Fire Protection of Commercial Cooking Operations and Appendix B of NFPA 96. 
Section 104.12 shall be added to read as follows: 
104.12 Governmental Immunity. The Fire Prevention Division is exercised by the City of Keller of its governmental functions, for the protection of the public peace, health and safety; and neither the City nor agents and representatives of said City (or any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, trustee or any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance) shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons or property as the result of said activity. 
Section 105.1.1; change to read as follows: 
Section 105.1.1 Permits required. Permits required by this code shall be obtained from the fire code official. 
Section 105.3.3; change to read as follows: 
Section 105.3.3 Occupancy Prohibited before Approval. The building or structure shall not be occupied prior to the fire code official issuing a permit when required and conducting associated inspections indicating the applicable provisions of this code have been met. 
Section 105.6.51 shall be added to read as follows: 
105.6.51 Model Rocketry. An operational permit is required for the demonstration and use of model rockets, in accordance with NFPA 1122. 
Section 105.6.7.26 shall be added to read as follows: 
Section 105.7.26 Electronic access control systems. Construction permits are required for the installation or modification of an electronic access control system, as specified in Chapter 10. A separate construction permit is required for the installation or modification of a fire alarm system that may be connected to the access control system. Maintenance performed in accordance with this code is not considered a modification and does not require a permit. 
Section 106.3 shall be amended as follows: 
106.3 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or other entity who commences any work, activity or operation regulated by this code before obtaining the necessary permits shall be fined a minimum of $500 - or double the permit fee, whichever is greater - up to $2,000, and each day work continues shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. 
Section 108.3 Recordkeeping. Add a third paragraph to read as follows: 
All Fire and Life Safety test and inspection records shall be filed via Compliance Center at www.buildingreports.com Sign-up at www.BuildingReports.com/signup Buildings with the following fire protection systems in place shall have test results recorded electronically: Fire Alarm, Fire Sprinkler, Fixed Suppression, Fire Pump, Fire Line Backflow, CO 2 , Fire Extinguishers, and Elevators. 
Section 110.3; change to read as follows: 
Section 110.3 Notice of Violation; citation 
Where the fire code official finds a building, premises, vehicle, storage facility or outdoor area that is in violation of this code, the fire code official is authorized to prepare a written notice of violation describing the conditions deemed unsafe and, where compliance is not immediate, specifying a time for re-inspection. The fire code official is authorized to issue citations alleging violations of this code for prosecution in the Municipal Court. Notice under this section is not a prerequisite to prosecution of violations of this code. 
Section 110.3.2 shall be deleted in its entirety. 
Section 110.3.3 shall be deleted in its entirety. 
Section 110.4 Violation penalties. Shall be amended to read as follows: 
Persons who shall violate a provision of this code, or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements, thereof, or who shall erect, install, alter, repair, or do work in violation of the approved construction documents, or directive, of the fire code official, or of a permit, or a certificate, used under provisions of this code, shall be fined a minimum of $500 - or double the permit fee, whichever is greater - up to $2,000, and each day work continues shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. 
Section 110.4.2 shall be added to read as follows: 
110.4.2 Citations. It is the intent of this division to achieve compliance by the traditional means of inspection, notification, granting of reasonable time to comply and re-inspection. After all reasonable means to gain compliance have failed, or when a condition exists that causes an immediate and/or extreme threat to life, property or safety from fire or explosion, the Fire Chief or his designee, who have the discretionary duty to enforce a code or ordinance may issue a notice to appear (citation) for the violation. Citations shall be issued only by qualified personnel as designated by the Fire Chief. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code or of the International Fire Code a citation may be issued without prior notice and the opportunity to correct the condition or violation if the violation is determined to be an immediate threat to life safety. 
Section 110.4.3 is added to read as follows: 
110.4.3 Compliance with codes. Any person or entity that violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of the provisions of this or other codes as referenced in this ordinance, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties as set forth in the Code of Ordinances of the City. In addition to these penalties the fire code official or his or her designee is authorized to close any business, or shut down any operation when any hazard or condition exists therein that poses a serious and imminent threat to life or property. Any reasonable method may be used to affect closure, including, but not limited to, disconnection of utilities and padlocking of any doors. Any person in control of or occupying any premises ordered closed, or performing or overseeing any operation ordered discontinued, who refuses an order to leave, or to discontinue is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties described herein. 
Section 112.4 shall be amended to read as follows: 
112.4 Failure to comply. Any person, firm, or corporation who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person, firm, or corporation is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be fined not less than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) or more than Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00). 
Section 202. Shall be amended by adding new definitions to the existing list of definitions in Section 202 of the 2018 International Fire Code, to read as follows: 
ADDRESSABLE FIRE DETECTION SYSTEM. Any system capable of providing identification of each individual alarm-initiating device. The identification shall be in plain English and as descriptive as possible to specifically identify the location of the device in alarm. The system shall have the capability of alarm verification. 
ANALOG INTELLIGENT ADDRESSABLE FIRE DETECTION SYSTEM. Any system capable of calculating a change in value by directly measurable quantities (voltage, resistance, etc.) at the sensing point. The physical analog may be conducted at the sensing point or at the main control panel. The system shall be capable of compensating for long-term changes in sensor response while maintaining a constant sensitivity. The compensation shall have a preset point at which a detector maintenance signal shall be transmitted to the control panel. The sensor shall remain capable of detecting and transmitting an alarm while in maintenance alert. 
AMBULATORY CARE FACILITY. Buildings or portions thereof used to provide medical, surgical, psychiatric, nursing, or similar care on a less than 24-hour basis to persons who are rendered incapable of self-preservation by the services provided. This group may include but not be limited to the following: 
- Dialysis centers 
- Procedures involving sedation 
- Sedation dentistry 
- Surgery centers 
- Colonic centers 
- Psychiatric centers 
ATRIUM. An opening connecting three or more stories… {Remaining text unchanged} 
CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY. A change in the purpose or level of activity within a building that involves a change of ownership, change in occupant, or the change in the designated use-type of the building as described in Chapter 3 of this code, and the application of the requirements of this code. The definition shall also apply to usage of the surrounding site and access to and from the building, structure or site, as necessary to achieve the purpose of this code, and to obtain compliance with other codes and ordinances of this jurisdiction. No building or lease space shall be allowed to change use, occupant, ownership or classification types without meeting all the requirements of this code. 
ELECTRICAL CODE. Electrical Code shall mean NFPA 70, the National Electrical Code, as adopted by this jurisdiction. For the purpose of this code, all references to NFPA 70 and/or the ICC Electrical Code shall be assumed to mean the Electrical Code as defined herein. 
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM. A fire alarm system shall include but not limited to the following: 
- Manual pull stations at all required exits. 
- Notification throughout the entire building. 
- Systems installed to monitor a fire sprinkler system shall also be considered a Fire Alarm System 
FIRE AREA. The aggregate floor area enclosed and bounded by fire walls, fire barriers, exterior walls or horizontal assemblies of a building. Areas of the building not provided with surrounding walls shall be included in the fire area if such areas are included within the horizontal projection of the roof or floor above. For purposes of determining automatic sprinkler systems required by Section 903, a fire area shall be determined by the aggregate floor area enclosed and bounded by the exterior walls of a building and/or the horizontal projection of the roof. 
DEFEND IN PLACE. A method of emergency response that engages building components and trained staff to provide occupant safety during an emergency. Emergency response involves remaining in place, relocating within the building, or both, without evacuating the building. 
EMERGENCY ACCESS EASEMENT. An access road or fire lane located on private property dedicated by the owner(s) of the property to provide fire apparatus access. 
FIRE WATCH. A temporary measure intended to ensure continuous and systematic surveillance of a building or portion thereof by one or more qualified individuals or standby personnel when required by the fire code official, for the purposes of identifying and controlling fire hazards, detecting early signs of unwanted fire, raising an alarm of fire and notifying the fire department. 
FIREWORKS. Any composition or device for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect for entertainment purposes by combustion, deflagration, detonation, and/or activated by ignition with a match or other heat producing device that meets the definition of 1.4G fireworks or 1.3G fireworks as set forth herein 
HIGH-PILED COMBUSTIBLE STORAGE: add a second paragraph to read as follows: 
Any building classified as a group S Occupancy or Speculative Building exceeding 6,000 sq. ft. that has a clear height in excess of 14 feet, making it possible to be used for storage in excess of 12 feet, shall be considered to be high-piled storage. When a specific product cannot be identified, a fire protection system and life safety features shall be installed as for Class IV commodities, to the maximum pile height. 
HIGH-RISE BUILDING. A building with an occupied floor located more than 55 feet (16,764 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access. 
REPAIR GARAGE. A building, structure or portion thereof used for servicing or repairing motor vehicles. This occupancy shall also include garages involved in minor repair, modification and servicing of motor vehicles for items such as lube changes, inspections, windshield repair or replacement, shocks, minor part replacement, and other such minor repairs. 
SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY. Real property designed and used for the purpose of renting or leasing individual storage spaces to customers for the purpose of storing and removing personal property on a self-service basis. 
STANDBY PERSONNEL. Qualified fire service personnel, approved by the Fire Chief. When utilized, the number required shall be as directed by the Fire Chief. Charges for utilization shall be as normally calculated by the jurisdiction. 
UPGRADED OR REPLACED FIRE ALARM SYSTEM. A fire alarm system that is upgraded or replaced includes, but is not limited to the following: 
- Replacing one single board or fire alarm control unit component with a newer model 
- Installing a new fire alarm control unit in addition to or in place of an existing one 
- Conversion from a horn system to an emergency voice/alarm communication system 
- Conversion from a conventional system to one that utilizes addressable or analog devices 
The following are not considered an upgrade or replacement: 
- Firmware updates 
- Software updates 
- Replacing boards of the same model with chips utilizing the same or newer firmware 
Section 307 Open Burning, Recreational Fires and Portable Outdoor Fireplaces, Section 307.1 General is amended to read as follows: 
307.1.1 All open burning, including trench burning, land clearing operations, prescribed burns and burning of domestic waste is prohibited by City of Keller Ordinance No. 1807. 
Exception: 
Fires used for Recreation, Ceremony, Cooking, and Warmth. Outdoor burning shall be authorized for fires used solely for recreational or ceremonial purposes, or in the noncommercial preparation of food, or used exclusively for the purpose of supplying warmth during cold weather. The fuel used for recreational burns shall consist of only clean seasoned firewood, natural gas or equivalent, or any clean burning fuel with emissions that are equivalent to or lower than those created from the burning of seasoned firewood. 
Container requirements: 
1.  Fires in approved containers i.e., Chiminea or portable fire pit that are not less than 15 feet (4572 mm) from a structure. 
2.  The minimum required distance from a structure for an in-ground fire pit shall be 25 feet (7620 mm) with a diameter of 3 feet (914 mm) or less with firewood no greater than 2 feet (610 mm) or less in height. 
Section 307.2 shall be amended to read as follows: 
307.2 Permit required. A permit shall be obtained from the fire code official in accordance with Section 105.6 prior to kindling a fire for recreational or ceremonial use. 
Examples of state or local law, or regulations referenced elsewhere in this section may include but not be limited to the following: 
1.  Texas Commission on Environmental Quality guidelines and/or restrictions. 
2.  State, county, or local temporary or permanent bans on open burning. 
3.  Local written policies as established by the Code Official. 
4.  Chapter 382, Texas Clean Air Act. 
Section 307.3 change to read as follows 
307.3 Extinguishment authority. The fire code official is authorized to order the extinguishment by the permit holder, another person responsible or the fire department of open burning that creates or adds to a hazardous or objectionable situation. 
Section 307.4 and 307.4.1 shall be deleted entirely. 
Section 308.1.4 shall be amended to read as follows: 
Section 308.1.4 Open-flame cooking devices. Open-flame cooking devices, charcoal grills and other similar devices used for cooking shall not be located or used on combustible balconies, decks, or within 10 feet (3048 mm) of any combustible construction. 
Exceptions: 
1.  One- and two-family dwellings, except that LP-gas containers are limited to a water capacity not greater than 50 pounds (22.68 kg) [nominal 20 pound (9.08 kg) LP-gas capacity] with an aggregate LP-gas capacity not to exceed 100 pounds (5 containers). 
2.  Where buildings, balconies and decks are protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system, except that LP-gas containers are limited to a water capacity not greater than 50 pounds (22.68 kg) [nominal 20 pound (9.08 kg) LP-gas capacity] with an aggregate LP-gas capacity not to exceed 40 pounds (2 containers). 
3.  LP-gas cooking devices having LP-gas containers with water capacity not greater than 2-½ pounds [nominal 1 pound (0.454 kg) LP-gas capacity]. 
Section 308.1.6.2, Exception 3 shall be amended to read as follows: 
3. Torches or flame-producing devices in accordance with Section 308.1.3. 
Section 308.1.6.3 shall be amended to read as follows. 
308.1.6.3 Sky Lanterns. A person shall not release or cause to be released an unmanned free-floating device containing an open flame or other heat source, such as, but not limited to a sky lantern. 
Section 308 Open Flames is amended by adding Section 308.5 and subsections to read as follows: 
Section 308.5 Open burning 
The use of open flame cooking devices shall be as follows: 
Section 308.5.1. Multifamily structure. 
It shall be a violation of this code for any person to use, allow or permit the use of a fixed or portable grill or cooking device that uses an open flame or electrical heating element within ten (10) feet of any multi-family structure, under any covered portion of a multi-family structure, under any covered parking structure or portion thereof. 
Section 308.5.2 Sign. 
It shall be a violation of this code for any person to own or manage any multi-family structure without installing and maintaining on each balcony, patio, landing or similar structure of each dwelling unit an approved sign readily visible to the occupants that prohibits the use of any grill, hibachi, smoker, electrical heating element, or similar apparatus within ten (10) feet of all apartment structures. Signs shall be at least thirty (30) square inches with the word "PROHIBITED" in one (1) inch letter, and the remaining message in at least one-fourth (1/4) inch letter, red on white, and provide the following warning: 
-PROHIBITED- THE USE OF ANY GRILL, HIBACHI, OR SMOKER IN OR WITHIN TEN FEET OF ALL APARTMENT STRUCTURES, PATIOS AND CARPORTS. KELLER FIRE CODE - FINE UP TO $2000.00 
Section 311.5; change to read as follows: 
Section 311.5 Placards. The fire code official is authorized to require marking of any vacant or abandoned buildings or structures determined to be unsafe pursuant to Section 110 of this code relating to structural or interior hazards, as required by Section 311.5.1 through 311.5.5. 
Section 403.5; change Section 403.5 to read as follows: 
Section 403.5 Group E Occupancies. An approved fire safety and evacuation plan in accordance with Section 404 shall be prepared and maintained for Group E occupancies and for buildings containing both a Group E occupancy and an atrium. A diagram depicting two evacuation routes shall be posted in a conspicuous location in each classroom. Group E occupancies shall also comply with Sections 403.5.1 through 403.5.3. 
Section 404.2.2; add Number 4.10 to read as follows: 
Section 4.10 Fire extinguishing system controls. 
Section 405.4; change Section 405.4 to read as follows: 
Section 405.4 Time. The fire code official may require an evacuation drill at any time. Drills shall be held at unexpected times and under varying conditions to simulate the unusual conditions that occur in case of fire. 
Section 501.4; change to read as follows: 
Section 501.4 Timing of Installation. When fire apparatus access roads or a water supply for fire protection is required to be installed for any structure or development, they shall be installed, tested, and approved prior to the time of which construction has progressed beyond completion of the foundation of any structure and before vertical construction with combustible material has begun. 
Section 503.1.1 shall be amended to add the following paragraph: 
Except for one- or two-family dwellings, the path of measurement shall be along a minimum of a ten foot (10') wide unobstructed level pathway around the external walls of the structure. 
Section 503.2.1 delete the exception and amended to read as follows: 
503.2.1 Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 24 feet (7,315 mm), exclusive of shoulders, except for approved security gates in accordance with Section 503.6, and an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than sixteen (16) feet. 
The requirements of Section D105 shall remain unchanged. 
Section 503.2.2; change to read as follows: 
Section 503.2.2 Authority. The fire code official shall have the authority to require an increase in the minimum access widths and vertical clearances where they are inadequate for fire or rescue operations. 
Section 503.2.3; change Section 503.2.3 to read as follows: 
503.2.3 Surface. Construction of all fire lanes shall be in accordance with the Keller Unified Development Code Design and Constructions Standards and this section. 
Fire lanes shall be constructed of a concrete surface capable of supporting the imposed loads of a 2-axle, 85,000 lb. fire apparatus. The design shall be based on the geotechnical investigation of the site, but shall meet the stated minimums. 
Whenever forty percent (40%) of existing, non-conforming fire lanes are replaced within a twelve month period, the entire fire lane shall be replaced according to current standards. 
All fire lanes shall be maintained and kept in a good state of repair at all times by the owner and the City of Keller shall not be responsible for the maintenance thereof. It shall further be the responsibility of the owner to insure that all fire lane markings required by Section 503.3 be kept so that they are easily distinguishable by the public. 
Appendix D; Change Appendix D102.1 to read as follows: 
D102.1 Access and Loading. Facilities, buildings, or portions of buildings, hereafter, constructed shall be accessible to fire department apparatus by way of an approved fire apparatus access road with an asphalt, concrete, or other approved driving surface capable of supporting the imposed load of apparatus weighing up to 85,000 pounds. Buildings 6,000 square feet or larger shall have fire apparatus roads on all four sides of the building to allow for adequate firefighting capabilities. 
Appendix D Section 103 Minimum Specifications. Change D103.2 to read as follows: 
D103.2 Grade. Fire apparatus access roads shall not exceed 6 percent in grade. 
Section 503.3 shall be amended to read as follows: 
503.3 Marking. Striping, signs, or other markings, when approved by the fire code official, shall be provided for fire apparatus access roads to identify such roads or prohibit the obstruction thereof. Striping, signs and other markings shall be maintained in a clean and legible condition at all times and shall be replaced or repaired when necessary to provide adequate visibility. Speed-reducing devices which are installed across Fire Department access roads and fire lanes shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of these rules and regulations. The speed-reducing devices shall be the speed cushion type. 
1.  Striping - Fire apparatus access roads shall be continuously marked by painted lines of red traffic paint six inches (6") in width to show the boundaries of the lane. The words "NO PARKING FIRE LANE- TOW AWAY" or "FIRE LANE NO PARKING - TOW AWAY" shall appear in four inch (4") white letters at 25 foot (25') intervals on the red border markings along both sides of the fire lanes. Where a curb is available, the striping shall be on both the horizontal and vertical faces of the curb. The red paint shall meet the Texas Department of Highway and Public Transportation, (TXDOT), specification number TTP-115, chlorinated rubber paint or approved equal. 
2.  Signs - Signs shall read "NO PARKING FIRE LANE - TOW AWAY" or "FIRE LANE NO PARKING TOW AWAY" and shall be twelve inches (12") wide and eighteen inches (18") high. Signs shall be painted on a white background with letters and borders in red, using not less than two-inch (2") lettering. Signs shall be permanently affixed to a stationary post and the bottom of the sign shall be six feet, six inches (6' 6") above finished grade. Signs shall be spaced not more than fifty feet (50') apart. Signs may be installed on permanent buildings or walls or as approved by the Fire Code Official. 
Section 503.2.4 shall be amended as follows: 
503.2.4 Turning radius. The required turning radius of a fire apparatus access road shall be in accordance with this section. 
Any such fire lane shall either connect both ends to a dedicated public street or fire lane or be provided with an approved turnaround having a minimum outer radius of fifty-four feet (54') and an inside radius of thirty feet (30'). 
Fire lane dimensions established by Appendix D, or other sections of this Code, shall be superseded by the criteria established by this section. 
Section 503.2.7 shall be amended as follows: 
503.2.7 Grade. The grade of the fire apparatus access road shall be within the limits established by the fire code official. In no case shall the grades along a fire apparatus access road exceed the following: 
Along the Fire Apparatus Access Road - 6% 
Cross Slope - 5% 
Exception. The code official shall have the authority to adjust the grade along the fire lane when necessary for fire or rescue operations or based upon the hazard being protected or general topography of the lot. In no case shall the grade exceed nine percent (9%). Written approval from the fire code official shall be required. 
Section 503.2.8 shall be amended to read as follows: 
503.2.8 Angles of approach and departure. The angles of approach and departure for a fire apparatus access road shall be within the limits established by the fire code official. In no case shall the grades exceed the following: 
1.  Maximum Angle of Approach - 5% 
2.  Maximum Angle of Departure - 5% 
Exception. The code official shall have the authority to adjust the grade along the fire lane when necessary for fire or rescue operations or based upon the hazard being protected or general topography of the lot. Written approval from the fire code official shall be required. 
Section 503.4 shall be amended to read as follows: 
503.4 Obstruction of fire apparatus access roads. Fire apparatus access roads shall not be obstructed in any manner, including the parking of vehicles. The minimum widths and clearances established in Section 503.2.1 through 503.2.8 and any area marked as a fire lane as described in Section 503.3 shall be maintained clear of obstructions at all times. Unattended vehicles or other obstructions in the fire lane may be removed or towed at the expense of the registered owner. 
Section 503.6 shall be amended to read as follows: 
503.6. Security Gates. When mechanically operated gates or barriers are provided, or required, across a fire apparatus access road, an approved emergency vehicle traffic preemption device shall be provided compatible with the fire department's apparatus. The installation of security gates across a fire apparatus access road shall be approved by the Fire Marshal. Where security gates are installed, they shall have an approved means of emergency operation. The security gates and the emergency operation shall be maintained operational at all times. Electric gate operators, where provided, shall be listed in accordance with UL 325. Gates intended for automatic operation shall be designed, constructed and installed to comply with the requirements of ASTM F 2200. 
Section 503.6.1.1 and subsections shall be added to read as follows: 
503.6.1.1 Distance from street, sidewalk, roadway or right-of-way. Gates shall be located on private property a minimum of 30 feet from the property line being crossed by the drive or 50 feet from the nearest edge of roadway, whichever is greater. 
Provisions shall be made to allow for egress from the property and 100' for stacking of vehicles at the entry, and for turnaround. 
Section 503.6.1.2 Electronic operation. All main gates shall be electrically operated. A secondary/emergency power source must be available and brought online automatically upon loss of primary power to the access gates. The secondary/emergency power source shall automatically open the gates. A manual disconnect is required in the event of complete power failure. The manual disconnect shall be placed in a weather tight box, with a piano-type hinge on one side and a Knox Box PL-1 padlock and hasp on the other side. 
Section 503.6.1.3 Open with key operated switch. All main gates shall open with the fire department Knox K.S. #2 key operated switch. The Knox key-operated switch shall be provided and installed by the owner. The key-operated switch shall be located 10 feet from the gate, on the left side of the approach, placed on a pedestal with the key switch facing the fire lane or road. The key switch shall be no closer than 4 feet 6 inches, or no farther than 5 feet 5 inches, from the ground. 
Section 503.6.1.4 Access codes. It shall be the owner's responsibility to program the security gate and provide the fire department with the access code and to maintain Keller Fire-Rescue's accessibility through the assigned access code. 
Section 503.6.1.5 Medians. Where a security gate is installed with a median, the entry side of the gate shall have a minimum opening of 30 feet (measured back of curb to back of curb. 
Section 503.6.1.6 Optically controlled emergency entry devices. All electronic security gates, commercial properties and residential subdivisions, shall be equipped with an optically controlled emergency override device (Opticom or equivalent) that is compatible with the optical activation device installed on fire apparatus. The devices shall be placed in both directions of travel to provide for the opening of gates as the fire apparatus approaches and exits the property. Permits for installation are required, and the Fire Marshal shall test and approve the installation upon completion, to determine compliance. 
Section 505.1; change to read as follows: 
Section 505.1 Address Identification. New and existing buildings shall be provided with approved address identification. The address identification shall be legible and placed in a position that is visible from the street or road fronting the property. 
1)  Address identification characters shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical letters. Numbers shall not be spelled out. Each building number and letter shall be not less than six (6) inches high with a minimum one (1) inch stroke width. Each suite number and letter shall be not less than four (4) inches high with a minimum one-half (1/2) inch stroke width. Where required by the fire code official, address numbers shall be provided in additional approved locations to facilitate emergency response. 
2)  Where access is by means of a private road, buildings do not immediately front a street, and/or cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or other sign with approved 6 inch (152.4 mm) height suite/apartment numerals of a color contrasting with the background of the building or other approved means shall be used to identify the structure. Numerals or addresses shall be posted on a minimum 20 inch (508 mm) by 30 inch (762 mm) background on border. Address shall be maintained. 
Exception: 
R-3 Single Family occupancies shall have approved numerals of a minimum four (4) inches high with a minimum one-half (1/2) inch stroke width and a color contrasting with the background clearly visible and legible from the street fronting the property and rear alleyway where such alleyway exists. 
Section 507.4; change to read as follows: 
Section 507.4 Water Supply Test Data and Information. The water supply test used for hydraulic calculation of fire protection systems shall be conducted in accordance with NFPA 291 "Recommended Practice for Fire Flow Testing and Marking of Hydrants" and within six-months of sprinkler plan submittal. Flow tests shall be scheduled through Public Works (SCADA). Water supply tests shall be conducted by the requesting party, all water valves will be operated by City of Keller water department personnel. The flow test shall be conducted in the presence of City of Keller Water Department personnel, the Flow Data Sheet shall be signed by Water Department staff member as a witness to the test. Staff is not confirming the data acquired, only that the test was performed using City of Keller fire hydrants. A hard copy of the Flow Data Sheet shall accompany your plan submittal. The exact location of the static/residual hydrant and the flow hydrant shall be indicated on the design drawings. The report must indicate the dominant water tank level at the time of the test and the maximum and minimum operating levels of the tank, as well, or identify applicable water supply fluctuation. The licensed contractor must then design the fire protection system based on this fluctuation information, as per the applicable referenced NFPA standard. Reference Section 903.3.5 for additional design requirements. Test data used for plan review submittal shall not be older than six (6) months from date of submittal. 
Section 507.5 Fire hydrant systems is amended and Sections added to read as follows: 
Section 507.5 Fire hydrant systems. Fire hydrant systems shall comply with Section 507.5.1 through 507.5.7. 
Section 507.5.1 Where required is amended by deleting the Section 507.5.1 Where required and replacing it with Section 507.5.1 Where required and subsections, to read as follows: 
Section 507.5.1 Where required. When a portion of the facility or building hereafter constructed or moved into, or within the jurisdiction, is more than 500 feet from a hydrant on the fire apparatus access road, as measured by an approved route around the exterior of the facility or building, on-site fire hydrants and mains shall be provided where required by the Fire Marshal. 
Exception: For Group R-3 and Group U occupancies, the distance requirement shall be 300 feet. 
Exception 2 is deleted. 
Section 507.5.1.2 Location. The location of fire hydrants on private property or along fire access roads shall be approved by the Fire Marshal. 
Section 507.5.1.2 Fire system connections to read as follows: 
Section 507.5.1.2 Fire department system connections. Fire hydrants shall be located within a 100-foot hose lay of the Fire Department Connection (FDC). Fire Department Connections when remotely located, shall have a 42" by 42" concrete pad below each connection. 
Section 507.5.1.3 Requirements when not on public street. Fire hydrants not installed on a public street shall be looped to provide a water supply from 2 directions. 
Section 507.5.4; change to read as follows: 
507.5.4 Obstruction. Unobstructed access to fire hydrants shall be maintained at all times. Posts, fences, vehicles, growth, trash, storage, and other materials or objects shall not be placed or kept near hydrants, fire department inlet connections or protection systems control valves in a manner that would prevent such equipment or fire hydrants from being immediately discernable. The fire department shall not be deterred or hindered from gaining immediate access to fire protection equipment or fire hydrants. 
Section 509.1.2; add new Section 509.1.2 to read as follows: 
Section 509.1.2 Sign Requirements. Unless more stringent requirements apply, lettering for signs required by this section shall have a minimum height of 2 inches (50.8 mm) when located inside a building and 4 inches (101.6 mm) when located outside, or as approved by the fire code official. The letters shall be of a color that contrasts with the background. 
Section 603.3.2 and 603.3.2.1; change to read as follows: 
603.3.1 Fuel oil storage in outside, aboveground tanks. In addition to the required Special Use Permit (SUP) where connected to a fuel-oil piping system, the maximum amount of fuel oil storage allowed outside above ground without additional protection shall be 660 gallons (2498 L). The storage of fuel oil above ground in quantities exceeding 660 gallons (2498 L) shall comply with NFPA 31 and Chapter 57. 
603.3.2 Fuel oil storage inside buildings. Fuel oil storage inside buildings shall comply with Sections 603.3.2.1 through 603.3.2.5 and Chapter 57. 
603.3.2.1 Quantity limits. One or more fuel oil storage tanks containing Class II or III combustible liquid shall be permitted in a building. The aggregate capacity of all tanks shall not exceed the following: 
1.  660 gallons (2498 L) in unsprinklered buildings, where stored in a tank complying with UL 80, UL 142, or UL 2085 for Class III liquids, and also listed as a double-wall/secondary containment tank for Class II liquids. 
2.  1320 gallons (4996 L) in buildings equipped with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, where stored in a tank with UL 142, or UL 2085 as a double-wall/secondary containment tank. 
3.  3000 gallons (11356 L) where stored in protected above-ground tanks complying with UL 2085 and Section 5704.2.9.7 and the room is protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. 
Section 607.2; change to read as follows: 
607.2 Where Required. A Type I hood shall be installed at or above all commercial cooking appliances and domestic cooking appliances used for commercial purposes that produce grease vapors, including but not limited to cooking equipment used in fixed, mobile, or temporary concessions, such as trucks, buses, trailers, pavilions, or any form of roofed enclosure, as required by the fire code official. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Tents, as provided for in Chapter 31 shall have a flame rating tag sewn into the material which indicates compliance with NFPA 701 Standard Methods of Fire Tests for Flame Propagation of Textiles and Films. 
2.  {No change to existing Exception.} 
Additionally, fuel gas and power provided for such cooking appliances shall be interlocked with the extinguishing system, as required by Section 904.12.2. Fuel gas containers and piping/hose shall be properly maintained in good working order and in accordance with all applicable regulations. 
Section 704.1; now 704.1.1 change to read as follows: 
704.1.1 Enclosure. Interior vertical shafts including, but not limited to, stairways, elevator hoist-ways, service and utility shafts, that connect two or more stories of a building shall be enclosed or protected in accordance with the codes in effect at the time of construction but, regardless of when constructed, not less than as required in Chapter 11. New floor openings in existing buildings shall comply with the International Building Code. 
Section 807.2; change to read as follows: 
807.2 Combustible Decorative Materials. In occupancies in Groups A, E, I, and R-1, and dormitories in Group R-2, curtains, draperies, fabric hangings and other similar combustible decorative materials suspended from walls or ceilings shall comply with Section 807.3 and shall not exceed 10 percent of the specific wall area to which they are attached. 
Section 807.5.2.2 and 807.5.2.3; change to read as follows: 
807.5.2.2 Artwork in Corridors. Artwork and teaching materials shall be limited on the walls of corridors to not more than 50 percent of the wall area. Such materials shall not be continuous from floor to ceiling or wall to wall. Curtains, draperies, wall hangings, and other decorative material suspended from the walls or ceilings shall meet the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701 in accordance with Section 807 or be noncombustible. 
807.5.2.3 Artwork in Classrooms. Artwork and teaching materials shall be limited on walls of classrooms to not more than 50 percent of the specific wall area to which they are attached. Curtains, draperies, wall hangings and other decorative material suspended from the walls or ceilings shall meet the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701 in accordance with Section 807 or be noncombustible. 
Section 901 General is amended by changing Section 901.3 and 901.5 as shown in the International Fire Code to read as follows: 
Section 901.3.1 Permit required. Permits shall be required as set forth in Section 105.6 and 105.7 and as required by this section. A permit shall be required for the installation, reconsideration, modification, moving or alteration of any life safety system including but not limited to fire sprinkler systems, fire alarm systems, fixed extinguishing systems, access control systems and carbon dioxide sensing and monitoring systems. Work shall not begin on any system without first obtaining a permit. Any person, firm, or corporation who that violates this requirement shall be liable for a fine that is two-times the cost of the Permit or Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00), whichever is greater. 
Exemption: Emergency repairs, due to system malfunctions or discharging, may begin, providing a permit is obtained as soon as possible, but no later than the next business day. 
Section 901.3.2 Permit application. The permit application shall be submitted to the office of the Fire Marshal, through the City of Keller Permitting Department and must have attached to the application detailed construction plans and a copy of the applicant's state license. The following shall be included with the plan submission: a CD, or other media, as approved by the Fire Marshal, containing state license, plan drawings, calculations, and spec sheets, in PDF format. 
Section 901.3.3 Permit fee. The permit fee for the construction, repair, alteration, or relocation of a fixed system shall be in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the City of Keller. 
Section 901.5 Installation acceptance testing. Fire detection and alarm systems, fire extinguishing systems, fire hydrant systems, fire standpipe systems, fire pump systems, private fire service mains, and all other fire protection systems, and appurtenances thereto, shall be subject to acceptance tests, as contained in the installation standards and as approved by the fire code official. The fire code official shall be notified before any required acceptance testing. No system shall be approved until a complete inspection of materials and a functional test has been completed and witnessed by the Fire Marshal. The installer/technician must be present for all inspections and testing. 
Section 901.6.1; add Section 901.6.1.1 to read as follows: 
901.6.1.1 Standpipe Testing. Building owners/managers must maintain and test standpipe systems as per NFPA 25 requirements. The following additional requirements shall be applied to the testing that is required every 5 years: 
1.  The piping between the Fire Department Connection (FDC) and the standpipe shall be backflushed or inspected by approved camera when foreign material is present or when caps are missing, and also hydrostatically tested for all FDC's on any type of standpipe system. Hydrostatic testing shall also be conducted in accordance with NFPA 25 requirements for the different types of standpipe systems. 
2.  For any manual (dry or wet) standpipe system not having an automatic water supply capable of flowing water through the standpipe, the tester shall connect hose from a fire hydrant or portable pumping system (as approved by the fire code official) to each FDC, and flow water through the standpipe system to the roof outlet to verify that each inlet connection functions properly. Confirm that there are no open hose valves prior to introducing water into a dry standpipe. There is no required pressure criteria at the outlet. Verify that check valves function properly and that there are no closed control valves on the system. 
3.  Any pressure relief, reducing, or control valves shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of NFPA 25. All hose valves shall be exercised. 
4.  If the FDC is not already provided with approved caps, the contractor shall install such caps for all FDC's as required by the fire code official. 
5.  Upon successful completion of standpipe test, place a blue tag (as per Texas Administrative Code, Fire Sprinkler Rules for Inspection, Test and Maintenance Service (ITM) Tag) at the bottom of each standpipe riser in the building. The tag shall be check-marked as "Fifth Year" for Type of ITM, and the note on the back of the tag shall read "5 Year Standpipe Test" at a minimum. 
6.  The procedures required by Texas Administrative Code Fire Sprinkler Rules with regard to Yellow Tags and Red Tags or any deficiencies noted during the testing, including the required notification of the local Authority Having Jurisdiction (fire code official) shall be followed. 
7.  Additionally, records of the testing shall be maintained by the owner and contractor, if applicable, as required by the State Rules mentioned above and NFPA 25. 
8.  Standpipe system tests where water will be flowed external to the building shall not be conducted during freezing conditions or during the day prior to expected night time freezing conditions. 
9.  Contact the fire code official for requests to remove existing fire hose from Class II and III standpipe systems where employees are not trained in the utilization of this firefighting equipment. All standpipe hose valves must remain in place and be provided with an approved cap and chain when approval is given to remove hose by the fire code official. 
Section 901.6.4; add Section 901.6.4 to read as follows: 
901.6.4 False Alarms and Nuisance Alarms. False alarms and nuisance alarms shall not be given, signaled or transmitted or caused or permitted to be given, signaled or transmitted in any manner. 
Section 901.7; shall be amended to read as follows: 
901.7 Systems out of service. Where a required fire protection system is out of service or in the event of an excessive number of activations, the fire department and the fire code official shall be notified immediately and, where required by the fire code official, the building shall either be evacuated or an approved fire watch shall be provided for all occupants left unprotected by the shut down until the fire protection system has been returned to service. Fire Watch is the responsibility of the property owner. The owner shall be required to hire a private security firm to supply two personnel for each of three 8 hour shifts or during the occupied hours of the business, to monitor for fire conditions and have the means necessary for contacting 911 immediately. The fire watch shall remain in effect until the life safety systems are back in service. Should the fire watch option be declined, the entire building shall be evacuated and closed until all repairs have been made, and a re-inspection has been performed the fire code official. 
Section 901.8.2; change to read as follows: 
901.8.2 Removal of Occupant-use Hose Lines. The fire code official is authorized to permit the removal of occupant-use hose lines and hose valves where all of the following conditions exist: 
1.  The hose line(s) would not be utilized by trained personnel or the fire department. 
2.  If the occupant-use hose lines are removed, but the hose valves are required to remain as per the fire code official, such shall be compatible with local fire department fittings. 
Add Sections 901.11 Certification, Section 901.12 Failure of system, and Section 901.13 Message alarms. To read as follows: 
Section 901.11 Certification. A notarized certification indicating all work has been performed as permitted and that the work meets code requirements must be submitted at final inspection. 
Section 901.12 Failure of system. All fire alarm systems shall be designed and constructed so the failure, malfunction, or removal of any single device, or failure of the wiring to a device does not interfere with the operation of other devices in the system. 
Section 901.13 Message alarms. Pre-recorded or voice message fire alarms shall not be approved unless accompanied by a fire alarm signal of audio-visual devices that meet the minimum standards of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). 
Section 903.1.1; change to read as follows: 
903.1.1 Alternative Protection. Alternative automatic fire-extinguishing systems complying with Section 904 shall be permitted in addition to automatic sprinkler protection where recognized by the applicable standard or as approved by the fire code official. 
Section 903 Automatic Sprinkler Systems is amended as follows: 
Section 903.1.2 is amended by adding subsection 903.1.2 and 903.1.3 to read as follows: 
903.1.2 Residential sprinklers. Unless specifically allowed by this Code, residential sprinkler systems installed in accordance with NFPA 13D or NFPA 13R shall not be granted exemptions or reductions, commonly known as "trade-offs" permitted by other requirements of this Code. Additionally, residential sprinkler systems installed in accordance with NFPA 13R shall include attic protection. 
903.1.3 No CPVC Piping. No fire sprinkler system shall be installed using CPVC piping. 
Exception: CPVC is allowed in private residences and townhomes. 
Section 903.2; add paragraph to read as follows: 
Automatic Sprinklers shall not be installed in elevator machine rooms, elevator machine spaces, and elevator hoistways, other than pits where such sprinklers would not necessitate shunt trip requirements under any circumstances. Storage shall not be allowed within the elevator machine room. Signage shall be provided at the entry doors to the elevator machine room indicating "ELEVATOR MACHINERY - NO STORAGE ALLOWED." 
Section 903.2 Where required. Delete the exception and amend as follows: 
Section 903.2.1.1 Group A-1, Section 903.2.1.3 Group A-3, and Section 903.2.1.4 Group A-4 are amended by deleting the number "12,000" in number one of each section and replacing it with the number "6,000". The sections are also amended by adding the following exception: 
"Exception: Open parking garages in compliance with Section 406.3 of the International Building Code, provided fire department standpipes and connections are installed in such a way that no portion of the garage is more than 100 feet, unobstructed hose lay from the connection". 
Section 903.2.8 Group R is amended to read as follows: 
Section 903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a Group R fire area. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings with a Group R-2 occupancy where the fire area is 2 stories in height, including basements, or where the building has more than 3 units. Any Group R-2 occupancy two (2) or more stories in height shall be required to have a sprinkler system meeting the requirements of NFPA Standard 13. 
Section 903.2.9.2 Bulk storage of tires, Section is amended by deleting that section and replacing it with a new Section 903.2.9.2, to read as follows: 
Section 903.2.9.2 Bulk storage of tires. Buildings and structures where the area for the storage of tires exceeds 10,000 cubic feet shall be equipped throughout with an automatic fire sprinkler system meeting the requirements of NFPA Standard 13. 
Section 903.2.9; add Section 903.2.9.3 to read as follows: 
903.2.9.3 Self-Service Storage Facility. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all self-service storage facilities. 
Section 903.2.11; change 903.2.11.3 and add 903.2.11.7, 903.2.11.8, and 903.2.11.9 as follows: 
903.2.11.3 Buildings 35 feet or more in height. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout buildings that have one or more stories, other than penthouses in compliance with Section 1510 of the International Building Code, located 35 feet (10,668 mm) or more above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access, measured to the finished floor. 
Exceptions: 
Open parking structures in compliance with Section 406.5 of the International Building Code, having no other occupancies above the subject garage. 
903.2.11.7 High-Piled Combustible Storage. For any building with a clear height exceeding 12 feet (4572 mm), see Chapter 32 to determine if those provisions apply. 
903.2.11.8 Spray Booths and Rooms. New and existing spray booths and spraying rooms shall be protected by an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system. 
903.2.11.9 Buildings 6,000 square feet or greater, under roof, an automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all buildings and any portion of a building that meets any one of the following criteria listed below: 
(1)  A building area 6,000 sq. feet or greater 
(2)  A tenant space 6,000 sq. feet or greater 
(3)  An existing building that is enlarged to 6,000 sq. feet or greater 
(4)  An tenant space within an existing building that is enlarged to be 6,000 sq. feet or greater 
For the purpose of this provision, firewalls and fire barriers shall not define separate buildings. 
Exception: Open parking garages in compliance with Section 406.3 of the International Building Code, provided fire department standpipes and connections are installed in such a way that no portion of the garage is more than 100 feet, unobstructed hose lay from the connection. 
Section 903.3.1.1.1; change to read as follows: 
903.3.1.1.1 Exempt Locations. When approved by the fire code official, automatic sprinklers shall not be required in the following rooms or areas where such...{text unchanged}… because it is damp, of fire-resistance-rated construction or contains electrical equipment. 
1.  Any room where the application of water, or flame and water, constitutes a serious life or fire hazard. 
2.  Any room or space where sprinklers are considered undesirable because of the nature of the contents, when approved by the code official. 
3.  Generator and transformer rooms, under the direct control of a public utility, separated from the remainder of the building by walls and floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies having a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours. 
4.  {Delete} 
5.  Elevator machine rooms, machinery spaces, and hoistways, other than pits where such sprinklers would not necessitate shunt trip requirements under any circumstances. 
6.  {Delete} 
Section 903.3.1.2.3; delete section and replace as follows: 
Section 903.3.1.2.3 Attached Garages and attics. Sprinkler protection is required in attached garages, and the following attic spaces: 
1.  Attics that are used, or intended for living purposes, or storage shall be protected by an automatic sprinkler system. 
2.  Where fuel-fired equipment is installed in an unsprinklered attic, not fewer than one quick-response intermediate temperature sprinkler shall be installed above the equipment. 
3.  Attic spaces of buildings that are two, or more, stories in height above grade plane, or above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access. 
4.  Group R-4, Condition 2 occupancy attics not required by item 1 or 3 to have sprinklers, shall comply with one of the following: 
4.1. Provide automatic sprinkler system protection 
4.2. Provide a heat detection system throughout the attic that is arranged to activate the building fire alarm system. 
4.3. Construct the attic using non-combustible materials. 
4.4. Construct the attic using fire-retardant-treated wood, complying with Section 2303.2 of the International Building Code. 
4.5 Fill the attic with non-combustible insulation. 
Section 903.3.1.3; change to read as follows: 
903.3.1.3 NFPA 13D Sprinkler Systems. Automatic sprinkler systems installed in one- and two-family dwellings; Group R-3; Group R-4 Condition 1 and townhouses shall be permitted to be installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13D or in accordance with state law. 
Section 903.3.1.4; add to read as follows: 
903.3.1.4 Freeze protection. Freeze protection systems for automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be in accordance with the requirements of the applicable referenced NFPA standard and this section. 
Section 903.3.1.4.1 Attics. Only dry-pipe, pre-action, or listed antifreeze automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be allowed to protect attic spaces. 
Exception: Wet-pipe fire sprinkler systems shall be allowed to protect non-ventilated attic spaces where: 
1.  The attic sprinklers are supplied by a separate floor control valve assembly to allow ease of draining the attic system without impairing sprinklers throughout the rest of the building, and 
2.  Adequate heat shall be provided for freeze protection as per the applicable referenced NFPA standard, and 
3.  The attic space is a part of the building's thermal, or heat, envelope, such that insulation is provided at the roof deck, rather than at the ceiling level. 
Section 903.3.1.4.2 Heat trace/insulation. Heat trace/insulation shall only be allowed where approved by the fire code official for small sections of large diameter water-filled pipe. 
Section 903.3.5; add a second paragraph to read as follows: 
Water supply as required for such systems shall be provided in conformance with the supply requirements of the respective standards; however, every water-based fire protection system shall be designed with a 10 psi safety factor. Reference Section 507.4 for additional design requirements. 
Section 903.3.7 Fire Department Connections. Is amended by deleting that section and adding the following section, to read as follows: 
Section 903.3.7 Fire Department Connections. The location of Fire Department Connections shall be approved by the fire code official. Locking caps, of an approved style or vendor may be required by the fire code official. Locking caps shall be installed as replacements for lost or damaged caps when deemed necessary by the fire code official to address tampering problems at existing facilities. 
Section 903.4; Amend Section 903.4 and add a second paragraph after the exceptions to read as follows: 
Section 903.4 Sprinkler system supervision and alarms. Valves controlling the water supply for automatic sprinkler systems, pumps, tanks, water levels and temperatures, critical air pressures and waterflow switches on all sprinkler systems, new and existing, shall be electrically supervised by a listed fire alarm control unit. 
Add second paragraph after the exceptions to read as follows: Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for fire department hose connection valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the central station upon tampering. 
Section 903.4.2; add second paragraph to read as follows: 
The alarm device required on the exterior of the building shall be a weatherproof horn/strobe notification appliance with a minimum 75 candela strobe rating, installed as close as practicable to the fire department connection. 
Section 903.4; add a second paragraph after the exceptions to read as follows: 
Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for fire department hose connection valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the central station upon tampering. 
Section 903.4.2; add second paragraph to read as follows: 
The alarm device required on the exterior of the building shall be a weatherproof horn/strobe notification appliance with a minimum 75 candela strobe rating, installed as close as practicable to the fire department connection. Also required is a water-motor activated gong. 
Section 903.7 shall be added to read as follows: 
Section 903.7 Automatic Sprinkler System Room Access. Sprinkler system risers providing protection for multi-family and commercial buildings must be located in a ground floor room directly accessible from the exterior of the building. The door shall be labeled as "SPRINKLER RISER ROOM." The minimum size of the room shall be 36 sq. ft., with the minimum dimension being 6 ft. The outside edge of the Riser stub into the building shall be a minimum of eighteen inches (18") from the wall and riser piping, and once stacked shall be a minimum of eighteen inches (18") from the outside edge of the piping to the inside edge of the finished wall. When approved by the fire code official, smaller rooms may be permitted. 
Section 903.8 Installation schedule is amended by adding 903.8 Installation schedule, to read as follows: 
Section 903.8 Installation schedule. Approved fire sprinkler systems shall be operational in a building under construction when: 
1.  The building is sufficiently constructed to the point that the exterior sheathing and roof have been installed; or 
2.  At the start of combustible interior construction; or 
3.  When there is an accumulation of combustible material within the building including, but not limited to, building supplies, rubbish, and furniture, or 
4.  When the building goes under conditioned atmosphere. 
Section 905.2; change to read as follows: 
905.2 Installation Standard. Standpipe systems shall be installed in accordance with this section and NFPA 14. Manual dry standpipe systems shall be supervised with a minimum of 10 psig and a maximum of 40 psig air pressure with a high/low alarm. 
Section 905.3; add Section 905.3.9 and exception to read as follows: 
905.3.9 Buildings. In buildings exceeding 10,000 square feet in area per story and where any portion of the building's interior area is more than 200 feet (60960 mm) of travel, vertically and horizontally, from the nearest point of fire department vehicle access, Class I automatic wet or manual wet standpipes shall be provided. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Automatic dry, semi-automatic dry, and manual dry standpipes are allowed as provided for in NFPA 14, where approved by the fire code official. 
2.  R-2 occupancies of four stories or less in height having no interior corridors. 
Section 905.4, change Item 1, 3, and 5, and add Item 7 to read as follows: 
1.  In every required exit stairway, a hose connection shall be provided for each story above and below grade plane. Hose connections shall be located at every landing, on each story, unless otherwise approved by the fire code official. 
2.  {No change.} 
3.  In every exit passageway, at the entrance from the exit passageway to other areas of a building. 
Exception: Where floor areas adjacent to an exit passageway are reachable from an exit stairway hose connection by a {remainder of text unchanged.} 
4.  {No change.} 
5.  Where the roof has a slope less than four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33.3-percent slope), each standpipe shall be provided with a two-way hose connection located to serve the roof or at the highest landing of an exit stairway with stair access to the roof provided in accordance with Section 1011.12. 
6.  {No change.} 
7.  When required by this Chapter, standpipe connections shall be placed adjacent to all required exits to the structure and at two hundred feet (200') intervals along corridors thereafter, or as otherwise approved by the fire code official. 
Section 905.9; add a second paragraph after the exceptions to read as follows: 
Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for fire department hose connection valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the central station upon tampering. 
Section 907.1; add Section 907.1.4 and 907.1.4.1 to read as follows: 
907.1.4 Design Standards. All alarm systems new or replacement shall be addressable. Alarm systems serving more than 20 smoke detectors shall be analog addressable. A system employing a DACT shall employ one telephone land line as the primary; VOIP is not an approved communication method. In addition, one of the following transmission means shall be employed as the back-up line: 
-One-way private radio alarm system 
-Two-way RF multiplex system 
-Transmission means complying with NFPA 72 
Exception: Existing systems need not comply unless the total building remodel or expansion initiated after the effective date of this code, as adopted, exceeds 30% of the building. When cumulative building remodel or expansion exceeds 50% of the building must comply within 18 months of permit application. 
Section 907.2; change, delete the second paragraph and replace with a paragraph to read as follows: 
907.2 Where required in buildings and structures. An approved fire alarm system installed in accordance with the provisions of this code and NFPA 72 shall be provided in new buildings in accordance with Sections 907.2.1 through 907.2.23 and provide occupant notification in accordance with Section 907.5, unless other requirements are provided by another section of this code. 
An approved fire alarm system shall be installed in existing buildings that are protected by a previously installed automatic sprinkler system in accordance with NFPA 72, 2019 Edition Chapter 1.4.2. 
Section 907.2.1; change to read as follows delete exception: 
907.2.1 Group A. A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.5 shall be installed in Group A occupancies having an occupant load 100 or more persons, or where the occupant load is more than 100 persons above or below the lowest level of exit discharge. Group A occupancies not separated from one another in accordance with Section 707.3.10 of the International Building Code shall be considered as a single occupancy for the purposes of applying this section. Portions of Group E occupancies occupied for assembly purposes shall be provided with a fire alarm system as required for the Group E occupancy. 
Section 907.2.3; change to read as follows: 
907.2.3 Group E. A manual fire alarm system that initiates the occupant notification signal utilizing an emergency voice/alarm communication system meeting the requirements of Section 907.5.2.2 and installed in accordance with Section 907.6 shall be installed in Group E educational occupancies. When automatic sprinkler systems or smoke detectors are installed, such systems or detectors shall be connected to the building fire alarm system. An approved smoke detection system shall be installed in Group E day care occupancies. Unless separated by a minimum of 100' open space, all buildings, whether portable buildings or the main building, will be considered one building for alarm occupant load consideration and interconnection of alarm systems. 
Exceptions: 
1. {No change.} 
1.1. Residential In-Home day care with not more than 12 children may use interconnected single station detectors in all habitable rooms. (For care of more than five children 2 1/2 or less years of age, see Section 907.2.6.) {No change to remainder of exceptions} 
Section 907.2.12, Exception 3; change to read as follows: 
3. Open air portions of buildings with an occupancy in Group A-5 in accordance with Section 303.1 of the International Building Code; however, this exception does not apply to accessory uses including but not limited to sky boxes, restaurants, and similarly enclosed areas. 
Section 907.4.2; add Section 907.4.2.7 to read as follows: 
907.4.2.7 Type. Manual alarm initiating devices shall be an approved double action type. 
Section 907.6.1; add Section 907.6.1.1 to read as follows: 
907.6.1.1 Wiring Installation. All fire alarm systems shall be installed in such a manner that a failure of any single initiating device or single open in an initiating circuit conductor will not interfere with the normal operation of other such devices. All signaling line circuits (SLC) shall be installed in such a way that a single open will not interfere with the operation of any addressable devices (Class A). Outgoing and return SLC conductors shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 72 requirements for Class A circuits and shall have a minimum of four (4) feet separation horizontal and one (1) foot vertical between supply and return circuit conductors. The initiating device circuit (IDC) from a signaling line circuit interface device shall be wired Class A, provided the distance from the interface device to the initiating device is ten feet or less. All wiring, SLC, IDC, NAC shall be wired Class A. Minimum fire alarm design shall include a manual pull station at each exit and notification devices throughout. 
Section 907.6.3; delete all four Exceptions. 
Section 907.6.6; - add sentence at end of paragraph to read as follows: 
See 907.6.3 for the required information transmitted to the supervising station. 
Section 909.22; add to read as follows: 
909.22 Stairway or Ramp Pressurization Alternative. Where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 and the stair pressurization alternative is chosen for compliance with Building Code requirements for a smokeproof enclosure, interior exit stairways or ramps shall be pressurized to a minimum of 0.10 inches of water (25 Pa) and a maximum of 0.35 inches of water (87 Pa) in the shaft relative to the building measured with all interior exit stairway and ramp doors closed under maximum anticipated conditions of stack effect and wind effect. Such systems shall comply with Section 909, including the installation of a separate fire-fighter's smoke control panel as per Section 909.16, and a Smoke Control Permit shall be required from the fire department as per Section 105.7. 
Section 909.22.1 Ventilating equipment. The activation of ventilating equipment for the stair or ramp pressurization system shall be by smoke detectors installed at each floor level at an approved location at the entrance to the smokeproof enclosure. When the closing device for the stairway or ramp shaft and vestibule doors is activated by smoke detection or power failure, the mechanical equipment shall activate and operate at the required performance levels. Smoke detectors shall be installed in accordance with Section 907.3. 
Section 909.22.1.1 Ventilation Systems. Smokeproof enclosure ventilation systems shall be independent of other building ventilation systems. The equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall comply with one of the following: 
1.  Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located exterior to the building and directly connected to the smokeproof enclosure or connected to the smokeproof enclosure by ductwork enclosed by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 of the Building Code or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 of the Building Code, or both. 
2.  Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located within the smokeproof enclosure with intake or exhaust directly from and to the outside or through ductwork enclosed by not less than 2-hour barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 of the Building Code or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 of the Building Code, or both. 
3.  Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located within the building if separated from the remainder of the building, including other mechanical equipment, by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 of the Building Code or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 of the Building Code, or both. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Control wiring and power wiring utilizing a 2-hour rated cable or cable system. 
2.  Where encased with not less than 2 inches (51 mm) of concrete. 
3.  Control wiring and power wiring protected by a listed electrical circuit protective systems with a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours. 
Section 909.21.1.2 Standby Power. 
Mechanical vestibule and stairway and ramp shaft ventilation systems and automatic fire detection systems shall be provided with standby power in accordance with Section 2702 of the Building Code. 
Section 909.22.1.3 Acceptance and Testing. 
Before the mechanical equipment is approved, the system shall be tested in the presence of the fire code official to confirm that the system is operating in compliance with these requirements. 
Section 910.2; change Exception 2. and 3. to read as follows: 
2.  Only manual smoke and heat removal shall be required in areas of buildings equipped with early suppression fast-response (ESFR) sprinklers. Automatic smoke and heat removal is prohibited. 
3.  Only manual smoke and heat removal shall be required in areas of buildings equipped with control mode special application sprinklers with a response time index of 50(m*S) 1/2 or less that are listed to control a fire in stored commodities with 12 or fewer sprinklers. Automatic smoke and heat removal is prohibited. 
Section 910.2; add subsections 910.2.3 with exceptions to read as follows: 
910.2.3 Group H. Buildings and portions thereof used as a Group H occupancy as follows: 
1.  In occupancies classified as Group H-2 or H-3, any of which are more than 6,000 square feet (1394 m 2 ) in single floor area. 
Exception: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only noncombustible materials. 
2.  In areas of buildings in Group H used for storing Class 2, 3, and 4 liquid and solid oxidizers, Class 1 and unclassified detonable organic peroxides, Class 3 and 4 unstable (reactive) materials, or Class 2 or 3 water-reactive materials as required for a high-hazard commodity classification. 
Exception: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only noncombustible materials. 
Section 910.3; add section 910.3.4 to read as follows: 
910.3.4 Vent Operation. Smoke and heat vents shall be capable of being operated by approved automatic and manual means. Automatic operation of smoke and heat vents shall conform to the provisions of Sections 910.3.2.1 through 910.3.2.3. 
910.3.4.1 Sprinklered buildings. Where installed in buildings equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall be designed to operate automatically. The automatic operating mechanism of the smoke and heat vents shall operate at a temperature rating at least 100 degrees F (approximately 38 degrees Celsius) greater than the temperature rating of the sprinklers installed. 
Exception: Manual only systems per Section 910.2. 
910.3.4.2 Non-sprinklered buildings. Where installed in buildings not equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall operate automatically by actuation of a heat responsive device rated at between 100 F (56C) and 220 F (122C) above ambient temperature. 
Exception: Listed gravity-operated drop out vents. 
Section 910.4.3.1; change to read as follows: 
910.4.3.1 Makeup air. Makeup air openings shall be provided within 6 feet (1829 mm) of the floor level. Operation of makeup air openings shall be automatic. The minimum gross area of makeup air inlets shall be 8 square feet per 1,000 cubic feet per minute (0.74 m2 per 0.4719 m3/s) of smoke exhaust. 
Section 912.2; add Section 912.2.3 to read as follows: 
912.2.3 Hydrant Distance. An approved fire hydrant shall be located within 100 feet of the fire department connection as the fire hose lays along an unobstructed path. 
Section 913.2.1; add second paragraph and exception to read as follows: 
When located on the ground level at an exterior wall, the fire pump room shall be provided with an exterior fire department access door that is not less than 3 ft. in width and 6 ft. 8 in. in height, regardless of any interior doors that are provided. A key box of an approved type or vendor shall be provided at this door, as required by Section 506.1. 
Exception: When it is necessary to locate the fire pump room on other levels or not at an exterior wall, the corridor leading to the fire pump room access from the exterior of the building shall be provided with equivalent fire resistance as that required for the pump room, or as approved by the fire code official. Access keys shall be provided in the key box as required by Section 506.1. 
Section 914.3.1.2; change to read as follows: 
914.3.1.2 Water Supply to required Fire Pumps. In buildings that are more than 120 feet (128 m) in building height, required fire pumps shall be supplied by connections to no fewer than two water mains located on different streets. Separate supply piping shall be provided between each connection to the water main and the pumps. Each connection and the supply piping between the connection and the pumps shall be sized to supply the flow and pressure required for the pumps to operate. 
Exception: {No change to exception} 
Section 1003.6 Means of egress continuity is amended by adding Section 1003.6.1 vehicle parking, to read as follows: 
Section 1003.6.1 Vehicle parking. No motor vehicle shall be parked within 10 feet of any patio, stairs, or egress path at any apartment, multi-family building, hotel, motel, educational occupancy or commercial structure, unless in an approved parking space. 
Section 1006.2.2.7; add a new Section 1006.2.2.7 as follows: 
1006.2.2.7 Electrical Rooms. For electrical rooms, special exiting requirements may apply. Reference the Electrical Code as adopted. 
Section 1009.1; add the following Exception 3: 
Exceptions: 
{previous exceptions unchanged} 
3.  Buildings regulated under State Law and built in accordance with State registered plans, including any variances or waivers granted by the State, shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of Section 1009. 
Section 1009.8; add the following Exception 7: 
Exceptions: 
7.  Buildings regulated under State Law and built in accordance with State registered plans, including variances or waivers granted by the State, shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of Section 1009 and Chapter 11. 
Section 1010.1.9.5 Bolt Locks; amend Exceptions 3 and 4 to read as follows: 
Exceptions: 
3.  Where a pair of doors serves an occupant load of less than 50 persons in a Group B, F, M or S occupancy. {Remainder unchanged} 
4.  Where a pair of doors serves a Group A, B, F, M or S occupancy {Remainder unchanged} 
Section 1015.8 Window Openings; change number 1 to read as follows: 
1.  Operable windows where the top of the sill of the opening is located more than 55 feet (16 764 mm) above the finished grade or other surface below and that are provided with window fall prevention devices that comply with ASTM F 2006. 
Section 1020.1 Construction; add Exception 6 to read as follows: 
6.  In group B occupancies, corridor walls and ceilings need not be of fire-resistive construction within a single tenant space when the space is equipped with approved automatic smoke-detection within the corridor. The actuation of any detector shall activate self-annunciating alarms audible in all areas within the corridor. Smoke detectors shall be connected to an approved automatic fire alarm system where such system is provided. 
Section 1024 Exit Passageways is amended by adding Section 1024.1.1 Exit ways - hotels, motels, and multi-family, to read as follows: 
Section 1024.1.1 Exit ways - hotels, motels, and multi-family. All public exit ways and balconies shall be constructed of material having a minimum of a class "C" flame spread rating (75 to 200 flame spread). All balconies and landings utilized as exit ways shall have a minimum length of 8 feet and a minimum width of 4 feet. 
Section 1029.1.1.1; delete this section. Spaces under Grandstands and Bleachers: 
Section 1031.2; change to read as follows: 
1031.2 Reliability. Required exit accesses, exits and exit discharges shall be continuously maintained free from obstructions or impediments to full instant use in the case of fire or other emergency. An exit or exit passageway shall not be used for any purpose that interferes with a means of egress. 
Section 1103.3; add sentence to end of paragraph as follows: 
Provide emergency signage as required by Section 606.3. 
1103.5 Sprinkler Systems change to read as follows: 
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in all existing buildings 6,000 square feet or larger in accordance with this section, when there is a change of owner, use or occupant and a hazard classification as defined in Chapter 4 of NFPA 13: Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems is present. The fire sprinkler system installation shall be completed within twenty-four (24) months from the date of notification by the fire code official. The fire code official is authorized to decrease the installation timeframe based on the occupant and/or use of the building to ensure life safety. 
Section 1103.5.1: add sentence to read as follows: 
Fire sprinkler system installation shall be completed within twenty-four (24) months from date of notification by the fire code official. 
Section 1103.5.3 Group I-2, Condition 2 change last sentence to read as follows: 
The automatic sprinkler system shall be installed as established by adopting this ordinance and within twelve (12) months of notification by the fire code official. 
Section 1103.5; add Section 1103.5.5 to read as follows: 
1103.5.5 Spray Booths and Rooms. Existing spray booths and spray rooms shall be protected by an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system in accordance with Section 2404. 
Section 1103.7; add Section 1103.7.7 and 1103.7.7.1 to read as follows: 
1103.7.7 Fire Alarm System Design Standards. Where an existing fire alarm system is upgraded or replaced, the devices shall be addressable. 
Exception: Existing systems need not comply unless the total building, or fire alarm system, remodel or expansion exceeds 30% of the building. When cumulative building, or fire alarm system, remodel or expansion initiated after the date of original fire alarm panel installation exceeds 50% of the building, or fire alarm system, the fire alarm system must comply within 18 months of permit application. 
Section 1103.7.7.1 Communication requirements. Refer to Section 907.6.6 for applicable requirements 
Section 1203; change and add to read as follows: 
1203.1.1 {No change} 
1203.1.2 {No change} 
1203.1.3 Installation. Emergency power systems and standby power systems shall be installed in accordance with the International Building Code, NFPA 70, NFPA 110, and NFPA 111. Existing installations shall be maintained in accordance with the original approval, except as specified in Chapter 11. 
1203.1.4 through 1203.1.9 {No changes to these sections} 
1203.1.10 Critical Operations Power Systems (COPS). For Critical Operations Power Systems necessary to maintain continuous power supply to facilities or parts of facilities that require continuous operation for the reasons of public safety, emergency management, national security, or business continuity, see NFPA 70. 
1203.2 Where required. Emergency and standby power systems shall be provided where required by Sections 1203.2.1 through 1203.2.26, or elsewhere identified in this code, or any other referenced code. 
1203.2.1 through 1203.2.3 {No change} 
1203.2.4 Emergency Voice/alarm communications systems. Emergency power shall be provided for emergency voice/alarm communications systems in the following occupancies, or as specified elsewhere in this code, as required in Section 907.5.2.2.5. The system shall be capable of powering the required load for a duration of not less than 24 hours, as required in NFPA 72. 
•  Covered and Open Malls, Section 907.2.19 and 914.2.3 
•  Group A Occupancies, Sections 907.2.1 and 907.5.2.2.4. 
•  Special Amusement Buildings, Section 907.2.11 
•  High-rise Buildings, Section 907.2.12 
•  Atriums, Section 907.2.13 
•  Deep Underground Buildings, Section 907.2.18 
1203.2.5 through 1203.2.13 {No change} 
1203.2.14 Means of egress illumination. Emergency power shall be provided for means of egress illumination in accordance with Sections 1008.3 and 1104.5.1. minimum of ninety (90)minutes. 
1203.2.15 Membrane Structures. 
Emergency power shall be provided for exit signs in temporary tents and membrane structures in accordance with Section 3103.12.6. (90 minutes) Standby power shall be provided for auxiliary inflation systems in permanent membrane structures in accordance with Section 2702 of the International Building Code. (4 hours) Auxiliary inflation systems shall be provided in temporary air-supported and air-inflated membrane structures in accordance with section 3103.10.4. 
1203.2.16 {No change} 
1203.2.17 Smoke Control Systems. 
Standby power shall be provided for smoke control systems in the following occupancies, or as specified elsewhere in this code, as required in Section 909.11: 
•  Covered Mall Building, International Building Code, Section 402.7 
•  Atriums, International Building Code, Section 404.7 
•  Underground Buildings, International Building Code, Section 405.8 
•  Group I-3, International Building Code, Section 408.4.2 
•  Stages, International Building Code, Section 410.2.5 
•  Special Amusement Buildings (as applicable to Group A's), International Building Code, Section 411.1 
•  Smoke Protected Seating, Section 1029.6.2. 
1203.2.18 {No change} 
1203.2.19 Covered and Open Mall Buildings. 
Emergency power shall be provided in accordance with Section 907.2.19 and 914.2.3. 
1203.2.20 Airport Traffic Control Towers. 
A standby power system shall be provided in airport traffic control towers more than 65 ft. in height. Power shall be provided to the following equipment: 
1.  Pressurization equipment, mechanical equipment and lighting. 
2.  Elevator operating equipment. 
3.  Fire alarm and smoke detection systems. 
1203.2.21 Smokeproof Enclosures and Stair Pressurization Alternative. 
Standby power shall be provided for smokeproof enclosures, stair pressurization alternative and associated automatic fire detection systems as required by the International Building Code, Section 909.20.6.2. 
1203.2.22 Elevator Pressurization. Standby power shall be provided for elevator pressurization system as required by the International Building Code, Section 909.21.5. 
1203.2.23 Elimination of Smoke Dampers in Shaft Penetrations. Standby power shall be provided when eliminating the smoke dampers in ducts penetrating shafts in accordance with the International Building Code, Section 717.5.3, exception 2.3. 
1203.2.24 Common Exhaust Systems for Clothes Dryers. Standby power shall be provided for common exhaust systems for clothes dryers located in multistory structures in accordance with the International Mechanical Code, Section 504.10, Item 7. 
1203.2.25 Hydrogen Cutoff Rooms. Standby power shall be provided for mechanical ventilation and gas detection systems of Hydrogen Cutoff Rooms in accordance with the International Building Code, Section 421. 
1203.2.26 Means of Egress Illumination in Existing Buildings. Emergency power shall be provided for means of egress illumination in accordance with Section 1104.5 when required by the fire code official. (90 minutes in I-2, 60 minutes elsewhere.) 
1203.3 through 1203.6 {No change} 
1203.7 Energy Time Duration. Unless a time limit is specified by the fire code official, in this chapter or elsewhere in this code, or in any other referenced code or standard, the emergency and standby power system shall be supplied with enough fuel or energy storage capacity for not less than 2-hour full-demand operation of the system. 
Exception: Where the system is supplied with natural gas from a utility provider and is approved. 
Section 2304.1; change to read as follows: 
2304.1 Supervision of Dispensing. The dispensing of fuel at motor fuel-dispensing facilities shall be in accordance with the following: 
1.  Conducted by a qualified attendant; and/or, 
2.  Shall be under the supervision of a qualified attendant; and/or 
3.  Shall be an unattended self-service facility in accordance with Section 2304.3. 
At any time the qualified attendant of item Number 1 or 2 above is not present, such operations shall be considered as an unattended self-service facility and shall also comply with Section 2304.3. 
Section 2401.2; delete this section. 
Section 3103.3.1; delete this section. 
Table 3206.2, footnote h; change text to read as follows: 
h.  Where storage areas are protected by either early suppression fast response (ESFR) sprinkler systems or control mode special application sprinklers with a response time index of 50 (m • s) 1/2 or less that are listed to control a fire in the stored commodities with 12 or fewer sprinklers, installed in accordance with NFPA 13, manual smoke and heat vents or manually activated engineered mechanical smoke exhaust systems shall be required within these areas. 
Table 3206.2, footnote j; add footnote j to row titled "High Hazard" and Greater than 300,000' to read as follows: 
j.  High hazard high-piled storage areas shall not exceed 500,000 square feet. A 2-hour fire wall, constructed in accordance with Section 706 of the International Building Code, shall be used to divide high-piled storage exceeding 500,000 square feet in area. 
Section 3310.1; add sentence to end of paragraph to read as follows: 
When fire apparatus access roads are required to be installed for any structure or development, they shall be approved prior to the time at which construction has progressed beyond completion of the foundation of any structure. Completion of the access road includes striping. 
Section 5003.2.2.1 Design and Construction change #3 and #4 and add #6 to read as follows: 
3.  Automatic fail-safe emergency shutoff valves shall be installed on supply piping and tubing at the following locations: {remainder of text unchanged} 
4.  Automatic emergency shutoff valves shall be identified and the location shall be clearly visible, accessible and indicated by means of a sign. 
6.  Bulk tank installations over 2,000 pounds will require an engineered foundation and construction permit per the 2018 International Building Code. Three complete sets of structural drawings, specifications and analysis (calculations) shall be provided and shall bear the seal of a licensed Texas professional engineer. 
Section 5003.3.1.4 Responsibility for cleanup shall be amended by deleting Section 5003.3.1.4 Responsibility for cleanup in the IFC and replacing it with the following: 
The person, firm or corporation, responsible for an unauthorized discharge or hazardous condition shall institute and complete all actions necessary to remedy the effects of such unauthorized discharge, whether sudden or gradual, at no cost to the jurisdiction. When deemed necessary, by the fire code official, cleanup may be initiated by the fire department, or by an authorized individual or firm. Costs associated with such cleanup shall be borne by the owner, operator, or other person responsible for the unauthorized discharge. Any costs associated with a fire department response to accomplish control and mitigation of an unauthorized discharge may be charged back to the person, firm, or corporation responsible for the release. 
Section 5004.10 Supervision and monitoring. Shall be amended to read as follows: 
Emergency alarm, detection and automatic fire-extinguishing systems required by Section 5004 shall be electrically supervised and monitored by an approved supervising station or, where approved, shall initiate an audible and visual signal at a constantly attended location. In buildings with a monitored sprinkler or fire alarm/detection system, the carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) emergency alarm system shall be connected to the building fire alarm control panel. A fire alarm permit is required per the City of Keller Fire Code. 
Section 5601.1.3; change to read as follows: 
5601.1.3 Fireworks. The possession, manufacture, storage, sale, handling, and use of fireworks are prohibited. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Only when approved for fireworks displays, storage, and handling of fireworks as allowed in Section 5604 and 5608. 
2.  The use of fireworks for approved fireworks displays as allowed in Section 5608. 
{Delete remainder of text.} 
Section 5703.6; add a sentence to read as follows: 
5703.6 Piping Systems. Piping systems, and their component parts, for flammable and combustible liquids shall be in accordance with Sections 5703.6.1 through 5703.6.11. An approved method of secondary containment shall be provided for underground tank and piping systems. 
Section 5704.2.9.5; change Section 5704.2.9.5 and add Section 5704.2.9.5.3 to read as follows: 
5704.2.9.5 Above-ground Tanks Inside of Buildings. Above-ground tanks inside of buildings shall comply with Section 5704.2.9.5.1 and 5704.2.9.5.2 through 5704.2.9.5.3. 
5704.2.9.5.1 {No change.} 
5704.2.9.5.2 {No change.} 
Section 5704.2.9.5.3 Combustible Liquid Storage Tanks Inside of Buildings. 
1.  The maximum aggregate allowable quantity limit shall be 3,000 gallons (11 356 L) of Class II or III combustible liquid for storage in protected aboveground tanks complying with Section 5704.2.9.7 when all of the following conditions are met: 
2.  The entire 3,000 gallon (11 356 L) quantity shall be stored in protected above-ground tanks; 
The 3,000 gallon (11 356 L) capacity shall be permitted to be stored in a single tank or multiple smaller tanks; 
3.  The tanks shall be located in a room protected by an automatic sprinkler system complying with Section 903.3.1.1; and 
4.  Tanks shall be connected to fuel-burning equipment, including generators, utilizing an approved closed piping system. 
The quantity of combustible liquid stored in tanks complying with this section shall not be counted towards the maximum allowable quantity set forth in Table 5003.1.1(1), and such tanks shall not be required to be located in a control area. Such tanks shall not be located more than two stories below grade. 
Section 5704.2.9.6.1 shall be amended to read as follows: 
5704.2.9.6.1 Locations where above ground tanks are prohibited. The storage of Class I and Class II liquids in permanent above ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited within the Keller City Limits unless approved by Special Use Permit and with approval of the Fire Marshal. 
Section 5704.2.11.4; add a sentence to read as follows: 
5704.2.11.4 Leak Prevention. Leak prevention for underground tanks shall comply with Sections 5704.2.11.4.1 through 5704.2.11.4.3. An approved method of secondary containment shall be provided for underground tank and piping systems. 
Section 5704.2.11.4.2; change to read as follows: 
5704.2.11.4.2 Leak Detection. Underground storage tank systems shall be provided with an approved method of leak detection from any component of the system that is designed and installed in accordance with NFPA 30 and as specified in Section 5704.2.11.4.3. 
Section 5704.2.11.4.3; add Section 5704.2.11.4.3 to read as follows: 
5704.2.11.4.3 Observation Wells. Approved sampling tubes of a minimum 4 inches in diameter shall be installed in the backfill material of each underground flammable or combustible liquid storage tank. The tubes shall extend from a point 12 inches below the average grade of the excavation to ground level and shall be provided with suitable surface access caps. Each tank site shall provide a sampling tube at the corners of the excavation with a minimum of 4 tubes. Sampling tubes shall be placed in the product line excavation within 10 feet of the tank excavation and one every 50 feet routed along product lines towards the dispensers, a minimum of two are required. 
Delete Section 5707 Mobile Refueling in its entirety. 
Section 6103.2.1; add Section 6103.2.1.8 to read as follows: 
6103.2.1.8 Jewelry Repair, Dental Labs and Similar Occupancies. Where natural gas service is not available, portable LP-Gas containers are allowed to be used to supply approved torch assemblies or similar appliances. Such containers shall not exceed 20-pound (9.0 kg) water capacity. Aggregate capacity shall not exceed 60-pound (27.2 kg) water capacity. Each device shall be separated from other containers by a distance of not less than 20 feet. 
Section 6104.2, Exception; add an exception 2 to read as follows: 
Exceptions: 
1.  {existing text unchanged} 
2.  Except as permitted in Sections 308 and 6104.3.2, LP-gas containers are not permitted in residential areas. 
Section 6104.3; add Section 6104.3.3 to read as follows: 
6104.3.3 Spas, Pool Heaters, and Other Listed Devices. LP-gas containers are allowed to be used to supply spa and pool heaters or other listed devices. Such container shall not exceed 250-gallon water capacity per lot. See Table 6104.3 for location of containers. Installation shall be in accordance with the Texas Administrative Code Title 16, Part 1, Chapter 9, Subchapter B. 
Exception: Lots where LP-gas can be off-loaded wholly on the property where the tank is located may install up to 500 gallon above ground or 1,000 gallon underground approved containers. 
Section 6107.4 and 6109.13; change to read as follows: 
6107.4 Protecting Containers from Vehicles. Where exposed to vehicular damage due to proximity to alleys, driveways or parking areas, LP-gas containers, regulators and piping shall be protected in accordance with NFPA 58 and Section 312. 
6109.13 Protection of Containers. LP-gas containers shall be stored within a suitable enclosure or otherwise protected against tampering. Vehicle impact protection shall be provided as required by Section 6107.4. 
Exception: {Deleted} 
Table B105.2; change footnote a. to read as follows: 
The reduced fire-flow shall be not less than 1,500 gallons per minute. 
Appendix C103.1 Hydrant Spacing; shall be amended to read as follows and C103.2 and C103.3 shall be deleted: 
C103 Fire Hydrant Spacing. 
1.  Commercial and Industrial Areas 
a.  Fire hydrants shall be located no more than a five hundred foot (500') truck hose lay distance to all points of any structure or combustible storage area on the lot. 
b.  Fire hydrants located on the opposite side of a street, designated as four lanes or larger on the current City Thoroughfare Plan, shall not be considered acceptable for meeting hydrant coverage requirements. 
c.  Fire hydrants shall be positioned to allow truck hose lays to follow normal traffic access to the site. 
d.  Fire hydrants shall be spaced at no more than three hundred foot (300') intervals. 
2.  Residential Areas 
a.  Fire hydrants shall be placed on block corners or near the center of the block to place every structure within a five hundred foot (500') truck hose lay distance from fire hydrant coverage. 
b.  Fire hydrants located on the opposite side of a street, designated as four lanes or larger on the current City Thoroughfare Plan, shall not be considered acceptable for meeting hydrant coverage requirements. 
c.  Fire hydrants shall be positioned to allow truck hose lays to follow normal traffic access to the site. 
d.  Fire hydrants shall be spaced at no more than five hundred foot (500') intervals. 
Appendix C104 Hydrant Spacing, shall be deleted entirely. 
Appendix D103.5 Fire apparatus access road gates shall be amended to read as follows: 
1.  Where a single gate is provided, the gate width shall be not less than 24 feet. Where a fire apparatus access road consists of a divided roadway, the gate width shall be not less than 16 feet. 
APPENDIX P PERMIT FEES 
Section P105 General. 
P101.1 The City of Keller shall collect the approved fees for inspections, annual permits, and other related permits as required by this Ordinance. Fees are adopted by the City Council annually when the City Council adopts the City budget. 
P101.2 Fire code construction permit fees shall be based on the contracted value of the work being permitted. Fees are as stated in the approved fee schedule as noted in P102.17 and adopted by the City of Keller. When a permit is required, the permit fee shall be doubled when work or construction has occurred without obtaining the appropriate permits. In those cases where the work occurs on City of Keller property and no permit fee is required, an amount equal to the initial permit cost shall be charged for failure to obtain a permit. 
P101.3 Fire Code operational permit fees shall be annual and due on the anniversary date of the permit issue, unless otherwise indicated on the permit. Operational permit fees shall be Fifty Dollars ($50.00) per permit per year. 
P101.4 Payment of annual permit fees shall be the responsibility of the property owner, business owner/manager, contractor, or other responsible individual as applicable. 
P101.5 The Fire Marshal may request copies of bid documents or other items to verify the estimated cost of construction when calculating permit fees. 
P101.6 A permit application shall be submitted to the Development Services Permit Desk and must have detailed construction plans consisting of three (3) hard copies and one (1) digital pdf copy and a copy of the applicant's State license as applicable attached to the application. 
P101.7 Contractor documentation. Anyone desiring to do work for which a construction permit is required shall be required to provide certain documentation to the Development Services Permit Desk. Such documentation shall include, but not be limited to, a copy of all applicable State licenses and contact information. 
P101.8 Work shall not begin on any construction requiring a fire code permit before the permit is obtained unless approved by the Fire Marshal. 
P101.9 Inspection requests. It shall be the duty of the permit holder or their duly authorized agent to notify the fire code official when work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to provide access to and means for inspections of such work that are required by this Code. 
P101.10 Approval required. Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the fire code official. The fire code official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction that is satisfactory as completed, or notify the permit holder or his or her agent wherein the same fails to comply with this Code. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the fire code official. 
P102 Required construction permits. For any and all new installations, and modifications to existing fire and life safety systems, including but not limited to Sections P102.1 through P102.16 of this document and, Section 105 Permits, of the 2018 Edition of the International Fire Code. A construction permit issued by the Fire Marshal shall be required for work as set forth in the above referenced Sections. 
P102.1 Automatic fire-extinguishing systems. The permit fee for the installation of or modification to any residential or commercial automatic fire-extinguishing system required by Section 105.7.1 and Section 903 as amended and adopted, shall be determined by the cost of construction and the fee shall be calculated based on the fee schedule as required by the most recent ordinances of the City of Keller. A plan review fee equal to sixty-five percent (65%) of the construction permit fee will also apply. 
P102.2 Battery Systems. The permit fee for the installation of stationary battery systems required by Section 105.7.2 shall be determined by the cost of construction and the fee shall be calculated based on the fee schedule as required by the most recent ordinances of the City of Keller. A plan review fee equal to sixty-five percent (65%) of the construction permit fee will also apply. 
P102.3 Compressed gases. The permit fee to install, repair damage to, abandon, remove, place temporarily out of service, or close or substantially modify a compressed gas system required by Section 105.7.4 shall be determined by the cost of construction and the fee shall be calculated based on the fee schedule as required by the most recent ordinances of the City of Keller. A plan review fee equal to sixty-five percent (65%) of the construction permit fee will also apply. 
P102.4 Cryogenic fluids. The permit fee for the installation of or alteration to outdoor stationary cryogenic fluid storage systems required by Chapter 55 and Section 105.7.5 shall be determined by the cost of construction and the fee shall be calculated based on the fee schedule as required by the most recent ordinances of the City of Keller. A plan review fee equal to sixty-five percent (65%) of the construction permit fee will also apply. 
P102.5 Fire alarm and detection systems and related equipment. The permit fee for the installation of or modification to fire alarm and detection systems and related equipment required by Section 105.7.7 shall be determined by the cost of construction and the fee shall be calculated based on the fee schedule as required by the most recent ordinances of the City of Keller. A plan review fee equal to sixty-five percent (65%) of the construction permit fee will also apply. 
P102.6 Fire pumps and related equipment. The permit fee for the installation of or modification to fire pumps and related fuel tanks, jockey pumps, controllers, and generators required by Section 105.7.8 shall be determined by the cost of construction and the fee shall be calculated based on the fee schedule as required by the most recent ordinances of the City of Keller. A plan review fee equal to sixty-five percent (65%) of the construction permit fee will also apply. 
P102.7 Flammable and combustible liquids. The permit fee for the installation of or repair or modification to a pipeline, tank, or other such items required by Section 105.7.9 shall be determined by the cost of construction and the fee shall be calculated based on the fee schedule as required by the most recent ordinances of the City of Keller. A plan review fee equal to sixty-five percent (65%) of the construction permit fee will also apply. 
P102.8 Hazardous materials. The permit fee for the installation, repair, abandonment, removal, closure, or modification to a storage facility or other area regulated by Chapter 50 as required by Section 105.7.13 shall be determined by the cost of construction and the fee shall be calculated based on the fee schedule as required by the most recent ordinances of the City of Keller. A plan review fee equal to sixty-five percent (65%) of the construction permit fee will also apply. 
P102.9 Industrial ovens. The permit fee for the installation of industrial ovens covered by Chapter 30 as required by Section 105.7.15 shall be determined by the cost of construction and the fee shall be calculated based on the fee schedule as required by the most recent ordinances of the City of Keller. A plan review fee equal to sixty-five percent (65%) of the construction permit fee will also apply. 
P102.10 LP-gas. The permit fee for the installation of or modification to an LP-gas system required by Section 105.7.16 shall be determined by the cost of construction and the fee shall be calculated based on the fee schedule as required by the most recent ordinances of the City of Keller. A plan review fee equal to sixty-five percent (65%) of the construction permit fee will also apply. 
P102.11 Spraying or dipping. The permit fee for the installation of or modification to a spray room, dip tank or booth required by Section 105.7.23 shall be determined by the cost of construction and the fee shall be calculated based on the fee schedule as required by the most recent ordinances of the City of Keller. A plan review fee equal to sixty-five percent (65%) of the construction permit fee will also apply. 
P102.12 Standpipe systems. The permit fee for the installation of, modification to or removal from service of a standpipe system required by Section 105.7.24 shall be determined by the cost of construction and the fee shall be calculated based on the fee schedule as required by the most recent ordinances of the City of Keller. A plan review fee equal to sixty-five percent (65%) of the construction permit fee will also apply. 
P102.13 Smoke control or exhaust systems. The permit fee for the installation of or modification to a smoke control or exhaust system required by Section 105.7.20 shall be determined by the cost of construction and the fee shall be calculated based on the fee schedule as required by the most recent ordinances of the City of Keller. A plan review fee equal to sixty-five percent (65%) of the construction permit fee will also apply. 
P102.14 Electronic access control systems. The permit fee for the installation of or modification to an electronic access control system as described in Section 105.7.26 shall be determined by the cost of construction and the fee shall be calculated based on the fee schedule as required by the most recent ordinances of the City of Keller. A plan review fee equal to sixty-five percent (65%) of the construction permit fee will also apply. 
P102.15 Gates across fire lanes. A permit is required for the installation of controlled access gates across required fire lanes as described in Section 105.7.12. The permit fee for the installation of or modification to controlled access gates across required fire lanes shall be determined by the cost of construction and the fee shall be calculated based on the fee schedule as required by the most recent ordinances of the City of Keller. A plan review fee equal to sixty-five percent (65%) of the construction permit fee will also apply. 
P102.16 Tent and Membrane Structures. The permit fee for the installation of a tent or membrane structure as described in Section 105.6.45 shall be determined by the cost of construction and the fee shall be calculated based on the fee schedule as required by the most recent ordinances of the City of Keller. A plan review fee equal to sixty-five percent (65%) of the construction permit fee will also apply. 
P102.17 Fireworks Displays. A permit is required for the display of Fireworks as described in Section 5601.1.3 and Section 5608. The permit fee for fireworks displays shall be calculated based on the fee schedule as required by the most recent ordinances of the City of Keller. A plan review fee equal to sixty-five percent (65%) of the permit fee will also apply. 
( Ord. No. 1956 , § 2, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 4-140. - Specific Amendments to the 2018 International Fuel and Gas Code (IFGC). 
Section 101.2 to read as follows: 
{Local amendments to Section 101.2 may be necessary to correspond with the State Plumbing Licensing Law.} 
Section 102.2; add an exception to read as follows: 
Exception: Existing dwelling units shall comply with Section 621.2. 
Section 102.8; change to read as follows: 
102.8 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 8 and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the ICC Electrical Code shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted. 
Section 306.3; change to read as follows: 
[M] 306.3 Appliances in attics. Attics containing appliances shall be provided . . . {bulk of paragraph unchanged} . . . side of the appliance. The clear access opening dimensions shall be a minimum of 20 inches by 30 inches (508 mm by 762 mm), and large enough to allow removal of the largest appliance. As a minimum, for access to the attic space, provide one of the following: 
•  A permanent stair, and/or 
•  A pull down stair with a minimum 300 lb (136 kg) capacity, and/or 
•  An access door from an upper floor level, and/or 
•  Access Panel may be used in lieu of items 1, 2, and 3 with prior approval of the code official due to building conditions. 
Exceptions: 
1.  The passageway and level service space are not required where the appliance is capable of being serviced and removed through the required opening. 
Where the passageway is not less than … {bulk of section to read the same}. 
Section 306.5; change to read as follows: 
[M] 306.5 Equipment and Appliances on Roofs or Elevated Structures. Where equipment requiring access or appliances are located on an elevated structure or the roof of a building such that personnel will have to climb higher than 16 feet (4877 mm) above grade to access, an interior or exterior means of access shall be provided. Exterior ladders providing roof access need not extend closer than 12 feet (2438 mm) to the finish grade or floor level below and shall extend to the equipment and appliances' level service space. Such access shall . . . {bulk of section to read the same} . . . on roofs having a slope greater than four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33-percent slope). ... {remainder of text unchanged}. 
Section 306.5.1; change to read as follows: 
[M] 306.5.1 Sloped roofs. Where appliances, equipment, fans or other components that require service are installed on a roof having a slope of 3 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25-percent slope) or greater and having an edge more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade at such edge, a catwalk at least 16 inches in width with substantial cleats spaced not more than 16 inches apart shall be provided from the roof access to a level platform at the appliance. The level platform shall be provided on each side of the appliance to which access is required for service, repair or maintenance. The platform shall be not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in any dimension and shall be provided with guards. The guards shall extend not less than 42 inches (1067 mm) above the platform, shall be constructed so as to prevent the passage of a 21-inch-diameter (533 mm) sphere and shall comply with the loading requirements for guards specified in the International Building Code. 
Section 401.5; add a second paragraph to read as follows: 
Both ends of each section of medium pressure gas piping shall identify its operating gas pressure with an approved tag. The tags are to be composed of aluminum or stainless steel and the following wording shall be stamped into the tag: 
"WARNING 
1/2 to 5 psi gas pressure 
Do Not Remove" 
Section 404.12; change to read as follows: 
404.12 Minimum burial depth. Underground piping systems shall be installed a minimum depth of 18 inches ( 458 mm) top of pipe below grade. 
404.12.1 Delete in its entirety 
Section 406.4; change to read as follows: 
406.4 Test pressure measurement. Test pressure shall be measured with a monometer or with a pressure-measuring device designed and calibrated to read, record, or indicate a pressure loss caused by leakage during the pressure test period. The source of pressure shall be isolated before the pressure tests are made. 
Section 406.4.1; change to read as follows: 
406.4.1 Test pressure. The test pressure to be used shall be no less than 3 psig (20 kPa gauge), or at the discretion of the Code Official, the piping and valves may be tested at a pressure of at least six (6) inches (152 mm) of mercury, measured with a manometer or slope gauge, For tests requiring a pressure of 3 psig, diaphragm gauges shall utilize a dial with a minimum diameter of three and one half inches (3 ½"), a set hand, 1/10 pound incrementation and pressure range not to exceed 6 psi for tests requiring a pressure of 3 psig. For tests requiring a pressure of 10 psig, diaphragm gauges shall utilize a dial with a minimum diameter of three and one-half inches (3 ½"), a set hand, a minimum of 2/10 pound incrementation and a pressure range not to exceed 20 psi. For welded piping, and for piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48 kPa) (1/2 psi) and less than 200 inches of water column pressure (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall not be less than ten (10) pounds per square inch (69.6 kPa). For piping carrying gas at a pressure that exceeds 200 inches of water column (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall be not less than one and one-half times the proposed maximum working pressure. 
Diaphragm gauges used for testing must display a current calibration and be in good working condition. The appropriate test must be applied to the diaphragm gauge used for testing. 
Section 409.1; add Section 409.1.4 to read as follows: 
409.1.4 Valves in CSST installations. Shutoff valves installed with corrugated stainless steel (CSST) piping systems shall be supported with an approved termination fitting, or equivalent support, suitable for the size of the valves, of adequate strength and quality, and located at intervals so as to prevent or damp out excessive vibration but in no case greater than 12-inches from the center of the valve. Supports shall be installed so as not to interfere with the free expansion and contraction of the system's piping, fittings, and valves between anchors. All valves and supports shall be designed and installed so they will not be disengaged by movement of the supporting piping. 
Section 621.2; add exception as follows: 
621.2 Prohibited use. One or more unvented room heaters shall not be used as the sole source of comfort heating in a dwelling unit. 
Exception: Existing approved unvented heaters may continue to be used in dwelling units, in accordance with the code provisions in effect when installed, when approved by the Code Official unless an unsafe condition is determined to exist as described in Section 108.7. 
( Ord. No. 1956 , § 2, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 4-145. - Specific Amendments to the 2017 National Electric Code (NEC). 
Article 100; add the following to definitions: 
Engineering Supervision. Supervision by a Qualified State of Texas Licensed Professional Engineer engaged primarily in the design or maintenance of electrical installations. 
Article 100; remove the amendment to the following definition: 
Intersystem Bonding Termination. A device that provides a means for connecting intersystem bonding conductors for communication systems to the grounding electrode system. 
Article 110.2; change the following to read as follows: 
110.2 Approval. The conductors and equipment required or permitted by this Code shall be acceptable only if approved. Approval of equipment may be evident by listing and labeling of equipment by a Nationally Recognized Testing Lab (NRTL) with a certification mark of that laboratory or a qualified third party inspection agency approved by the AHJ. 
Exception: Unlisted equipment that is relocated to another location within a jurisdiction or is field modified is subject to the approval by the AHJ. This approval may be by a field evaluation by a NRTL or qualified third party inspection agency approved by the AHJ. 
Informational Note No. 1: See 90.7, Examination of Equipment for Safety, and 110.3, Examination, Identification, Installation, and Use of Equipment. See definitions of Approved, Identified, Labeled, and Listed. 
Informational Note No. 2: Manufacturer's self-certification of equipment may not necessarily comply with U.S. product safety standards as certified by an NRTL. 
Informational Note No. 3: National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 790 and 791 provide an example of an approved method for qualifying a third party inspection agency. 
Article 210.52(G) (1) Garages: remove the amendment that deleted the following: 
(1) Garages. In each attached garage and in each detached garage with electric power. At least one receptacle outlet shall be installed for each car space. 
Article 230.71(A); remove the amendment that added the following exception: 
Article 300.11; remove the amendment that added the following exception: 
Article 310.15(B) (7); remove the amendment that changed the following to read as follows: 
Article 500.8 (A) (3); change to read as follows: 
500.8 Equipment. 
Articles 500 through 504 require equipment construction and installation that ensure safe performance under conditions of proper use and maintenance. 
Informational Note No. 1: It is important that inspection authorities and users exercise more than ordinary care with regard to installation and maintenance. 
Informational Note No. 2: Since there is no consistent relationship between explosion properties and ignition temperature, the two are independent requirements. 
Informational Note No. 3: Low ambient conditions require special consideration. Explosion proof or dust-ignition proof equipment may not be suitable for use at temperatures lower than -25°C 
(-13°F) unless they are identified for low-temperature service. However, at low ambient temperatures, flammable concentrations of vapors may not exist in a location classified as Class I, Division 1 at normal ambient temperature. 
(A)  Suitability. Suitability of identified equipment shall be determined by one of the following: 
(1)  Equipment listing or labeling; 
(2)  Evidence of equipment evaluation from a qualified testing laboratory or inspection agency concerned with product evaluation; or, 
(3)  Evidence acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction such as a manufacturer's self-evaluation or an engineering judgment signed and sealed by a qualified licensed Professional Engineer in the State of Texas. 
Informational Note: Additional documentation for equipment may include certificates demonstrating compliance with applicable equipment standards, indicating special conditions of use, and other pertinent information. 
Article 505.7 (A) changed to read as follows: 
505.7 Special Precaution. 
Article 505 requires equipment construction and installation that ensures safe performance under conditions of proper use and maintenance. 
Informational Note No. 1: It is important that inspection authorities and users exercise more than ordinary care with regard to the installation and maintenance of electrical equipment in hazardous (classified) locations. 
Informational Note No. 2: Low ambient conditions require special consideration. Electrical equipment depending on the protection techniques described by 505.8(A) may not be suitable for use at temperatures lower than -20°C (-4°F) unless they are identified for use at lower temperatures. However, at low ambient temperatures, flammable concentrations of vapors may not exist in a location classified Class I, Zones 0, 1, or 2 at normal ambient temperature. 
(A)  Implementation of Zone Classification System. Classification of areas, engineering and design, selection of equipment and wiring methods, installation, and inspection shall be performed by a qualified licensed Professional Engineer in the State of Texas. 
Article 517.30 Essential Electrical Systems for Hospitals; remove the amendment that created a new (H) and added the following language: 
(G)  Coordination. Overcurrent protective devices serving the essential electrical system shall be coordinated for the period of time that a fault's duration extends beyond 0.1 second. 
Exception No. 1: Between transformer primary and secondary overcurrent protective devices, where only one overcurrent protective device or set of overcurrent protective devices exists on the transformer secondary. 
Exception No. 2: Between overcurrent protective devices of the same size (ampere rating) in series. 
Informational Note: The terms coordination and coordinated as used in this section do not cover the full range of overcurrent conditions. 
Article 600.6(A) (1) At Point of Entry to a Sign; Exception 1 changed to read as follows: 
Exception No.1: A disconnect shall not be required for branch circuits(s) or feeder conductor(s) passing through the sign where enclosed in a Chapter 3 listed raceway or metal-jacketed cable identified for the location. The conductor(s) shall not serve the sign body or sign enclosure where passing through. 
Article 600.6(A) (1) At Point of Entry to a Sign; create a new Exception No. 2 to add the following language: 
Exception No. 2. A disconnect shall not be required at the point of entry to a sign body, sign enclosure, or pole for branch circuit conductor(s). The conductors shall be enclosed in a Chapter 3 listed raceway or metal-jacketed cable identified for the location. The conductor(s) shall be routed to a device box which contains the disconnect. A field-applied permanent warning label that is visible during servicing shall be applied to the raceway at or near the point of entry into the sign enclosure or sign body. The warning label shall comply with 110.21(B) and state the following: "Danger. This raceway contains energized conductors." The marking shall include the location of the disconnecting means for the energized conductor(s). The disconnecting means shall be capable of being locked in the open position in accordance with 110.25. 
Article 600.6(A) (1) At Point of Entry to a Sign; move the original Exception 2 to create a new Exception No. 3 and add the following language: 
Exception No. 3: A disconnect shall not be required at the point of entry to a sign enclosure or sign body for branch circuit(s) or feeder conductor(s) that supply an internal panelboard(s) in a sign enclosure or sign body. The conductors shall be enclosed in a Chapter 3 listed raceway or metal-jacketed cable identified for the location. A field-applied permanent warning label that is visible during servicing shall be applied to the raceway at or near the point of entry into the sign enclosure or sign body. The warning label shall comply with 110.21(B) and state the following: "Danger. This raceway contains energized conductors." The marking shall include the location of the disconnecting means for the energized conductor(s). The disconnecting means shall be capable of being locked in the open position in accordance with 110.25. 
(2017 Code) Informational Note: The location of the disconnect is intended to allow service or maintenance personnel complete and local control of the disconnecting means. 
Article 680.25(A) remove the amendment that added the following language and exception: 
680.25 Feeders. 
These provisions shall apply to any feeder on the supply side of panelboards supplying branch circuits for pool equipment covered in Part II of this article and on the load side of the service equipment or the source of a separately derived system. 
(A)  Feeders. Feeders shall be installed in rigid metal conduit, intermediate metal conduit. The following wiring methods shall be permitted if not subject to physical damage: 
(1)  Liquidtight flexible nonmetallic conduit 
(2)  Rigid polyvinyl chloride conduit 
(3)  Reinforced thermosetting resin conduit 
(4)  Electrical metallic tubing where installed on or in a building 
(5)  Electrical nonmetallic tubing where installed within a building 
(6)  Type MC Cable where installed within a building and if not subject to corrosive environment 
( Ord. No. 1956 , § 2, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 4-150. - Specific Amendments to the 2018 International Plumbing Code (IPC). 
Table of Contents, Chapter 7, Section 714; change to read as follows: 
714 Engineered Drainage Design…69 
Section 102.8; change to read as follows: 
102.8 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 15 and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be considered as part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where the differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall be the minimum requirements. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the adopted amendments. Any reference to NFPA 70 shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted. 
Sections 106.6.2 and 106.6.3; change to read as follows: 
106.6.2 Fee schedule. The fees for all plumbing work shall be as adopted by resolution of the governing body of the jurisdiction. 
106.6.3 Fee Refunds. The code official shall establish a policy for authorizing the refunding of fees . {Delete balance of section} 
Section 109; delete entire section and insert the following: 
Section 109 
MEANS OF APPEAL 
109.1 Application for appeal. Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the code official to the board of appeals established by ordinance. The board shall be governed by the enabling ordinance. 
Section 305; change to read as follows: 
305.1 Protection against contact. Metallic piping, except for cast iron, ductile iron and galvanized steel, shall not be placed in direct contact with steel framing members, concrete or cinder walls and floors or other masonry. Metallic piping shall not be placed in direct contact with corrosive soil. Where sheathing is used to prevent direct contact, the sheathing shall have a thickness of not less than 0.008 inch (8 mil) (0.203 mm) and the sheathing shall be made of approved material. Where sheathing protects piping that penetrates concrete or masonry walls or floors, the sheathing shall be installed in a manner that allows movement of the piping within the sheathing. 
305.4.1 Sewer depth. Building sewers shall be a minimum of 12 inches (304 mm) below grade. 
Section 305.7; change to read as follows: 
305.7 Protection of components of plumbing system. Components of a plumbing system installed within 3 feet along alleyways, driveways, parking garages or other locations in a manner in which they could be exposed to damage shall be recessed into the wall or otherwise protected in an approved manner. 
Section 306; change to read as follows: 
306.2.4 Plastic sewer and DWV piping installation. Plastic sewer and DWV piping installed underground shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions. Trench width shall be controlled to not exceed the outside the pipe diameter plus 16 inches or in a trench which has a controlled width equal to the nominal diameter of the diameter of the piping multiplied by 1.25 plus 12 inches. The piping shall be bedded in 4 inches of granular fill and then backfilled compacting the side fill in 6-inch layers on each side of the piping. The compaction shall be to minimum of 85 percent standard proctor density and extend to a minimum of 6 inches above the top of the pipe. 
Section 314.2.1; change to read as follows: 
314.2.1 Condensate disposal. Condensate from all cooling coils and evaporators shall be conveyed from the drain pan outlet to an approved place of disposal. ... {text unchanged} ...Condensate shall not discharge into a street, alley, sidewalk, rooftop, or other areas so as to cause a nuisance. 
Section 409.2; change to read as follows: 
409.2 Water connection. The water supply to a commercial dishwashing machine shall be protected against backflow by an air gap or backflow preventer in accordance with Section 608. (Remainder of section unchanged). 
Section 413.4; change to read as follows: 
413.4 Required location for floor drains. Floor drains shall be installed in the following areas: 
1.  In public laundries and in the central washing facilities of multiple family dwellings, the rooms containing automatic clothes washers shall be provided with floor drains located to readily drain the entire floor area. Such drains shall have a minimum outlet of not less than 3 inches (76 mm) in diameter. 
2.  Commercial kitchens. In lieu of floor drains in commercial kitchens, the Code Official may accept floor sinks. 
3.  Public restrooms. 
Section 502.3; change to read as follows: 
502.3 Water heaters installed in attics. Attics containing a water heater shall be provided . . . {bulk of paragraph unchanged} . . . side of the water heater. The clear access opening dimensions shall be not less than 20 inches by 30 inches (508 mm by 762 mm) where such dimensions are large enough to allow removal of the water heater. As a minimum, for access to the attic space, provide one of the following: 
1.  A permanent stair. 
2.  A pull-down stair with a minimum 300 lb (136 kg) capacity. 
3.  An access door from an upper floor level. 
4.  Access Panel may be used in lieu of items 1, 2, and 3 with prior approval of the Code Official due to building conditions. 
Exceptions: 
1.  The passageway and level service space are not required where the appliance is capable of being serviced and removed… {remainder of text unchanged} 
Section 502.6; add Section 502.6 to read as follows: 
502.6 Water heaters above ground or floor. When the attic, roof, mezzanine or platform in which a water heater is installed is more than eight (8) feet (2438 mm) above the ground or floor level, it shall be made accessible by a stairway or permanent ladder fastened to the building. 
Exception: A max 10-gallon water heater (or larger with approval) is capable of being accessed through a lay-in ceiling and a water heater is installed is not more than ten (10) feet (3048 mm) above the ground or floor level and may be reached with a portable ladder. 
Section 504.6; change to read as follows: 
504.6 Requirements for discharge piping. The discharge piping serving a pressure relief valve, temperature relief valve or combination thereof shall: 
1.  Not be directly connected to the drainage system. 
2.  Discharge through an air gap. 
3.  Not be smaller than the diameter of the outlet of the valve served and shall discharge full size to the air gap. 
4.  Serve a single relief device and shall not connect to piping serving any other relief device or equipment. 
Exception: Multiple relief devices may be installed to a single T & P discharge piping system when approved by the administrative authority and permitted by the manufacture's installation instructions and installed with those instructions. 
5.  Discharge to an approved location or to the outdoors. 
6.  Discharge in a manner that does not cause personal injury or structural damage. 
7.  Discharge to a termination point that is readily observable by the building occupants. 
8.  Not be trapped. 
9.  Be installed so as to flow by gravity. 
10.  Terminate not more than 6 inches above and not less than two times the discharge pipe diameter above the floor or flood level rim of the waste receptor. 
11.  Not have a threaded connection at the end of such piping. 
12.  Not have valves or tee fittings. 
13.  Be constructed of those materials listed in Section 605.4 or materials tested, rated and approved for such use in accordance with ASME A112.4.1. 
14.  Be one nominal size larger than the size of the relief valve outlet, where the relief valve discharge piping is installed with insert fittings. The outlet end of such tubing shall be fastened in place 
Section 504.7.1; change to read as follows: 
Section 504.7.1 Pan size and drain to read as follows: The pan shall be not less than 1 1/2 inches (38 mm) in depth and shall be of sufficient size and shape to receive all dripping or condensate from the tank or water heater. The pan shall be drained by an indirect waste pipe having a diameter of not less than 3/4 inch (19 mm). Piping for safety pan drains shall be of those materials listed in Table 605.4. Multiple pan drains may terminate to a single discharge piping system when approved by the administrative authority and permitted by the manufactures installation instructions and installed with those instructions. 
Section 608.1; change to read as follows: 
608.1 General. A potable water supply system shall be designed, installed and maintained in such a manner so as to prevent contamination from non-potable liquids, solids or gases being introduced into the potable water supply through cross-connections or any other piping connections to the system. Backflow preventer applications shall conform to applicable local regulations, Table 608.1, and as specifically stated in Sections 608.2 through 608.16.10. 
Section 608.17.5; change to read as follows: 
608.17.5 Connections to lawn irrigation systems. 
The potable water supply to lawn irrigation systems shall be protected against backflow by an atmospheric-type vacuum breaker, a pressure-type vacuum breaker, a double-check assembly or a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. A valve shall not be installed downstream from an atmospheric vacuum breaker. Where chemicals are introduced into the system, the potable water supply shall be protected against backflow by a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. 
Section 608.18; change to read as follows: 
608.18 Protection of individual water supplies. An individual water supply shall be located and constructed so as to be safeguarded against contamination in accordance with applicable local regulations. Installation shall be in accordance with Sections 608.17.1 through 608.17.8. 
Section 703.6; Delete 
Section 704.5; added to read as follows: 
704.5 Single stack fittings. Single stack fittings with internal baffle, PVC schedule 40 or cast iron single stack shall be designed by a registered engineer and comply to a national recognized standard 
Section 712.5; add Section 712.5 to read as follows: 
712.5 Dual Pump System. All sumps shall be automatically discharged and, when in any "public use" occupancy where the sump serves more than 10 fixture units, shall be provided with dual pumps or ejectors arranged to function independently in case of overload or mechanical failure. For storm drainage sumps and pumping systems, see Section 1113. 
Section 713, 713.1; change to read as follows: 
SECTION 713
ENGINEERED DRAINAGE DESIGN 
713.1 Design of drainage system. The sizing, design and layout of the drainage system shall be designed by a registered engineer using approved design methods. 
Section 803.3; added to read as follows: 
803.3 Special waste pipe, fittings, and components. Pipes, fittings, and components receiving or intended to receive the discharge of any fixture into which acid or corrosive chemicals are placed shall be constructed of CPVC, high silicone iron, PP, PVDF, chemical resistant glass, or glazed ceramic materials. 
Section 903.1; change to read as follows: 
903.1 Roof extension. Open vent pipes that extend through a roof shall terminate not less than six (6) inches (152 mm) above the roof. Where a roof is to be used for assembly or as a promenade, observation deck, sunbathing deck or similar purposes, open vent pipes shall terminate not less than 7 feet (2134 mm) above the roof. 
Section 918.8; change to read as follows: 
918.8 Where permitted. Individual, branch and circuit vents shall be permitted to terminate with a connection to an individual or branch-type air admittance valve in accordance with Section 918.3.1. Stack vents and vent stacks shall be permitted to terminate to stack-type air admittance valves in accordance with Section 918.3.2. Air admittance valves shall only be installed with the prior approval of the building official. 
Section 1003; see note below: 
Until the Health and Water Departments of the area can coordinate a uniform grease interceptor section, each city will have to modify this section individually. 
Section 1106.1; change to read as follows: 
1106.1 General. The size of the vertical conductors and leaders, building storm drains, building storm sewers, and any horizontal branches of such drains or sewers shall be based on six (6) inches per hour rainfall rate. 
Section 1108.3; change to read as follows: 
1108.3 Sizing of secondary drains. Secondary (emergency) roof drain systems shall be sized in accordance with Section 1106 Scuppers shall be sized to prevent the depth of ponding water from exceeding that for which the roof was designed as determined by Section 1101.7. Scuppers shall not have an opening dimension of less than 4 inches (102 mm). The flow through the primary system shall not be considered when sizing the secondary roof drain system. 
Section 1109; delete this section. 
Section 1202.1; delete Exceptions 1 and 2. 
( Ord. No. 1956 , § 2, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 4-155. - Specific Amendments to the 2018 International Mechanical Code (IMC). 
Section 102.8; change to read as follows: 
102.8 Referenced Codes and Standards. The codes and standards referenced herein shall be those that are listed in Chapter 15 and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the adopted amendments. Any reference to NFPA 70 shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted. 
Section 306.3; change to read as follows: 
306.3 Appliances in Attics. Attics containing appliances shall be provided . . . {bulk of paragraph unchanged} . . . side of the appliance. The clear access opening dimensions shall be a minimum of 20 inches by 30 inches (508 mm by 762 mm), and large enough to allow removal of the largest appliance. As a minimum, for access to the attic space, provide one of the following: 
5.  A permanent stair. 
6.  A pull-down stair with a minimum 300 lb (136 kg) capacity. 
7.  An access door from an upper floor level. 
8.  Access Panel may be used in lieu of items 1, 2, and 3 with prior approval of the Code Official due to building conditions. 
Exceptions: 
1.  The passageway and level service space are not required where the appliance is capable of being serviced and removed… {remainder of text unchanged} 
Section 306.5; change to read as follows: 
306.5 Equipment and Appliances on Roofs or Elevated Structures. Where equipment requiring access or appliances are located on an elevated structure or the roof of a building such that personnel will have to climb higher than 16 feet (4877 mm) above grade to access, an interior or exterior means of access shall be provided. Exterior ladders providing roof access need not extend closer than 12 feet (2438 mm) to the finish grade or floor level below and shall extend to the equipment and appliances' level service space. Such access shall . . . {bulk of section to read the same} . . . on roofs having a slope greater than four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33-percent slope). ... {remainder of text unchanged}. 
Section 306.5.1; change to read as follows: 
306.5.1 Sloped Roofs. Where appliances, equipment, fans or other components that require service are installed on a roof having a slope of three units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25-percent slope) or greater and having an edge more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade at such edge, a catwalk at least 16 inches in width with substantial cleats spaced not more than 16 inches apart shall be provided from the roof access to a level platform at the appliance. The level platform shall be provided on each side of the appliance to which access is required for service, repair or maintenance. The platform shall be not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in any dimension and shall be provided with guards. The guards shall extend not less than 42 inches (1067 mm) above the platform, shall be constructed so as to prevent the passage of a 21-inch-diameter (533 mm) sphere and shall comply with the loading requirements for guards specified in the International Building Code…{remainder of text unchanged}. 
Section 306; add Section 306.6 to read as follows: 
306.6 Water Heaters Above Ground or Floor. When the mezzanine or platform in which a water heater is installed is more than eight (8) feet (2438 mm) above the ground or floor level, it shall be made accessible by a stairway or permanent ladder fastened to the building. 
Exception: A maximum 10 gallon water heater (or larger with approval) is capable of being accessed through a lay-in ceiling and the water heater installed is not more than ten (10) feet (3048 mm) above the ground or floor level and may be reached with a portable ladder. 
Section 307.2.3; amend item 2 to read as follows: 
2.  A separate overflow drain line shall be connected to the drain pan provided with the equipment. Such overflow drain shall discharge to a conspicuous point of disposal to alert occupants in the event of a stoppage of the primary drain. The overflow drain line shall connect to the drain pan at a higher level than the primary drain connection. However, the conspicuous point shall not create a hazard such as dripping over a walking surface or other areas so as to create a nuisance. 
Section 403.2.1; add an item 5 to read as follows: 
1.  Toilet rooms within private dwellings that contain only a water closet, lavatory, or combination thereof may be ventilated with an approved mechanical recirculating fan or similar device designed to remove odors from the air. 
Section 501.3; add an exception to read as follows: 
501.3 Exhaust Discharge. The air removed by every mechanical exhaust system shall be discharged outdoors at a point where it will not cause a public nuisance and not less than the distances specified in Section 501.3.1. The air shall be discharged to a location from which it cannot again be readily drawn in by a ventilating system. Air shall not be exhausted into an attic, crawl space, or be directed onto walkways. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Whole-house ventilation-type attic fans shall be permitted to discharge into the attic space of dwelling units having private attics. 
2.  Commercial cooking recirculating systems. 
3.  Where installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and where mechanical or natural ventilation is otherwise provided in accordance with Chapter 4, listed and labeled domestic ductless range hoods shall not be required to discharge to the outdoors. 
4.  Toilet room exhaust ducts may terminate in a warehouse or shop area when infiltration of outside air is present. 
Section 607.5.1; change to read as follows: 
607.5.1 Fire Walls. Ducts and air transfer openings permitted in fire walls in accordance with Section 705.11 of the International Building Code shall be protected with listed fire dampers installed in accordance with their listing. For hazardous exhaust systems see Section 510.1-510.9 IMC. 
( Ord. No. 1956 , § 2, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 4-160. - Specific Amendments to the 2018 International Energy Conservation Code (IECC). 
Section C102/R102 General; add Section C102.1.2 and R102.1.2 (N1101.4.1) to read as follows: 
C102.1.2 Alternative compliance. A building certified by a national, state, or local accredited energy efficiency program and determined by the Energy Systems Laboratory to be in compliance with the energy efficiency requirements of this section may, at the option of the Code Official, be considered in compliance. The United States Environmental Protection Agency's Energy Star Program certification of energy code equivalency shall be considered in compliance. 
R102.1.2 (N1101.4.1) Alternative compliance. A building certified by a national, state, or local accredited energy efficiency program and determined by the Energy Systems Laboratory to be in compliance with the energy efficiency requirements of this section may, at the option of the Code Official, be considered in compliance. The United States Environmental Protection Agency's Energy Star Program certification of energy code equivalency shall be considered in compliance. Regardless of the program or the path to compliance, each 1- and 2-family dwelling shall be tested for air and duct leakage as prescribed in Section R402.4.1.2 (N1102.4.1.2) and R403.3.3 (N1103.3.3) respectively. 
Section R202 (N1101.6) Definitions; add the following definition: 
**PROJECTION FACTOR. The ratio of the horizontal depth of the overhang, eave or permanently attached shading device, divided by the distance measured vertically from the bottom of the fenestration glazing to the underside of the overhang, eave or permanently attached shading device. 
Section R202 (N1101.6) Definitions; add the following definition: 
**DYNAMIC GLAZING. Any fenestration product that has the fully reversible ability to change it performance properties, including U-factor, solar heat gain coefficient (SHGC), or visible transmittance (VT). 
Table 402.1.2 (N1102.1.2) INSULATION AND FENESTRATION REQUIREMENTS BY COMPONENT; the Fenestration U-factor for Climate Zone 3 is amended as follows: 
CLIMATE ZONE 	FENESTRATION U-FACTOR 
3 	0.35 
 
Section R402.3.2 (N1102.3.2) Glazed fenestration SHGC; amend by adding a paragraph and table following the exception to read as follows: 
Where vertical fenestration is shaded by an overhang, eave, or permanently attached shading device, the SHGC required in Table R402.1.2 shall be reduced by using the multipliers in Table R402.3.2 SHGC Multipliers for Permanent Projections. 
Table R402.3.2 SHGC Multipliers for Permanent Projections a 
Projection Factor 	SHGC Multiplier 
(all Other Orientation) 	SHGC Multiplier 
(North Oriented) 
0 - 0.10 	1.00 	1.00 
>0.10 - 0.20 	0.91 	0.95 
>0.20 - 0.30 	0.82 	0.91 
>0.30 - 0.40 	0.74 	0.87 
>0.40 - 0.50 	0.67 	0.84 
>0.50 - 0.60 	0.61 	0.81 
>0.60 - 0.70 	0.56 	0.78 
>0.70 - 0.80 	0.51 	0.76 
>0.80 - 0.90 	0.47 	0.75 
>0.90 - 1.00 	0.44 	0.73 
 
a North oriented means within 45 degrees of true north. 
R402.4.1.2 (N1102.4.1.2) Testing; add a last paragraph to read as follows: 
Mandatory testing shall only be performed by individuals that are certified to perform air infiltration testing certified by national or state organizations as approved by the building official. The certified individuals must be an independent third-party entity, and may not be employed; or have any financial interest in the company that constructs the structure. 
Section R402.4 (N1102.4) Air leakage (Mandatory); add a new section and table to read as follows: 
R402.4.1.3 (N1102.4.1.3) Testing option - ACH tradeoff. As an option to the air leakage rate set out in Section R402.4.1.2 (N1102.4.1.2), 1- and 2-family homes meeting all of the listed criteria below and the thermal envelope requirements in Table R402.4.1.3 (N1102.4.1.3) will be considered compliant when tested and verified as having an air leakage rate to not less than or equal to four air changes per hour when tested and reported in accordance with the testing standards and reporting criteria listed in Section R402.4.1.2 (N1102.4.1.2). 
The compliance equivalency is limited as follows: 
1.  Limited to a conditioned floor area between 1,000 and 6,000 square feet, 
2.  Limited to between 2 to 6 bedrooms, 
3.  Assumes all ductwork and mechanical equipment is located in the unconditioned attic, 
4.  Assumes typical wood framing in the walls and roof, and 
5.  Assumes one of the following heating/cooling systems: 
a.  All electric system with a heat pump for heating, or 
b.  A system with electric cooling and natural gas heating. 
Dwellings using electric resistance strip heating do not qualify for this tradeoff. 
TABLE R402.4.1.3 (N1102.4.1.3)a 
Envelope Component 	Option #1 	Option #2 
R402.4 Air Leakage 	< 4 ACH50 	< 4 ACH50 
Wall Insulation R-value 	R13 + R3b 	R13 + R3 b 
Fenestration U-factor 	< 0.32 	< 0.32 
Fenestration SHGC 	< 0.25 	< 0.25 
Ceiling R-value 	> R49 	> R49 
Duct Insulation R-value 	R8 	R6 
Radiant Barrier Required 	No 	Yes 
 
a Except for the values listed in the table, all other mandatory code provisions are applicable. 
b The first value listed is the R-value of cavity insulation, the second value is the R-value of the continuous insulation or insulated siding. 
Section R402.4 Air leakage (Mandatory); add a new section to read as follows: 
R402.4.1.4 Testing options for R2 multifamily dwelling units. As an option to the air leakage rate set out in Section R402.4.1.2, multifamily dwelling units will be considered compliant when tested and verified as having an air leakage rate to the air leakage rate set out in either Section R402.4.1.4.1 or Section R402.4.1.4.2 when tested and reported in accordance with the testing standards and reporting criteria listed in Section R402.4.1.2 
R402.4.1.4.1 Total air leakage rate for interior multifamily dwelling units. Interior multifamily dwelling units with a measured, "unguarded" total air leakage result of 5.3 ACH50 or less shall be considered compliant. 
R402.4.1.4.2 Total air leakage rate for corner multifamily dwelling units. Corner multifamily units with a measured, "unguarded" total leakage result of less than 5.0 ACH50 shall be considered compliant. 
Section R402.4 Air leakage (Mandatory); add a new section to read as follows: 
R402.4.1.5 Sampling options for R2 multifamily dwelling units. For buildings having three or more dwelling units, a minimum of 15% of the dwelling units in each building must be tested as required by Section R402.4.1.2. Prior to beginning sampling for testing, "Initial Testing" is required for each multifamily property. "Initial Testing" shall consist of the 3 rd party testing contractor performing the required tests on at least three consecutive dwelling units. Test results from the "Initial Testing" must satisfy minimum code requirements before sampling is permitted. Dwelling units selected for the "Initial Testing" must be within the same building. Dwelling units selected for "Initial Testing" shall not be included in a "sample group" or counted toward the minimum 15% of dwelling units tested. The building official shall randomly select the three dwelling units for "Initial Testing." The building official may delegate the random selection to the designated 3 rd party testing contractor. 
R402.4.1.5.1 Sample group Identification and Sampling. The builder shall identify a "sample group" which may be a building, floor, fire area or portion thereof. All of the dwelling units within the "sample group" must be at the same stage of construction and must be ready for testing. The building official shall randomly select at least 15% of dwelling units from each "sample group" for testing. The building official may delegate the random selection to the designated 3 rd party testing contractor. 
If each tested dwelling unit within a "sample group" meets the minimum code requirements, then all dwelling units in the "sample group" are considered to meet the minimum code requirements. 
Before a building may be deemed compliant with the testing as required, each "sample group" must be deemed compliant with the minimum code requirements. The sum total of all of the tested dwelling units across all "sample groups" shall not be less than a minimum of 15% of the dwelling units in a building. 
R402.4.1.5.2 Failure to Meet Code Requirement(s). If any dwelling units within the identified "sample group" fail to meet a code requirement as determined by testing, the builder will be directed to correct the cause(s) of failure, and 30% of the remaining dwelling units in the "sample group" will be randomly selected for testing by the building official, or third-party testing contractor, regarding the specific cause(s) of failure. 
If any failures occur in the additional dwelling units, all remaining dwelling units in the sample group must be individually tested for code compliance. 
A multifamily property with three failures within a 90-day period is no longer eligible to use the sampling protocol in that community or project until successfully repeating "Initial Testing." Sampling may be reinstated after at least three consecutive dwelling units are individually verified to meet all code requirements. 
A Certificate of Occupancy may not may be issued for any building until testing has been performed and deemed to satisfy the minimum code requirements on the dwelling unit(s) identified for testing. 
R403.3.3 (N1103.3.3) Duct Testing (Mandatory); add a last paragraph to read as follows: 
Mandatory testing shall only be performed by individuals that are certified to perform duct testing leakage testing certified by national or state organizations as approved by the building official. The certified individuals must be an independent third-party entity, and may not be employed; or have any financial interest in the company that constructs the structure. 
Section R403.3 Ducts; add a new section to read as follows: 
R403.3.4.1 Sampling options for R2 multifamily dwelling units. For buildings having three or more dwelling units, a minimum of 15% of the dwelling units in each building must be tested as required by Section R403.3.3. Prior to beginning sampling for testing, "Initial Testing" is required for each multifamily property. "Initial Testing" shall consist of the 3 rd party testing contractor performing the required tests on at least three consecutive dwelling units. Test results from the "Initial Testing" must satisfy minimum code requirements before sampling is permitted. Dwelling units selected for the "Initial Testing" must be within the same building. Dwelling units selected for "Initial Testing" shall not be included in a "sample group" or counted toward the minimum 15% of dwelling units tested. The building official shall randomly select the three dwelling units for "Initial Testing." The building official may delegate the random selection to the designated 3 rd party testing contractor. 
R403.3.4.1.1 Sample group Identification and Sampling. The builder shall identify a "sample group" which may be a building, floor, fire area or portion thereof. All of the dwelling units within the "sample group" must be at the same stage of construction and must be ready for testing. The building official shall randomly select at least 15% of dwelling units from each "sample group" for testing. The building official may delegate the random selection to the designated 3 rd party testing contractor. 
If each tested dwelling unit within a "sample group" meets the minimum code requirements, then all dwelling units in the "sample group" are considered to meet the minimum code requirements. 
Before a building may be deemed compliant with the testing as required, each "sample group" must be deemed compliant with the minimum code requirements. The sum total of all of the tested dwelling units across all "sample groups" shall not be less than a minimum of 15% of the dwelling units in a building. 
R403.3.4.1.2 Failure to Meet Code Requirement(s). If any dwelling units within the identified "sample group" fail to meet a code requirement as determined by testing, the builder will be directed to correct the cause(s) of failure, and 30% of the remaining dwelling units in the "sample group" will be randomly selected for testing by the building official, or third-party testing contractor, regarding the specific cause(s) of failure. 
If any failures occur in the additional dwelling units, all remaining dwelling units in the sample group must be individually tested for code compliance. 
A multifamily property with three failures within a 90-day period is no longer eligible to use the sampling protocol in that community or project until successfully repeating "Initial Testing." Sampling may be reinstated after at least three consecutive dwelling units are individually verified to meet all code requirements. 
A Certificate of Occupancy may not may be issued for any building until testing has been performed and deemed to satisfy the minimum code requirements on the dwelling unit(s) identified for testing. 
Section C402.2/R402.2 (N1102.2) Specific insulation requirements (Prescriptive); add Section C402.2.8 and R402.2.14 (N1102.2.14) to read as follows: 
Section C402.2.8/R402.2.14 (N1102.2.14) Insulation installed in walls. Insulation installed in walls shall be totally enclosed on all sides consisting of framing lumber, gypsum, sheathing, wood structural panel sheathing or other equivalent material approved by the building official. 
Section C403.7.4 Energy recovery ventilation systems (Mandatory); add exception #12 to read as follows: 
12.  Individual ventilation systems that serve an individual dwelling unit or sleeping unit. 
Section C403.11.1 Duct and Plenum Insulation and Sealing (Mandatory); is amended by adding a second paragraph to read as follows: 
Environmental ducts and plenums installed in vertical chases, both supply and exhaust, where the ducts or plenums will not be accessible after construction completion, shall be leak tested in accordance with the SMACNA HVAC Air Leakage Test Manual to the installed ductwork class and pressure requirements. 
Documentation shall be furnished demonstrating that representative sections totaling not less than 25 percent of the duct area have been tested and that all tested sections comply with the requirements of this section. 
Section R404.1 (N1104.1); revised in its entirety to read as follows: 
Section R404.1 (N1104.1) Lighting equipment (Mandatory). Not less than 75 percent of the lamps in permanently installed lighting fixtures or not less than 75 percent of the permanently installed lighting fixtures shall contain only high-efficacy lamps. 
Section 405.2 (N1105.2); add the exception to read as follows: 
Section 405.2 (N1105.2) Mandatory requirements. Compliance with the section requires that the mandatory provisions identified in Section 401.2 be met. Supply and return ducts not completely inside the building thermal envelope shall be insulated to an R-value of not less than R-6. 
Exceptions: 
1.  For one and two family dwellings the maximum envelope leakage of 4 ACH50 is permitted provided the envelope leakage in the Standard Reference Design is 3 ACH50 and all other requirements of Section R405 are met, including all other mandatory measures. The annual energy cost or source energy usage of the Proposed Design must be equal to or less than that of the Standard Reference Design. 
2.  For multifamily or townhomes and buildings classified as Group R2 and Group R4 of three stories or less the maximum envelope leakage of less than 5 ACH50 is permitted provided the envelope leakage in the Standard Reference Design is 3 ACH50 and all other requirements of Section R405 are met, including all other mandatory measures. The annual energy cost or source energy usage of the Proposed Design must be equal to or less than that of the Standard Reference Design. 
Section R405.6.2 (N1105.6.2); add the following sentence to the end of paragraph: 
Acceptable performance software simulation tools may include, but are not limited to, REM Rate TM ; Energy Gauge ® ; ICF International Beacon Residential; Ekotrope, HERS Module; Right-Energy HERS and IC3. Other performance software programs as listed by RESNET ® and having the ability to provide a report as outlined in R405.4.2 may also be deemed acceptable performance simulation programs and may be considered by the building official. 
Section C405.9. Voltage drop in feeders; deleted in its entirety. 
TABLE R406.4 (N1106.4) MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX; amend to read as follows: 
TABLE R406.4 (N1106.4) 1 
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX 
CLIMATE ZONE 	ENERGY RATING INDEX 
3 	65 
 
1 This table is effective until August 31, 2019. 
TABLE R406.4 (N1106.4) 2 
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX 
CLIMATE ZONE 	ENERGY RATING INDEX 
3 	63 
 
2 The table is effective from September 1, 2019 to August 31, 2022. 
TABLE R406.4 (N1106.4) 3 
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX 
CLIMATE ZONE 	ENERGY RATING INDEX 
3 	59 
 
3 This table is effective on or after September 1, 2022. 
Section C408.3.1 Functional Testing; amend to read as follows: 
C408.3.1 Functional Testing. Prior to passing final inspection, the registered design professional orapproved agency shall provide evidence that the lighting control systems have been tested to ensure that control hardware and software are calibrated, adjusted, programmed, and in proper working condition in accordance with the construction documents and manufacturer's instructions. Functional testing shall be in accordance with Sections C408.3.1.1 through C408.3.1.3 for the applicable control type. 
( Ord. No. 1956 , § 2, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 4-165. - Specific Amendments to the 2018 International Existing Building Code (IEBC). 
Section 102.4; change to read as follows: 
[A] 102.4 Referenced codes and standards. The codes, when specifically adopted, and standards referenced in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference and as further regulated in Sections 102.4.1 and 102.4.2. 
Section 202; amend definition of Existing Building as follows: 
Existing Building - A building, structure, or space, with an approved final inspection issued under a code edition which is at least 2 published code editions preceding the currently adopted building code; or a change of occupancy. 
Section 202; amend definition of Existing Structure as follows: 
Existing Structure - A building, structure, or space, with an approved final inspection issued under a code edition which is at least 2 published code editions preceding the currently adopted building code; or a change of occupancy. 
Section 305.1; adds an exception to read as follows: 
Exception: Components of projects regulated by and registered with Architectural Barriers Division of Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation shall be deemed to be incompliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
Section 305.4.2; add Number 7 to the list of requirements as follows: 
7.  At least one accessible family or assisted use toilet room shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 11 of the International Building Code. 
Section 401.3 Flood Hazard Areas; delete this section. 
Section 405.2.5 Flood Hazard Areas; delete this section. 
406.1 Material. Existing electrical wiring and equipment undergoing repair shall be allowed to be repaired or replaced with like material, in accordance with the requirements of NFPA 70. 
Section 502.3 Flood Hazard Areas; delete this section. 504.1.2 Existing fire escapes.;p0; Existing fire escapes shall continue to be accepted as a component in the means of egress in existing buildings only. Existing fire escapes shall be permitted to be repaired or replaced. 
Section 504.1.3; delete entire section. 
Section 507.3 Flood Hazard Areas; delete this section. 
Section 701.3 Flood Hazard Areas; delete this section. 
Section 702.6 Materials and methods. New work shall comply with the materials and methods requirements in the applicable City of Keller building and zoning ordinances, the International Building Code, the International Energy Conservation Code,… {remainder of paragraph as is}. 
702.6 Materials and methods. All new work shall comply with the materials and methods requirements in the International Building Code, International Energy Conservation Code, International Mechanical Code, National Electrical Code, and International Plumbing Code, as applicable, that specify material standards, detail of installation and connection, joints, penetrations, and continuity of any element, component, or system in the building. 
802.5.1 Minimum requirement. Every portion of open-sided walking surfaces, including mezzanines, equipment platforms, aisles, stairs, ramps and landings that is more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor or grade below and is not provided with guards, or those in which the existing guards are judged to be in danger of collapsing, shall be provided with guards. 
Section 803.1 Scope. Add sentence after "…beyond the work area" to read as follows: 
For the purpose of fire sprinkler protection and fire alarm requirements included in this section, the work area shall be extended to include at least the entire tenant space or spaces bounded by walls capable of resisting the passage of smoke containing the subject work area, and if the work area includes a corridor, hallway, or other exit access, then such corridor, hallway, or other exit access shall be protected in its entirety on that particular floor level. 
Section 803.2.4; change exception to read as follows: 
Exception: Supervision is not required where the Fire Code does not require such for new construction 
Section 803.3; change section to read as follows: 
803.3 Standpipes. Refer to Section 1103.6 of the Fire Code for retroactive standpipe requirements. 
{Delete rest of Section 804.3.} 
Section 805.2;remove Exception #1 
Exception 1. 
805.3.1.2 Fire Escapes required. For other than Group I-2, where more than one exit is required an existing fire escape complying with section 805.3.1.2.1 shall be accepted as providing one of the required means of egress. 
Section 805.3.1.2.1; change to read as follows: 
805.3.1.2.1 Fire Escape access and details - … 
1.  [Remain unchanged] 
2.  Access to a fire escape shall be through a door... 
3.  Item Deleted 
4.  [Remain unchanged] 
5.  In all buildings of Group E occupancy up to and including the 12th grade, buildings of Group I occupancy, boarding houses, and childcare centers, ladders of any type are prohibited on fire escapes used as a required means of egress. 
Section 805.5.2 Transoms; add language to read as follows: 
805.5.2 Transoms. In all buildings of Group B, E, [Remainder unchanged] 
Section 904.1; add sentence to read as follows: 
For the purpose of fire sprinkler protection and fire alarm requirements included in this section, the work area shall be extended to include at least the entire tenant space or spaces bounded by walls containing the subject work area, and if the work area includes a corridor, hallway, or other exit access, then such corridor, hallway, or other exit access shall be protected in its entirety on that particular floor level. 
Section 904.1.1; change sentence to read as follows: 
904.1.1 High-rise buildings. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in work areas of high-rise buildings. 
Section 1103.3 Flood Hazard Areas; delete this section. 
Section 1106 STORM SHELTERS; Section 1106.1 Addition to a Group E Occupancy. Amend the first sentence as follows [Exceptions to remain the same]: 
Where an addition is added to an existing Group E Occupancy located in an area where the shelter design wind speed for tornados is 250 mph in accordance with Figure 304.2(1) of ICC 500 and the occupant load in the addition is 50 or more, the addition shall have a storm shelter constructed in accordance with ICC 500 and/or state law. 
Section 1402.6 Flood Hazard Areas; delete this section. 
( Ord. No. 1956 , § 2, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 4-170. - Specific Amendments to the 2018 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code (ISPSC). 
Section 102.9 Other laws. The provisions of this code shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law, including but not limited to: 
1.  Texas Department of State Health Services (TDSHS); Standards for Public Pools and Spas; §285.181 through §285.208, (TDSHS rules do not apply to pools serving one- and two family dwellings or townhouses). 
2.  Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation (TDLR); 2012 Texas Accessibility Standards (TAS), TAS provide the scoping and technical requirements for accessibility for Swimming Pool, wading pools and spas and shall comply with 2012 TAS, Section 242. (TAS rules do not apply to pools serving one- and two family dwellings or townhouses). 
Exception: Elements regulated under Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation (TDLR) and built in accordance with TDLR approved plans, including any variances or waivers granted by the TDLR, shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this Chapter. 
Section 103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. The [Building Services] is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the code official. [Building Services] is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the code official for operation and maintenance of any public swimming pool in accordance this code, local and state law. 
Section 107.4; Delete entirely (covered by general provisions in Code of Ordinances): 
107.5 Stop work orders. Upon notice from the code official, work on any system that is being done contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. The notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be in violation of this code. 
Section 202 DEFINITIONS; insert definition; change to read as follows: 
Tarrant County Health Department regulates the operation of public pools. Routine inspections on pools and spas open to the public are conducted to document compliance with the standards set forth in State law. 
303 SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS, AND HOT TUBS 
303.1 Swimming pools. Swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and in good repair. It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain on any property within the city a pond, pool, depression or container which contains unwholesome, impure or offensive water, or which is conducive to the breeding of mosquitoes. 
305.1 General. 
The provisions of this section shall apply to the design of barriers for restricting entry into areas having pools and spas. In one-and two-family dwellings and townhouses, where spas or hot tubs are equipped with a lockable safety cover complying with ASTM F1346 and swimming pools are equipped with a powered safety cover that complies with ASTM F1346, the areas where those spas, hot tubs or pools are located shall not be required to comply with Sections 305.2 through 305.7. 
305.2 Outdoor swimming pools and spas. Outdoor pools and spasand indoor swimming pools shall be surrounded by a barrier that complies with Sections 305.2.1 through 305.7 and in accordance with the Texas Administrative Code, Texas Health and Safety Code 757 for public pools. 
Add subsection 305.2.7.1; to read as follows: 
305.2.7.1 Chain link fencing prohibited. Chain link fencing is not permitted as a barrier in public pools built after January 1, 1994. 
305.4 Structure wall as a barrier. Where a wall of a one and two family dwelling or townhouse or its accessory structure serves as part of a barrier and where doors or windows provide direct access to the pool or spa through that wall, one of the following shall be required: 
1.  Remainder Unchanged 
2.  Remainder Unchanged 
3.  Remainder Unchanged 
The wall of a building with windows in accordance with 2018 International Building Code, Section 1030 in Group R2 occupancies shall not be used as part of pool enclosure. Other windows that are part of a pool yard enclosure shall be permanently closed and unable to be opened for public pools. 
305.6 Natural barriers used in a one and two family dwelling or townhouse. In the case where the pool or spa area abuts the edge of a lake or other natural body of water, public access is not permitted or allowed along the shoreline, and required barriers extend to and beyond the water's edge a minimum of eighteen (18) inches, a barrier is not required between the natural body of water shoreline and the pool or spa. 
Section 307.1.4 Accessibility; Add exception to Section to 307.1.4 as follows: 
Exception: Components of projects regulated by and registered with Architectural Barriers Division of Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
Section 310; Change to read as follows: 
310.1 General. Suction entrapment avoidance for pools and spas shall be provided in accordance with APSP 7 or for public swimming pools in accordance with State of Texas Rules for Public Swimming Pools and Spas, Title 25 TAC Chapter 265 Subchapter L, Rule §265.190. 
Section 313.7; Change to read as follows: 
313.7 Emergency shutoff switch for spas and hot tubs. A clearly labeled emergency shutoff or control switch for the purpose of stopping the motor(s) that provide power to the recirculation system and jet system shall be installed at a point readily accessible to the users and not less than 1.5 m (5 ft.) away, adjacent to, and within sight of the spa or hot tub. This requirement shall not apply to one and two family dwellings and townhouses. 
Section 402.12; Change to read as follows: 
402.12 Water envelopes. The minimum diving water envelopes shall be in accordance with Texas department of State Health services, Administrative Code Title 25, Chapter 265, Section 186 (e) and Figure: 25 TAC 256.186(e)(6). (Delete Table 402.12 and Figure 402.12) ADD: Figure: 25 TAC §265.186(e)(6) 
Maximum Diving Board Height Over Water 	¾ Meter 	1 Meter 	3 Meters 
Max. Diving Board Length 	12 ft. 	16 ft. 	16 ft. 
Minimum Diving Board Overhang 	2 ft. 6 in. 	5 ft. 	5 ft. 
D1 Minimum 	8 ft. 6 in. 	11 ft. 2 in. 	12 ft. 2 in. 
D2 Minimum 	9 ft. 	10 ft. 10 in. 	11 ft. 10 in. 
D3 Minimum 	4 ft. 	6 ft. 	6 ft. 
L1 Minimum 	4 ft. 	5 ft. 	5 ft. 
L2 Minimum 	12 ft. 	16 ft. 5 in. 	19 ft. 9 in. 
L3 Minimum 	14 ft. 10 in. 	13 ft. 2 in. 	13 ft. 11 in. 
L4 Minimum 	30 ft. 10 in. 	34 ft. 7 in. 	38 ft. 8 in. 
L5 Minimum 	8 ft. 	10 ft. 	13 ft. 
H Minimum 	16 ft. 	16 ft. 	16 ft. 
From Plummet to Pool Wall at Side 	9 ft. 	10 ft. 	11 ft. 6 in. 
From Plummet to Adjacent Plummet 	10 ft. 	10 ft. 	10 ft. 
 
 
 
Section 402.13; Change to read as follows: 
402.13 Ladders for diving equipment. Ladders shall be provided with two grab rails or two handrails. There shall be a uniform distance between ladder treads, with a 7 inch (178 mm minimum) distance and 12 inch (305 mm) maximum distance. Supports, platforms, steps, and ladders for diving equipment shall be designed to carry the anticipated loads. Steps and ladders shall be of corrosion-resistant material, easily cleanable and with slip-resistant tread; 
Section 411.2.1 & 411.2.2; Change to read as follows: 
411.2.1 Tread dimensions and area. Treads shall have a minimum unobstructed horizontal depth (i.e., horizontal run) of 12 inches and a minimum width of 20 inches. 
411.2.2 Risers. Risers for steps shall have a maximum uniform height of 10 inches, with the bottom riser height allowed to taper to zero 
Section 411.5.1 & 411.5.2; Change to read as follows: 
411.5.1 Swimouts. Swimouts, located in either the deep or shallow area of a pool, shall comply with all of the following: 
1.  Unchanged 
2.  Unchanged 
3.  Unchanged 
4.  The leading edge shall be visibly set apart and provided with a horizontal solid or broken stripe at least 1 inch wide on the top surface along the front leading edge of each step. This stripe shall be plainly visible to persons on the pool deck. The stripe shall be a contrasting color to the background on which it is applied, and the color shall be permanent in nature and shall be a slip-resistant surface 
411.5.2 Underwater seats and benches. Underwater seats and benches, whether used alone or in conjunction with pool stairs, shall comply with all of the following: 
1.  Unchanged 
2.  Unchanged 
3.  Unchanged 
4.  Unchanged 
5.  The leading edge shall be visually set apart and provided with a horizontal solid or broken stripe at least 1 inch wide on the top surface along the front leading edge of each step. This stripe shall be plainly visible to persons on the pool deck. The stripe shall be a contrasting color to the background on which it is applied, and the color shall be permanent in nature and shall be a slip-resistant surface. 
6.  Unchanged 
7.  Unchanged 
Section 603.2; Change to read as follows: 
603.2 
Class A and B pools: Class A and B pools over 5 feet deep: the transition point of the pool from the shallow area to the deep area of the pool shall be visually set apart with a 4-inch minimum width row of floor tile, a painted line, or similar means using a color contrasting with the bottom; and a rope and float line shall be provided between 1 foot and 2 feet on the shallow side of the 5-foot depth along and parallel to this depth from one side of the pool to the other side. The floats shall be spaced at not greater than 7-foot intervals; and the floats shall be secured so they will not slide or bunch up. The stretched float line shall be of sufficient size and strength to offer a good handhold and support loads normally imposed by users. If the owner or operator of the pool knows or should have known in the exercise of ordinary care that a rope or float is missing, broken, or defective, the problem shall be promptly remedied. 
Section 610.5.1; Change to read: 
610.5.1 Uniform height of 10 inches. Except for the bottom riser, risers at the centerline shall have a maximum uniform height of 10 inches (254 mm). The bottom riser height shall be permitted to vary from the other risers. 
Section 804 Diving Water Envelopes; Change to read as follows: 
Section 804.1 General. The minimum diving water envelopes shall be in accordance with Table 804.1 and Figure 804.1, or the manufacturer's specifications, whichever is greater. Negative construction tolerances shall not be applied to the dimensions of the minimum diving water envelopes given in Table 804.1. 
( Ord. No. 1956 , § 2, 11-19-19)  
Sec. 4-180. - Specific Amendments to the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code (ISPSC). 
Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED. 
 
Secs. 4-181—4-299. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FLOOD HAZARD PREVENTION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1926, § 2, adopted March 5, 2019, repealed former Art. III, §§ 4-300—4-340, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Art. III pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1472, § 2, Sept. 15, 1909. 
Cross reference— Mobile homes, Ch. 11; storm drainage plans, § 16-900. 
 
Sec. 4-300. - Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose, and methods of reducing flood losses. 
(a)  Statutory authorization. The Legislature of the State of Texas has in the Flood Control Insurance Act, Texas Water Code, Section 16.315, delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City Council does ordain as follows: 
(b)  Findings of fact. 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of Keller are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, flood proofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(c)  Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(d)  Methods of reducing flood losses. In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
( Ord. No. 1926 , § 2, 3-5-19)  
Sec. 4-310. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article it's most reasonable application. 
Alluvial fan flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. 
Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a variance. 
Appurtenant structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
Area of future conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one (1) percent annual chance (100 year) flood based on future conditions hydrology. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one-percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of the Firm, Zone A usually is refined into zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1—30, A99, AR, AR/A1—30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1—30, VE or V. 
Base flood means the flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base Flood Elevation (BFE) is the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for Zones A, AE, AH, A1—A30, AR, V1—V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a one-percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year (also called the base flood). 
Basement means any area of the building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR). A CLOMR is defined as the Federal Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA's) comment on a proposed project that would affect the hydrologic and/or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodway or effective base flood elevations. There is no appeal period. The letter becomes effective on the date sent. This letter does not revise an effective National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) map, it indicates whether the project, if built as proposed, would or would not be removed from the special flood hazard area (SFHA) by FEMA if later submitted as a request for a letter of map revision (LOMR). 
Development means any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means, for insurance purposes, a non-basement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for serving the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters, or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study (FIS) is the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the flood boundary-floodway map. 
Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding). 
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance, and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
Flood proofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway. See "regulatory floodway" definition. 
Functionally dependent use means a use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(a)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(b)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(c)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(d)  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
(1)  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or; 
(2)  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Letter of map revision (LOMR). LOMR is an official amendment by letter from the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), to an effective National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) map. A LOMR may change flood insurance risk zones, floodplain and/or floodway boundary delineations, planimetric features, and/or BFE. The letter becomes effective on the date sent. 
Levee means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for serving the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
No adverse effects means, for the purpose of floodplain damage reduction, that the developer or property owner shall be responsible for the necessary facilities to provide drainage controls such that properties located immediately upstream, immediately downstream, or adjacent to the development are not adversely affected by the storm water runoff from the development. "No Adverse Effects" does not mean there are no changes in the hydrology or hydraulics of the storm water runoff, but that any changes do not cause any significant damage to the adjacent properties that was not already occurring. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is (i) built on a single chassis; (ii) four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (iv) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
Special flood hazard area. See "area of special flood hazard." 
Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within one hundred and eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: (1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions or (2) Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Variance is a grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this article when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.) 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in the National Flood Insurance Program regulations Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
( Ord. No. 1926 , § 2, 3-5-19)  
Sec. 4-320. - General provisions. 
(a)  Lands to which this article applies. This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the City of Keller. 
(b)  Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Tarrant County, Texas And Incorporated Areas," dated March 21, 2019 with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps dated March 21, 2019, and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. 
(c)  Establishment of development permit. A "floodplain development permit" shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(e)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(f)  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be; (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(g)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
( Ord. No. 1926 , § 2, 3-5-19)  
Sec. 4-330. - Administration. 
(a)  Designation of the floodplain administrator. The director of public works or designee is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance - National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(b)  Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Review permit application to determine whether the proposed building site project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of the ordinance from which this article derives. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the State Coordinating Agency which is the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB) and also the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(7)  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 4-320(b), the floodplain administrator shall require the base flood elevation data be generated by the developer or property owner through a detailed engineering study for all Zone A areas, for all areas within one hundred (100) feet of the contour lines of Zone A areas, and all other streams or drainage ways not mapped by FEMA, as indicated on the community's FIRM, in order to administer the provisions of section 4-340. 
(9)  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) be permitted within Zones A1—30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. 
(10)  When a regulatory floodway has been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new construction substantial Improvements or other development (including fill) be permitted within the special flood hazard area unless it has been demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the based flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. 
(c)  Permit procedures. 
(1)  Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
a.  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be flood proofed; 
c.  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential flood proofed structure shall meet the flood proofing criteria of section 4-340(b)(2); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; 
e.  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 4-330(b)(1). 
(2)  Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors: 
a.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
b.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
c.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
d.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
e.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
f.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
g.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
h.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
i.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
(d)  Variance procedures. 
(1)  The Keller City Council shall serve as the appeal board and shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(2)  The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(3)  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(4)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) upon request. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(6)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (½) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in section 4-330(c)(2) of this article have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (½) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(7)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this article (section 4-300(c)). 
(8)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(9)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
a.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
b.  Variances shall only be issued upon: (i) showing a good and sufficient cause; (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
c.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(10)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that (i) the criteria outlined in subsections (1) through (9) are met, and (ii) the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(11)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this article. 
( Ord. No. 1926 , § 2, 3-5-19)  
Sec. 4-340. - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
(a)  General standards. In all areas of special flood hazards, the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction, development, or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that cause no adverse effects on upstream properties, downstream properties, and adjacent properties having to do with storm water runoff; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(5)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(6)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(7)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and, 
(8)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(9)  Where base flood elevation data is utilized for new and substantial improvements, obtain and maintain records of certified elevation data for the lowest floor and floodproofing elevations. 
(b)  Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in (i) Section 4-320(b), (ii) Section 4-330(b)(8), or (iii) Section 4-340(c)(3), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to two (2) feet above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in section 4-330(c)(1)a., is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to two feet (2') above the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are flood proofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two (2) openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square-foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1') above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.  All manufactured homes shall be in compliance with section 4-340(b)(1). 
c.  Require that all manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1—30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to two feet (2') above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
d.  Require that all manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1—30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of paragraph (4) of this section be elevated so that either: 
(i)  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at two (2) feet above the base flood elevation; or 
(ii)  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1—30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either (i) be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, or (ii) be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or (iii) meet the permit requirements of Section 4-330(c)(1), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in paragraph (4) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(c)  Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(1)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with subsections 4-300(b), (c) and (d) of this article. 
(2)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of section 4-320(c); section 4-330(c); and the provisions of section 4-340 of this article. 
(3)  Base flood elevation data for a fully developed upstream drainage area shall be generated for all subdivision proposals and other proposed developments including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions. 
(4)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated by a detailed engineering study for all Zone A areas, within one hundred (100) feet of the contour lines of Zone A areas, and other streams not mapped by FEMA, as indicated on the community's FIRM. 
(5)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(6)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(d)  Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH Zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 4-320(b) are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to two (2) feet above the base flood elevation or as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM above the highest adjacent grade, but in no case less than two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures; 
a.  Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to two (2) feet above the base flood elevation or as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM above the highest adjacent grade, but in no case less than two (2) feet) above the highest adjacent grade; or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base specified flood depth in an AO Zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH Zone, level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in paragraph 4-330(c)(1)a., are satisfied. 
(4)  Require within Zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures. 
(e)  Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 4-320(b), are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge and the person proposing the encroachment applies for a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) to FEMA and gets FEMA's approval. All proposed floodway revisions must be approved by FEMA prior to beginning any encroachment operations, such as, clearing, grading, filling, and construction in the floodway. A FEMA approved LOMR will be required by the city for all approved CLOMR's upon completion of the proposed encroachment. 
(2)  If subsection (e)(1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of section 4-340. 
( Ord. No. 1926 , § 2, 3-5-19)  
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED. 
 
Secs. 4-400—4-470. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 537, § 1, adopted April 5, 1988, added provisions designated as Article V, §§ 5-100—5-500, which the editor has redesignated as Article V, §§ 4-500—4-540, to conform to the numbering system of the Code. Section 3 of Ord. No. 537 has been included as § 4-550 of Article V at the editor's discretion. 
 
Sec. 4-500. - Required; application; record. 
(a)  No existing commercial or industrial building and no commercial or industrial building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be occupied, used, changed in use or changed in occupancy, until a certificate of occupancy and compliance shall have been issued by the building official stating that the building and proposed use of the building or land complies with all of the health laws, building code ordinances, ordinances relating to electrical and plumbing installations and zoning ordinances, with the provisions of this article and all other applicable city ordinances. 
(b)  Certificate of occupancy and compliance shall be applied for to coincide with the application for a building permit, or may be applied for directly, and shall be issued within ten (10) days after the erection, structural alteration or conversion provided such building shall have been completed in complete conformity with the provisions of this article and the laws and ordinances above mentioned. 
(c)  A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the building official and copies shall be furnished, for a fee, on request to persons having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land affected. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1(5-100), 4-5-88)  
Sec. 4-510. - Changes in use. 
The use of a building already erected at the time of passage of this article shall not be changed from one class, character or type of use to another, unless and until a certificate of occupancy and compliance under the provisions of this article shall have been obtained from the building official. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1(5-200), 4-5-88)  
Sec. 4-520. - Utility connections. 
It shall be unlawful for any public utility, including the City of Keller, or any person within their employment to connect any water, sewer, gas or electrical service to any building or property unless a certificate of occupancy and compliance has been issued by the building official of the city. Failure to comply with the provisions of this article shall constitute a basis to deny or disconnect city utilities or to require utility companies to do likewise. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1(5-300), 4-5-88) 
Cross reference— Water and sewers, Ch. 19.  
Sec. 4-530. - Temporary certificate of occupancy. 
Upon request of the owner or authorized representative, the building official may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for the temporary use and occupancy of a portion of a building prior to the completion and occupancy of the entire building provided such temporary occupancy or use will not in any way or manner jeopardize life or property. Such certificate may be issued for a period not exceeding four (4) months, with a renewable fee to be collected every thirty (30) days. (See section 4-540.) 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1(5-400), 4-5-88)  
Sec. 4-540. - Fees. 
A fee as set out in the city's fee schedule [Appendix C] shall be charged for each certificate of occupancy. No certificate of occupancy for retail or wholesale use which requires a sales tax certificate by the comptroller of public accounts shall be issued until such time as the city is satisfied that said certificate is addressed for collection and disbursement of sales tax revenue within the City of Keller and containing zip codes 76248, 76262, or 76180. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1(5-500), 4-5-88)  
Sec. 4-550. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon final conviction thereof shall be fined in a sum not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each and every day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense and is punishable as such hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 537, § 3, 4-5-88)  
Chapter 6 - FIRE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings, Ch. 4; electric code, Ch. 5; unlawful to deposit burning materials in containers, § 7-160(e); fire protection in mobile home parks, § 11-140(e); mechanical code, § 14-200 et seq.; fire hydrants, § 19-1260. 
 
ARTICLE I. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1956 , § 2, adopted November 19, 2019, repealed Art. I, §§ 6-100 and 6-610 and enacted a new Art. I to read as set out herein. Former Art. I pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1780, § 2, adopted March 15, 2016. 
 
Sec. 6-100. - Adoption of International Fire Code. 
See Chapter 4, Building, Article I. Technical codes adopted, Sec. 4-135. Specific Amendments to the 2018 International Fire Code.  
Sec. 6-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - FIRE DEPARTMENT  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 6-500—6-540. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - EMERGENCY AMBULANCE SERVICE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 546, adopted July 19, 1988, was not expressly amendatory of the Code; hence, codification of §§ 1—7 as Art. V, Div. 2, §§ 6-550—6-580, was at the editor's discretion. 
 
Sec. 6-550. - Provision of service. 
Advanced life support emergency ambulance service shall be provided by the fire department within the corporate city limits of the City of Keller, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 546, § 1, 7-19-88)  
Sec. 6-555. - Supervision; rules and regulations. 
Ambulance service shall be operated by the Keller fire department under the supervision of the fire department chief. Ambulance service shall be governed by the rules and regulations set forth in this article and other ordinances [and regulations] properly promulgated by the city manager for all city employees and city administration and the chief of the fire department for fire department employees and fire department administration. 
(Ord. No. 546, § 2, 7-19-88)  
Sec. 6-560. - Responsibility for determination of proper emergency medical facility. 
It shall be the sole responsibility of the Keller fire department medical personnel on the scene as to which emergency medical facility the patient will be transported to, based upon the capability of the emergency medical facility and the severity of the case. 
(Ord. No. 546, § 3, 7-19-88)  
Sec. 6-565. - Requests for service. 
Request for ambulance service shall be made through the fire department. Ambulance service will be provided only on emergency calls. It shall be unlawful for any person to inform any city, police or fire department employee that an ambulance is needed at a location when such person knew or should have known that such a statement was false. 
(Ord. No. 546, § 4, 7-19-88)  
Sec. 6-570. - Areas of service. 
Ambulance service shall be provided within the corporate city limits of the City of Keller, Texas. Ambulance service outside the city limits will be provided to such other cities that have their own city operated ambulance service and are a part of a mutual aid agreement between the City of Keller and such city. Ambulance service outside the City of Keller not covered by a mutual aid agreement shall be provided to such areas defined as "fire service areas" in contract with the Tarrant County Rural Fire Protection District. In the event of an emergency disaster condition, the fire chief, or acting chief in his absence, may send a city ambulance to another area not included above. 
(Ord. No. 546, § 5, 7-19-88)  
Sec. 6-575. - Fees. 
(a)  The rate structure for pricing of ambulance service shall be periodically adjusted and modified, and shall conform to the reasonable, customary, and usual charges associated with the provision of health care. 
(b)  The rate for service assessed to residents of other cities which Keller has either an interlocal, automatic/mutual aid agreement, or specific reciprocity shall be at a rate commensurate with the rate assessed to residents of Keller. 
(c)  The person or persons transported, or in the event such person is a minor, then that person's parent or guardian, shall be responsible for the fees or charges incurred. 
(Ord. No. 546, § 6, 7-19-88; Ord. No. 1261, § 2, 5-17-05)  
Sec. 6-580. - Private ambulance service. 
Permits for private ambulance service will be issued through the city manager for the City of Keller. Private service shall be restricted to nonemergency calls, special events, transfers and removing of deceased persons. 
(Ord. No. 546, § 7, 7-19-88)  
Chapter 7 - CITYWIDE SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND RECYCLING SERVICES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1506, § 2, adopted May 18, 2010, repealed former Ch. 7, 7-100—7-420, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Ch. 7 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Ord. No. 1272, § 2, 8-16-05; Ord. No. 1456, §§ 1, 3, 4, 5-19-09. 
 
Sec. 7-100. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Acceptable brush: Tree, shrub, and bush trimmings that are bundled in lengths no more than four (4) feet and no more than fifty (50) pounds in weight. 
Acceptable waste: Any and all waste that is solid waste, refuse, or residential garbage including acceptable brush, garbage, yard waste, and trash, as solid waste is defined under the laws of the United States and/or the State of Texas and/or the regulations promulgated thereunder, and that is acceptable for disposal in a landfill, except for unacceptable waste, as defined herein. No garbage that produces noxious odors is allowed. 
Agreement: The contractual agreement made and entered into by the city and the contractor for the collection, transportation, and/or disposal of solid waste, and/or the collection, transportation, and/or processing of recyclable materials. 
Backdoor service: All handicapped or disabled customers, who have provided verification to the contractor from a physician as to their inability to carry containers to the curbside, may place containers at their front doorstep to be visible from the street, or at a location as may be determined by the contractor. The contractor shall not be responsible for entering garages or behind enclosed fences. 
Brush: Tree, shrub, and bush trimmings. 
Bulky waste: Solid waste that is too large, heavy, or bulky to be collected during normal garbage collection, including, but not limited to, brush other than acceptable brush, stoves, refrigerators (with verification that CFC components have been removed by a certified technician), water tanks, hot water heaters, washing machines, other large household appliances, furniture, and materials resulting from minor remodeling; but, excluding construction debris, unbundled brush, dead animals, hazardous waste, or stable matter with weights or volumes greater than those allowed for containers. Nothing that constitutes unacceptable waste shall be considered bulky waste. 
Bundle: Tree, shrub, and brush trimmings securely tied together forming an easily handled package not exceeding four (4) feet in length and/or fifty (50) pounds in weight. 
City: The City of Keller. 
Commercial hand collect unit: A retail or light commercial type of business that generates no more than one (1) cubic yard, or not more than six (6) plastic bags, of refuse per week. 
Commercial premises: All premises, locations, or entities, public or private, including industrial premises, requiring refuse collection within the corporate limits of the city, that are not residential premises. 
Commercial refuse: All bulky waste, construction debris, garbage, rubbish, and stable matter generated by a customer at a commercial premise; nothing that constitutes unacceptable waste shall be considered commercial refuse. 
Community clean-up program: A program whereby the city assess a monthly fee to residential customers to be applied towards clean-up programs within the community to include, but not limited to, storm debris pick-up, city-wide clean-ups, and educational and promotional activities. 
Consumer Price Index (CPI-DFW): The revised Consumer Price Index for the Dallas/Fort Worth Metropolitan Area (CPI-DFW), twelve-month average for all items as published by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Region 6. In the event the United States Department of Labor Statistics ceases to publish the CPI, the parties hereto agree to substitute another equally authoritative measure of change in the purchasing power of the United States dollar as may then be available so as to carry out the intent of this provision. 
Construction debris: Waste building materials resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, or demolition operations. 
Container: A receptacle constructed of plastic, metal, or fiberglass; and having handles of adequate strength for lifting. The mouth of the container shall have a diameter greater than, or equal to, that of the base. Container may also be a plastic garbage bag or sack. 
Contract documents: The request for qualifications and proposals, instruction to the contractors, the contractor's proposal, general specifications, the contract performance bond, and any addenda or changes to the foregoing document agreed to by the city and the contractor, and the agreement signed by the contractor and the city. 
Contractor: Such private firm designated by the city for the collection, transportation, and/or disposal of the solid waste and recyclable material collection and processing. 
Customer: A residential user, commercial hand collection user, and/or commercial/industrial user who generates refuse. 
Debris: Dirt, concrete, rocks, bricks, lumber, plaster, sand or gravel, other waste building materials, automobile frames, or large, uncut dead trees. 
Disposal site: See landfill (sanitary). 
Garbage: Solid waste consisting of putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage facilities, handling, and sale of produce and other food products. 
Hazardous waste: Any waste characterized, identified, listed, or regulated as hazardous by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the Federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, 42 U.S.C.A. Section 1002, et seq., as amended, or regulated as toxic under the Toxic Substances Control Act, 15 U.S.C.A. Section 2601, et seq., and regulations promulgated thereunder, or applicable by State law concerning the regulation of hazardous or toxic wastes. 
Kraft bag: Biodegradable brown paper bags used for yard waste collection purposes. 
Landfill: A lawfully permitted facility where solid waste is lawfully disposed of by the contractor. 
Medical waste: Solid waste generated by healthcare-related facilities and associated with healthcare activities, not including garbage or rubbish generated from offices, kitchens, or other non-healthcare activities. The term includes special waste from healthcare-related facilities, which is comprised of animal waste, bulk blood and blood products, microbiological waste, pathological waste, and sharps, as those terms are defined in 25 TAC § 1.132 or any successor. The term does not include waste produced on farmland and ranchland as defined in Agricultural Code, § 252.001(6) or any successor, nor does the term include artificial, nonhuman materials removed from a patient and/or requested by a patient, including, but not limited to, orthopedic devices and implants. 
Premises: All public and private establishments, including individual residences, all multi-family dwellings, residential care facilities, hospitals, schools, businesses, other buildings, and all vacant lots. 
Producer: An occupant of a residential premise or commercial premise who generates refuse. 
Recyclable materials: Commodities collected by the contractor, which can be sold for processing and use or reuse including, but not limited to, newsprint, magazines, catalogs, copy paper, office paper, plastic containers (#1, #2, #3, #4, #5, and #7 PET and HDPE), glass containers, aluminum cans, metal (tin) cans, and household paper products to include junk mail, envelopes, cereal boxes, cardboard, chipboard, and telephone books. Recyclable materials are not solid waste; however, recyclable materials may become solid waste at such time, if any, as abandoned or disposed of rather than recycled, whereupon it will be solid waste with respect only to the party actually abandoning or disposing of the material. 
Recycling: A process by which materials that have served their intended use or are scrapped, discarded, used, surplus, or obsolete, are collected, separated, ground, or processed and returned to use in the form of raw materials used in the production of new products or for any beneficial purpose. Except for mixed municipal solid waste composting, that is, composting of the typical mixed solid waste stream generated by residential, commercial, and/or institutional sources, recycling includes the composting process if the compost material is put to beneficial use. 
Recycling bin: A plastic receptacle with an attached waterproof lid, imprinted with the contractor's logo, and with a minimum capacity of sixty-five (65) gallons, for the purpose of curbside collection of recycling commodities. 
Refuse: Residential and commercial bulky waste, construction debris, and stable matter generated at residential or commercial premises. Refuse excludes debris not included in definitions construction debris and unacceptable waste. 
Residential waste: All acceptable waste generated by a customer at a residential premise, excluding unacceptable waste and debris, but including acceptable brush and bulky waste. 
Residential premises: A dwelling within the corporate limits of the city occupied by a person or group of persons comprising not more than four (4) families. A residential premise shall be deemed occupied when either water or domestic light and power services are being supplied thereto. A condominium dwelling, whether of single or multi-level construction, consisting of more than four (4) units, shall be treated as a residential premise, except that each single-family dwelling within any such residential premises shall be billed separately as a residential premises. 
Rubbish: Non-putrescible solid waste (excluding ashes), consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste materials; combustible rubbish includes paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves, and similar materials; noncombustible rubbish includes glass, crockery, tin cans, aluminum cans, metal furniture, and the like materials which will not burn at ordinary incinerator temperatures (1,600 degrees Fahrenheit to 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit.) 
Special waste: Waste that is defined as such by applicable state or federal regulation and which because of its quantity, concentration, physical or chemical characteristics, or biological properties requires special handling and disposal to protect the human health or environment. Special waste shall include: 
(a)  Waste from a non-residential source; 
(b)  Dead animals; 
(c)  Containerized waste (e.g., a drum, barrel, portable tank, box, pail, etc.); 
(d)  Waste transported in a bulk tanker; 
(e)  Liquid waste; 
(f)  Sludge waste; 
(g)  Stable matter; 
(h)  Waste from an industrial process; 
(i)  Waste from a pollution control process; 
(j)  Residue and debris from the cleanup of a spill or release of a chemical; and 
(k)  Any other waste which because of its quantity, concentration, frequency of disposal, required disposal procedures, regulatory status, or physical, chemical, infectious, or other characteristics jeopardizes or may jeopardize the environmentally sound operation of the landfill, as determined by the contractor in its sole discretion. 
Solid waste: All non-hazardous (as defined by the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act [CERCLA] and other applicable laws) and non-special (see Special Waste definition) solid waste material including any unwanted or discarded waste material in a solid, liquid, semi-solid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, municipal, commercial, and community and institutional activities; including, but not limited to: garbage, ashes, refuse, rubbish, yard waste (including brush, tree trimmings, Christmas trees), discarded appliances, and home furniture and furnishings. The term does not include: 
(a)  Solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage, or solid or dissolved material in irrigation return flows, or industrial discharges subject to regulation by permit issued under the Water Code, Chapter 26; 
(b)  Soil, dirt, rock, sand, and other natural or man-made inert solid materials used to fill land if the object of the fill is to make the land suitable for the construction of surface improvements; 
(c)  Waste materials that result from activities associated with the exploration, development, or production of oil or gas or geothermal resources and other substance or material regulated by the Railroad Commission of Texas under the Natural Resources Code; 
(d)  Special waste; 
(e)  Medical waste; or 
(f)  Hazardous waste; provided that such material must be of the type and consistency to be lawfully accepted at the landfill under the applicable federal, state, and local laws, regulations, and permits governing each. 
Stable matter: All manure and other waste matter normally accumulated in or about a stable; or any animal, livestock, or poultry enclosure; and resulting from the keeping of animals, poultry, or livestock. 
Take all service: Refers to the service level expected of the contractor for solid waste collection. Specially, the contractor will dispose of any items placed on curbside, including bulky items; other than construction debris, unbundled brush, dead animals, hazardous waste, stable matter, or unacceptable waste with weights or volumes greater than those allowed for containers. 
Unacceptable waste: Any and all waste, the acceptance and handling of which by the contractor or the disposal of which in a landfill would cause a violation of any landfill permit or applicable law or which is prohibited by applicable laws, cause substantial damage to all or any portion of the landfill or any improvements thereon or equipment used in connection therewith, the contractor's equipment or facilities, or present a substantial danger to the health or safety of the public or the contractor's or city's representatives, agents, or employees, including (without limitation) hazardous waste, medical waste, special waste, asbestos, brush which is not considered acceptable brush (tree, shrub, and bush trimmings that are bundled in lengths no more than four (4) feet and no more than fifty (50) pounds in weight), and refrigeration appliances that have not had CFC's removed by a certified technician. Unacceptable waste also includes waste which is prohibited from disposal at the landfill by the contractor including tires, concrete, and bulk petroleum or chemical products or by-products; liquid waste, as defined herein, and septic tank pumping and grease and grit trap wastes, sludge waste, including water supply treatment plant sludges and stabilized and/or unstablized sludges from municipal or industrial wastewater treatment plants, or dead animals and/or slaughterhouse waste, except for animals euthanized under authority and direction of the city. 
Yard waste: Grass, leaves, and brush from general yard maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 1506, § 2, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 1739, § 2, 5-19-15)  
Sec. 7-110. - Types of collection. 
(1)  Residential collection: Contractor shall provide curbside or backdoor collection service for residential solid waste (including acceptable brush) twice per week on a schedule to be presented by the contractor in writing for review and consideration by the city. Such schedule must not include weekends and must include recycling to occur on the same day as a regular solid waste collection day. The residential collection schedule shall include a yard waste program where contractor shall collect up to twenty (20) total bundles and bags containing yard waste per collection. All yard waste must be placed in biodegradable kraft paper bags. Yard waste collection shall occur on Mondays and Tuesdays and must coincide with a regular solid waste collection day. City agrees to not unreasonably withhold approval of such schedule. 
City shall bill residential customers according to the approved rates, retain all franchise fees, and remit all appropriate sales tax to the State Comptroller's Office. See Appendix "A" - Rate Table. City shall pay contractor based on the set rate received on a monthly basis. Contractor shall be entitled to payment on all collections directly relating to services provided. 
Contractor shall be required to pick up all acceptable waste generated from a residential premises, provided the same is properly prepared, bagged, or stored for collection in garbage containers, or properly bundled, although bulky waste will not be required to be in garbage containers. Contractor shall also be required to pick up all acceptable brush and tree stumps during the regular residential collection frequency provided that they are prepared according to specifications. Loose brush and tree stumps exceeding fifty (50) pounds each may be disposed of by contractor for a rate of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per hour plus disposal fees for collection of such bulky waste and construction debris. At customer's request, rubbish, brush and tree stumps that are not contained in garbage containers or are not prepared as acceptable brush and placed for collection in a bundle or a boxed bundle, may be collected and disposed of by contractor for a special haul fee mutually agreed upon by contractor and such customer. The special haul fee will be defined as a specific cubic yard measurement. (Fees are established in citywide solid waste collection and recycling services ordinance.) See Appendix "A" - Rate Table. 
Editor's note— Appendix A is not set out herein but is available at the office of the city secretary. 
(2)  Commercial collection: The contractor shall provide for the collection of commercial solid waste from commercial premises and, in certain instances from residential premises when commercial activities including, but not limited to, new construction or re-modeling are occurring, according to requirements of the city and at rates approved by the city. Commercial service charges will be determined by size of container requested and frequency of pick up. Tonnage or weight has no bearing in charges for collection of commercial waste services in front load containers. Where the contractor determines that hauling an individual roll off container will cause the gross vehicle weight to exceed maximum license limits as approved by the State of Texas, the contractor shall give notice to the customer and adjust size of container and/or frequency of service to achieve compliance with GVW limits. The customer shall be responsible for charges for such changes. Collection service shall be at least once per week to maintain the commercial premises free of accumulation of waste. If collection is from a commercial container, that container should be located on a concrete pad to accommodate collection equipment. The city shall be the sole determinant of acceptable dumpster pads, locations, and screening, excluding roll-off's. The contractor shall bill regular commercial front-load and roll-off customers, remit all franchise fees to the City on a monthly basis with a report on billings and collections, and remit all appropriate sales tax to the State Comptroller's Office. The city shall bill regular commercial hand-load customers, retain all franchise fees, and remit all appropriate sales tax to the State Comptroller's Office. 
The city may require additional capacity or frequency of collections to ensure sanitary conditions are maintained on commercial premises. In the event the city deems current frequency does not ensure sanitary conditions and the commercial customer is asked to alter its container size and/or frequency of pick up, the contractor shall be compensated additional charges for additional capacity or frequency at rates approved by the city. 
The contractor may lease containers for waste storage to the owner or occupant of the contractor's commercial, institutional, and industrial customers. In the event any such lease agreement is entered into, the contractor shall lease the container at the rate approved by the city. Such containers shall be equipped with suitable covers to prevent blowing or scattering of waste and shall be maintained in a sanitary and safe condition. Such containers shall be clearly marked with the contractor's name and telephone number in letters not less than two (2) inches in height. Such containers shall be maintained in the city approved single color or color scheme. 
(3)  Residential curbside recycling: Contractor shall provide each residential premises one (1) recycling bin with attached lid for recyclable materials. Each residential premises may have up to two (2) recycling bins. The charge for collecting up to two (2) recycling bins shall be the same as for the collection from a single recycling bin. Contractor shall provide city a supply of recycling bins and lids for purchase by residential customers at fees approved by city. See Appendix "A" - Rate Table. 
Contractor shall provide recycling service to each residential premises once per week based on a mutually agreeable schedule that includes recycling pick-up to occur on the same day as a regular solid waste collection day. City agrees to not unreasonably withhold approval of such schedule. The collection of the recyclable materials shall occur at the curb. Contractor shall collect recyclable materials set out for collection outside the normal recycling bin when necessary. An example includes extra newspapers bundled and/or bagged where volume is greater than recycling bin size. Contractor shall also provide city a recycling report detailing volume collected and participation rate on a monthly basis. City will accept percent of diversion for reporting. 
Acceptable recycling materials. At a minimum, the following materials shall be included in the recycling materials collected by the contractor: 
—  Office paper; 
—  Newsprint; 
—  Magazines and catalogs; 
—  Aluminum beverage cans; 
—  Steel/tin cans; 
—  Glass—Clear, brown, and green; 
—  HDPE & PET Plastic Bottles #1, #2, #3, #4, #5, #7; and 
—  Household paper products to include junk mail, envelopes, cereal boxes, cardboard, chipboard, and telephone books. 
(4)  Optional small business recycling: Contractor shall offer optional recycling services to small businesses at a rate of four dollars and seventy-five cents ($4.75) per month for one (1) ninety-five (95) gallon recycling cart for the first one hundred (100) carts requested and eighteen dollars and fifty cents ($18.50) per month for each additional cart requested above one hundred (100). Collection will be made on a schedule agreed upon by contractor and commercial customer, not to exceed once per week. Businesses that elect to participate in recycling services will be required to place recycling containers for curbside collection within twenty (20) feet of where the collection truck can pull up. 
Acceptable recyclable materials—Commercial collection. At a minimum, the following materials shall be included in the recycling materials collected by contractor under this agreement: 
—  Accounting ledger paper 
—  Advertisements 
—  Brochures 
—  Booklets 
—  Calculator tape 
—  Scrap paper 
—  Coated paper envelopes with windows or labels 
—  Colored paper 
—  Computer printouts (any form) 
—  Fax paper 
—  Manila folders with plastic tabs 
—  NCR paper 
—  Posters 
—  Photocopy and typing paper (any color) 
—  Paper from legal pads and note pads 
—  Magazines 
—  Newsprint 
—  White paper 
—  Cardboard (broken down) 
—  Aluminum and tin cans (emptied and rinsed) 
—  Plastic and glass drink bottles (emptied and rinsed) 
The contractor shall be responsible for transporting the recyclable materials to a processing site and must have established buyers or markets for the recyclable materials. The contractor shall identify the buyers of the recyclable materials upon request by the city. 
Contractor shall be totally responsible for the processing and marketing of all recyclable materials collected pursuant to the Agreement and shall participate in recycling revenue sharing with the city. 
Non-Collection of recyclable materials. If the contractor's employees determine that the recyclable materials set out by the residential customer falls outside the definition in this chapter of what is acceptable recycling materials or includes unacceptable waste, the contractor may leave the inappropriate materials in the recycling bin, or if customer left the materials outside the recycling bin, outside the recycling bin. A sticker shall be attached to the recycling bin or other notification provided explaining the reason the materials were rejected. The contractor will not be required to collect recyclable materials mixed with solid waste normally collected by solid waste collecting crews. 
(Ord. No. 1506, § 2, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 1739, § 2, 5-19-15)  
Sec. 7-120. - Duties of and obligations of residential customers. 
(a)  Every owner, agent, lessee, tenant or occupant of any premises in the city is hereby required to participate in the city's solid waste collection program. 
(b)  Every owner, agent, lessee, tenant or occupant of any premises in the city is hereby required to participate in the city's recycling service program. 
(c)  All residential waste shall be placed in a receptacle sufficient in number to hold solid waste materials accumulating on the premises; constructed of plastic, metal, or fiberglass; and having handles of adequate strength for lifting. The mouth of the container shall have a diameter greater than, or equal to, that of the base. Container may also be a plastic garbage bag or sack. 
(d)  Containers and/or recycling bins shall be placed either at the curbside on the street bearing the customer's address or, for backdoor service, at their front doorstep to be visible from the street, or at a location as may be determined by the contractor and accessible without entering a gate. The contractor cannot enter or be responsible for entering garages or behind enclosed fences. The contractor must be notified by the residential customer prior to any change in acceptable locations. 
(e)  Waste, recycling bins, bulky waste, and/or acceptable brush shall be placed at curbside not later than 7:00 a.m. on the day of scheduled collection, if they are to be picked up; however, not more than twelve (12) hours prior to the day of pick up. 
(f)  No waste shall include unacceptable waste. 
(g)  All waste mixed with water or other liquids shall be drained before being placed into a garbage or trash container. 
(h)  To the fullest extent possible, recyclable materials should be protected by the residential customer against contaminates that require disposal at a landfill rather than recycling. 
(i)  If any brush cannot be placed in disposable containers, it shall be cut in lengths no more than four (4) feet, bundled (no bundle shall weigh more than fifty (50) pounds) and stacked at curbside. 
(j)  A customer may receive a special pick up upon request for an additional charge to be determined by the contractor, depending on the quantity of material to be removed. 
(k)  Every customer shall keep all acceptable solid waste, recyclable materials, bulky waste, and/or acceptable brush securely closed or bundled in such a manner as to prevent the scattering of the contents thereof and to render said contents inaccessible to insects, rodents, and other animals. 
(l)  Every owner, agent, lessee, tenant or occupant of any premises in the city is hereby required to participate in the city's community clean-up program. 
(m)  Yard waste must be placed in biodegradable paper kraft bags for collection on weekly yard waste days. 
(Ord. No. 1506, § 2, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 1739, § 2, 5-19-15)  
Sec. 7-130. - Duties and obligations of commercial, institutional and industrial customers. 
(a)  Commercial curbside/hand-load service. It shall be the duty of the owner or the person otherwise in charge of commercial, institutional or industrial premises within the City to cause all solid waste accumulated on said premises to be placed in containers at the curbside on the street bearing the customer's address or placed at a location on the premises which is readily accessible to the contractor and screened where possible, subject to review by the City at any time. The contractor cannot enter or be responsible for entering garages or behind enclosed fences. 
(b)  Commercial front-load and roll-off service. It shall be the duty of the owner or the person otherwise in charge of commercial, institutional or industrial premises within the city to cause all solid waste accumulated on said premises to be placed in a commercial type container located on a concrete pad to accommodate collection equipment. The city shall be the sole determinant of acceptable dumpster pads, locations, and screening, excluding roll-off's. 
(c)  Wastes from building operations. Debris, as that term is defined herein, or other trash resulting from construction, major remodeling, general cleanup of property, or resulting from sizeable amounts of solid waste materials and debris being cleared in preparation for construction will not be removed by the contractor as regular service. The owner will have such debris and solid waste materials removed at his expense, by either his own crew or by the contractor. The owner of the building operation shall be responsible for keeping the lease containers in a sightly manner, inside and on the grounds surrounding the container. Lease containers used for wastes from building operations may be used and placed at a location on the premises as arranged between the customer and the contractor, subject to review by the city at any time. 
(d)  Wholesale accumulations. Places of wholesale accumulations, such as killing and dressing plants for fowl, wholesale fruit and vegetable houses, retail stores, filling stations and garages, restaurants and cafes, tourist and trailer camps and all other places where the daily accumulation of solid waste is more than the ordinary quantities incident to residential dwellings, are not to be included in the residential service as herein provided; such places are required to remove the same from the city at their own expense, in the manner and by the method directed by the official designated by the City in charge of solid waste disposal. Medical waste shall be handled as prescribed by State law. 
(Ord. No. 1506, § 2, 5-18-10)  
Sec. 7-140. - Duties and obligations of the contractor. 
It is expressly understood and agreed that the contractor shall collect and dispose of all acceptable waste, recyclable materials, bulky waste, and/or acceptable brush accumulated on premises within the corporate limits of the city where a charge for such service is made or authorized by the city. The contractor shall, at its own expense, furnish the landfill site, personnel, and equipment to collect waste as described herein and shall establish and maintain in an efficient and businesslike manner such daily routes and special schedules as may be necessary to fulfill the waste service requirements contained in the ordinances and regulations of the city and the contractor's obligations set forth in this chapter. The contractor agrees to make two (2) pickups each week for each residence and each business not requiring contractor-furnished containers, (i.e. commercial curbside/hand-load). The contractor also agrees to pick up recyclable materials once per week at each residential premises; the contractor is not required to collect recyclable materials from any commercial premises. 
(Ord. No. 1506, § 2, 5-18-10)  
Sec. 7-150. - Regulation of lease containers. 
It is specifically understood and agreed that the contractor shall make lease containers available to the owner or occupant of any premises within the corporate limits of the city, excluding residential premises and commercial hand-load customers, for waste storage and collection of acceptable waste at the rates established and approved by the city, and subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  All contractor-supplied containers shall be equipped with suitable covers to prevent blowing or scattering of waste while being transported for disposal of their contents. 
(2)  All such containers shall be cleaned and maintained regularly by the contractor so as to be in good repair, of a good appearance, and free of such waste residues as may cause odor and provide a breeding place for flies and harborage for rodents. 
(3)  All such containers shall be clearly marked with the contractor's name and telephone number in letters not less than two (2) inches in height. 
(4)  The contractor shall reimburse the owner of any premises where such containers are placed for any damage caused by the contractor's employees to screening fences, buildings, gates, or other improvements on property served by the contractor so long as the commercial customer does not create a condition that makes damage unavoidable; provided however, that the contractor shall be responsible for damage on private properties to curbs, sidewalks, or paved surfaces caused by the weight of the contractor's vehicle. 
(5)  Containers and enclosures for containers shall be located in a manner that allows for safe access and sufficient ingress and egress to such enclosure or container. The city is responsible for designating where containers will sit at commercial premises and must insure that such location allows such safe access and sufficient ingress and egress by the contractor. 
(Ord. No. 1506, § 2, 5-18-10)  
Sec. 7-160. - Special provisions. 
(1)  Regular service for city owned or operated facilities: The contractor shall make, at no charge to the city, the collection, transportation, and disposal of waste accumulated by the city at city owned, operated, or other city designated sites. Regular service shall include the free provision, collection, and hauling of dumpsters and/or roll-off containers as requested by the city for special events and ongoing or special projects. In the event that the city's containers are full and are in need of a special disposal, the contractor shall accommodate the city when possible. 
(2)  Recycling services at city facilities: The contractor shall provide carts (approximately sixty-four-gallon in size) for each city building for employee participation in single stream recycling equivalent to residential service with once a week pick up by contractor. 
(3)  Christmas tree recycling/mulching program: The contractor shall provide annual Christmas tree mulching by the second weekend in January of each year. The city will market and advertise that residents can dispose of Christmas trees at a designated site(s) up to the second weekend in January. At this time, the site will be shut down and the contractor will mulch all trees. The contractor will provide the mulching equipment, and mulched trees will be available to regular solid waste customers at no charge, or may be used by the city. Any storage and disbursement of the mulched trees will be the responsibility of the city. In an effort to eliminate contamination of the mulch, The contractor will take caution to not mulch trees containing stands, tinsel, or other decorations. 
(4)  Commercial customer billing: At the city's direction, the contractor agrees to bill all regular commercial front-load, roll-off customers and hand load customers, remit all franchise fees to the city on a monthly basis with a report on billings and collections, and remit all appropriate sales tax to the State Comptroller's Office. The contractor may, with prior notification to the city Manager, discontinue service for failure to pay delinquent accounts. The city shall pursue all legal means, including the disconnection of water service, to ensure payment to the contractor in an effort to maintain the health and safety of the community. The contractor agrees to collect and remit all appropriate sales taxes on services to all regular commercial front-load and roll-off customers to the State Comptroller's Office. 
(5)  Open landfill/transfer station: The contractor shall provide free landfill disposal to all city residential customers on the first Saturday of each month, excluding legal holidays, upon presentation by such customers of their most current water bill and a valid driver's license. The city shall have free dumping privileges at the contractor's transfer station during the term of said agreement. All materials to be disposed of must not fall outside of any regulations pertaining to hauling/disposal of waste. 
(6)  Storm debris management program: In the event of a major storm or other natural disaster beyond the city's control, the contractor shall provide storm debris management at the request of the office of the city manager. The contractor shall provide at least one (1) truck and three (3) employees for clean up under this section. The contractor crew(s) will clean-up streets and locations specified by city. The fees associated with this service shall be no more than one hundred thoirty-five dollars ($135.00) per hour, plus a disposal fee per ton. Contractor and the city agree that contractor does not have the exclusive right to clean up the material generated within the city as a result of a storm event as the city may choose to augment the collection by the use of city forces and/or another contractor to expedite the removal of storm event debris. 
(7)  Community policing and crime prevention training program: All drivers and workers servicing the City of Keller will be required to participate in a one-hour training program provided by the Keller Police Department. The training program is designed to educate contractor employees on how to identify and report potential crimes. 
(Ord. No. 1506, § 2, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 1739, § 2, 5-19-15)  
Sec. 7-170. - Routes of collection. 
Collection routes shall be established by the contractor and approved by the city. The city shall approve all routes of residential and commercial collection. The city shall not unreasonably withhold approval. The contractor shall provide the city a copy of maps indicating the routes used in the collection of waste from all residential customers. The city has the right to reject and request modification of routes, and updates on routes, of the contractor if the need arises. 
(Ord. No. 1506, § 2, 5-18-10)  
Sec. 7-180. - Communication and office. 
The contractor must have an office within the Dallas-Fort Worth Metropolitan Area. The contractor agrees, at its own expense, to keep a toll-free telephone number and to provide a telephone answered (mechanical answering machine is not acceptable) from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday; and 8:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m., on Saturday, excluding legal holidays, for the purpose of handling complaints and other calls regarding solid waste and/or recyclable collection service. The contractor shall keep competent personnel in the office during the time the office is required to be open to the public, and the office personnel shall have authority to represent the contractor in its relations with the public. The contractor shall also provide the city a telephone number by which the contractor can be contacted for after-hours' emergencies. The contractor shall keep and maintain in the office a daily log, electronic generated accepted, of all the service calls that shall show the nature of the call, complaint, or communication and the disposition thereof by the contractor. The city shall have the right to inspect the daily log at any reasonable time during the hours listed above. Throughout the term of said agreement, the contractor shall establish and maintain an authorized managing agent and shall designate in writing to the city manager the name, telephone number, and address of such agent upon whom all notices shall be served by the city and to whom complaints received from citizens of the city may be directed. The contractor shall respond to customers' service calls on the same day and within four (4) hours of receipt of call, or prior to 9:00 a.m. the following day, pursuant to the stated office schedule, if service call is received after 4:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 1506, § 2, 5-18-10)  
Sec. 7-190. - Collection-equipment. 
The contractor, at its sole cost and expense, agrees to furnish all trucks, equipment, machines, and labor, which are reasonably necessary to adequately, efficiently, and properly collect and transport garbage from accounts serviced by the contractor in accordance with said agreement. No trucks shall be older than an age of ten (10) years. 
(a)  Protection from scattering. Each vehicle shall be equipped with a cover, which may be net with mesh of not greater than one and one-half (1½) inches, or tarpaulin, or a fully enclosed metal top, to prevent leakage, blowing, or scattering of refuse onto public or private property. Such cover shall be kept in good order and used to cover the load going to and from the disposal site, during loading operations, or when parked if contents are likely to be scattered. Vehicles shall not be overloaded so as to scatter refuse; however, if refuse is scattered from contractor's vehicle for any reason, it shall be picked up immediately. Each vehicle shall be equipped with a fork, broom, and shovel for this purpose. 
Due to street size variations in the city, the contractor shall provide equipment that will accommodate such public streets and alleys. Special collections shall be made using appropriate equipment. The contractor shall, if necessary, hand-clean all spillage resulting from its collection activities. Damage caused by collection equipment such as spillage, broken curbs or sidewalks, and ruts off pavement shall promptly be repaired or replaced at the contractor's expense in the case of negligence. The contractor shall not be responsible for damage to curbs, sidewalks, or paved surfaces caused by the weight of the contractor's vehicles except in public rights-of-way. 
All motor vehicles used in performance of the obligations herein created shall be clearly marked with the contractor's name, telephone number, and unit number legible from one hundred fifty (150) feet. No advertising, except the company logo, shall be permitted on vehicles without prior approval of the city. All collection equipment shall be maintained in a first class, safe, and efficient working condition throughout the term of said agreement. Such vehicles shall be maintained through a regular preventative maintenance program and painted as often as necessary to preserve and present a well-kept appearance. Garbage collection vehicles and recycling collection vehicles shall be clearly distinguishable from one another. In the event that one (1) vehicle is used to serve the other purpose, a clearly visible sign should be affixed to the vehicle to inform residents that the refuse or recycling materials are going to the proper place. The contractor shall furnish the city a list of all equipment to be used fulfilling said agreement, and shall update that list as may be requested by the city. The city may inspect the contractor's vehicles at any time reasonable that does not interfere with the contractor's operations to insure compliance of equipment with said agreement; provided however, that the contractor shall have no obligation to assemble vehicles for any such inspection. Vehicles are to be washed on the inside and sanitized with a suitable disinfectant and deodorant a minimum of once a month. Such vehicles shall be washed and painted or repainted as often as necessary to keep them in a neat and sanitary condition. 
The contractor may lease containers for waste storage to the owner or occupant of the contractor's commercial, institutional, and industrial customers. In the event any such lease agreement is entered into, the contractor shall lease the container at the rate approved by the City. Such containers shall be equipped with suitable covers to prevent blowing or scattering of waste and shall be maintained in a sanitary and safe condition. Such containers shall be clearly marked with the contractor's name and telephone number in letters not less than two (2) inches in height. Such containers shall be maintained in the City approved single color or color scheme. 
(Ord. No. 1506, § 2, 5-18-10)  
Sec. 7-200. - Spillage. 
The contractor shall not be responsible for scattered refuse unless the same has been caused by its acts or those of any of its employees; in which case, all scattered refuse shall be picked up immediately by the contractor. A fork, push broom, and a scoop-type shovel shall be maintained on each truck for cleanup activity. The contractor shall, if necessary, hand clean all spillage resulting from its collection activities. The City, at its discretion, may inspect the contractor's vehicles at any time to ensure compliance of the equipment, or require equipment replacement schedules to be submitted to the city. The contractor will not be required to clean up or collect loose refuse or spillage not caused by the acts of its employees, but shall report the location of such conditions to the designated contact of the city so that proper notice can be given to the customer at the premises to properly contain refuse. The contractor shall pick up commercial refuse spillage or excess refuse after the customer reloads the container. In the case of commercial customers, the contractor shall then be entitled to an extra collection charge for each reloading of a commercial container requiring an extra collection. Should such commercial spillage continue to occur, the city shall require the commercial customer and the contractor to increase the frequency of collection of the commercial customer's refuse or require the customer to utilize a commercial container with a larger capacity, and the contractor shall be compensated for such additional services. 
(Ord. No. 1506, § 2, 5-18-10)  
Sec. 7-210. - Vicious animals. 
Employees of the contractor shall not be required to expose themselves to the dangers of vicious animals in order to accomplish refuse collection in any case where the owner or tenants have animals at large, but the contractor shall immediately notify the city, in writing, of such condition and of his inability to make collection. 
(Ord. No. 1506, § 2, 5-18-10)  
Sec. 7-220. - Heavy dead animals. 
Heavy dead animals such as, but not limited to, cows, horses, and mules shall be removed from the City at the expense of the owner or person have the same in charge, in the manner, time, and by the method directed by the official designated by the City in charge of solid waste disposal. 
(Ord. No. 1506, § 2, 5-18-10)  
Sec. 7-230. - Disposal of refuse. 
It is specifically understood and agreed that the contractor shall be responsible for disposing of all acceptable waste collected, in accordance with the terms and conditions of said agreement, from premises in the corporate limits of the city, and shall not in any event dispose of same within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1506, § 2, 5-18-10)  
Sec. 7-240. - Reporting requirements. 
The contractor shall provide the city with a monthly garbage collection report within two (2) weeks of the end of the reporting period. this report should include the tonnage of all materials collected for the month. The contractor shall provide the city with monthly recycling reports within two (2) weeks of the end of the reporting period. Recycling reports should include a percent of diversion. The contractor shall provide the city with a monthly report of customer contacts regarding service issues within two (2) weeks of the end of the reporting period. Customer complaint reports should include the total number of complaints, number of complaints based on service provided, and percentage of complaints received in relation to total number of customers. All reports should provide monthly as well as annual cumulative totals. 
(Ord. No. 1506, § 2, 5-18-10)  
Sec. 7-250. - Complaints. 
At a minimum, customer complaint procedures shall provide that the customer complaint be addressed within twenty-four (24) hours of receipt of such complaint and shall be promptly resolved. The contractor shall be responsible for maintaining a log of complaints, and provide the city, on a monthly basis, with copies of all complaints indicating the date and hour of the complaint, nature of the complaint, and the manner and timing of its resolution. The contractor shall keep and maintain in the office a daily log, electronically-generated accepted, of all the service calls that shall show the nature of the call, complaint, or communication and the disposition thereof by the contractor. The city shall have the right to inspect the daily log at any reasonable time during the hours listed in section 7-180 of the City of Keller Code of Ordinances. Calls logged to the contractor by the city designee shall also be contained in said log. The city may also require the contractor to e-mail a complaint log report in an electronic file format compatible by the city. 
Any missed pick ups of residential refuse shall be collected within twenty-four (24) hours with the exception of legal holidays, which shall be picked up on the following regular work day. No collection shall be made on Sunday. 
To prevent misunderstanding and litigation, the city manager, or designee, shall decide any and all questions which may arise concerning the quality and acceptability of the work and services performed, the sufficiency of the performance, and the acceptable fulfillment on the part of the contractor; and the city manager, or designee, shall determine whether or not the amount, quantity, character, and quality of the work performed is satisfactory. The city manager, or designee, shall make such explanation as may be necessary to complete, explain, or make definite the provisions and his reasonable findings and conclusions shall be final and binding on both parties. If at any time performance of the contractor does not meet the standards set forth herein, the contractor, upon notification by the city, shall increase the forces, tools, or equipment as needed to properly perform the duties as stated herein. The failure of the City to give such notification shall not relieve the contractor of the obligation to perform the work at the time and in the manner as stated herein. The contractor and the city agree that the city manager, or designee, will be the final authority for the approval of charges for any service not set forth herein and for the disposition of any dispute regarding performance between the city, the contractor, and any customer. 
(Ord. No. 1506, § 2, 5-18-10)  
Sec. 7-260. - Compliance with laws. 
The contractor, its officers, agents, employees, contractors, and subcontractors shall abide by, and comply with, all federal, state, and local laws. it is agreed and understood that, if the city calls the attention of the contractor to any such violations on the part of the contractor, its officers, agents, employees, contractors, or subcontractors, then the contractor shall immediately desist from and correct each violation. 
(Ord. No. 1506, § 2, 5-18-10)  
Sec. 7-270. - Discrimination prohibited. 
The contractor, in the execution, performance, or attempted performance of services as stated herein, shall not discriminate against any person or persons because of sex, race, religion, color, or national origin. The contractor must be an equal opportunity employer. 
(Ord. No. 1506, § 2, 5-18-10)  
Sec. 7-280. - Bond. 
(1)  Performance bond: As security for the services as stated herein, the contractor shall provide the city a two hundred fifty thousand dollar ($250,000.00) performance bond that is annually renewed prior to the end of each covered year. The contractor shall pay any and all premiums for the performance bond described above. A certificate from the surety showing that the bond premiums are paid in full shall accompany the bond. Such certificate shall be submitted to the city with the bond on an annual basis. The surety on the bond shall be a duly authorized corporate surety to do business in the State of Texas. 
(2)  Power of attorney: Attorneys-in-fact who sign bonds must file with each performance bond a certified and effectively dated copy of their power of attorney. 
(Ord. No. 1506, § 2, 5-18-10)  
Sec. 7-290. - Insurance. 
(a)  Prior to the approval of said agreement by the city, the contractor shall furnish a completed insurance certificate to the city, which shall be completed by an agent authorized to bind the named underwriters/insurance carriers to the coverages, limits, and termination provisions shown thereon. The city shall have no duty to pay or perform until such certificate has been delivered to the city. 
(b)  The city reserves the right to review the insurance requirements of this section during the effective period and to require adjustment of insurance coverages and their limits when deemed necessary and prudent by the city based upon changes in statutory law, court decisions, or the claims history of the industry as well as the contractor. 
(c)  Subject to the contractor's right to maintain reasonable deductibles in such amounts as are approved by the city, the contractor shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect for the duration as stated herein, and any extension hereof, at the contractor's sole expense, insurance coverage written by companies approved by the State of Texas and acceptable to the city, in the following types and amounts: 
(1)  Workers' compensation and employer's liability insurance: Covering all employees engaged in operations as stated herein and as required by the State of Texas. 
(2)  Commercial general (public) liability insurance: A combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage in the amount of two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) per occurrence or its equivalent, including coverage for premises operations, independent contractors, products/completed operations, personal injury, advertising injury, contractual liability, and medical payments. 
(3)  Comprehensive automobile insurance: A combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage in the amount of five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) per accident or its equivalent, including coverage for loading and unloading hazards for owned/leased vehicles, non-owned vehicles, and hired vehicles. 
Insurance coverages specified herein constitutes the minimum requirements and said requirements shall in no way lessen or limit the liability of the contractor under the terms of this chapter. The contractor shall procure and maintain, at its own cost and expense, any additional kinds and amounts of insurance that in its own judgment may be necessary for proper protection in the prosecution of its work. 
(d)  Approval, disapproval, or failure to act by the city regarding any insurance supplied by the contractor shall not relieve the contractor of full responsibility or liability for damages and accidents as set forth in chapter. Neither shall the bankruptcy, insolvency, or denial of liability by the insurance company exonerates the contractor from liability. 
(Ord. No. 1506, § 2, 5-18-10)  
Sec. 7-300. - Consideration. 
The city shall provide billing and collection services to and from all residential accounts, and shall transmit funds collected, less a ten-percent franchise fee, to the contractor on a monthly basis. The city agrees to collect and remit all appropriate sales taxes on residential collection services to the State Comptroller's Office. The city agrees to use reasonable diligence in the collection of each account, but does not guarantee its collection. Accounts may be written off as uncollectible after remaining unpaid for six (6) months or longer. The contractor reserves the right to collect those accounts deemed uncollectible by city. The city will provide this information to the contractor monthly. After an account is unpaid for two (2) months, service is not required. The rate for residential curbside or backdoor solid waste collection and recycling service, to include automatic rate adjustments as included in agreements for solid waste and recycling services, shall be established through agreement with the contractor as approved by the city council of the City of Keller, Texas. The city shall have the right to credit accounts in the appropriate amount, if the customer's regularly scheduled pick up is missed, upon the final decision of the city manager, or his designee. 
The contractor shall bill regular commercial front-load, roll-off, and hand load customers and remit all franchise fees to the city on a monthly basis with a report on billings and collections. The city shall have the right to audit the contractor's list(s) of commercial customers and the fees being charged. The contractor agrees to collect and remit all appropriate sales taxes on commercial front-load and roll-off collection services to the State Comptroller's Office. The contractor agrees to use reasonable diligence in the collection of each account, but does not guarantee its collection. Accounts may be written off as uncollectible after remaining unpaid for six (6) months or longer. The city reserves the right to collect those accounts deemed uncollectible by the contractor. The contractor will provide this information to city monthly. 
(Ord. No. 1506, § 2, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 1739, § 2, 5-19-15)  
Sec. 7-310. - Remuneration. 
Remuneration shall be included in and based upon said agreement between the city and the contractor for solid waste collection and recycling services. 
(Ord. No. 1506, § 2, 5-18-10)  
Sec. 7-320. - Non-collection. 
Should a dispute arise between the City, the contractor, and/or customer as to whether the contractor actually failed to make a collection (missed a pick up) the decision of the City shall be final, and the contractor shall abide by such decision. 
It is specifically understood and agreed that if the customer fails to timely place a container out, maintains improper or inadequate containers for the nature, volume, or weight of acceptable waste to be removed from the premises, or places improper bundles or volumes of waste for collection, or places hazardous waste, special waste, or other refuse in violation of this chapter, the contractor may refrain from collection of all or a portion of such refuse that is rendered not collectable due to any of the aforementioned circumstances. The contractor shall notify both the city and the customer of the reason for any such non-collection (unless such non-collection is due to the customer's failure to timely place the waste for collection). The contractor's notice to the customer shall be in writing, attached to the container or the front door of the residence or commercial establishment, and shall indicate the nature of the violation and the correction required in order that such solid waste may then be collected at the next regular collection date. 
Where a customer notifies the city that acceptable waste has not been removed from his premises on the scheduled collection day and where no notice of non-collection or no change in collection schedule has been received from the contractor, the city shall investigate. If the investigation discloses that the contractor has failed to collect acceptable waste from the subject premises without cause, the contractor shall collect same within twelve (12) hours after a collection is ordered by the city, at no additional charge. 
It is expressly understood that these rules apply to any other type of regularly scheduled collection services offered to the customer, including, but not limited to: residential or commercial solid waste or recycling, bulky waste, and/or acceptable brush collection as may be applicable. In all disputes between the contractor and an owner or residential customer, the city manager, or his designee, shall make the final decision reconciling differences and the contractor shall abide by the decision. 
Should the contractor fail to make a pick up due to a holiday, the contractor shall make up such pick up before the following regularly scheduled pick up day; provided, however, this shall not apply when weather prevents such make-up collection. The city and contractor agree that the following days shall be recognized as holidays: 
-  New Year's Day 
-  Independence Day 
-  Thanksgiving Day 
-  Christmas Day 
The contractor may observe any or all of the above listed holidays by suspension of collection service on the holiday. However, any deviation from a regular scheduled pick up day due to any holiday observed by the contractor must be marketed to all residents within the city. The contractor will be responsible for notifying all customers by newspaper advertisement, direct mail or inserts in city water bills at the contractor's expense. The city will make the decision as to which will ensure all residents are properly notified. In the case of inserts in the city water bills, the contractor will provide the city with approved printing materials to be inserted in city water bills at least six (6) weeks prior to interruption of service. In either case, the city will approve in writing all mass mailings with such approval not to be unreasonably withheld. Solid waste and recycling services for residential and commercial routes that occur on the specified legal holidays shall be picked up on the next regularly scheduled collection day. 
(Ord. No. 1506, § 2, 5-18-10)  
Sec. 7-330. - Termination. 
If, at any time, the contractor shall fail to substantially perform terms, covenants, or conditions herein set forth, the city shall notify the contractor by certified mail addressed to the contractor at the address set forth herein of specific reasons in support of city's claim that the contractor has substantially breached the terms and provisions as stated herein. The contractor shall be allowed thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of notice to remedy any failure to perform. Should the city deem failures to be corrected, no hearing shall be held. 
Should the contractor not remedy its performance, after a hearing described herein, the city may terminate the rights and privileges granted to the contractor herein. A notice shall be sent to the contractor no earlier than ten (10) days before a hearing is scheduled. The notice shall specify the time and place of the hearing, and shall include the specific reasons in support of the city's claim that the contractor has substantially breached the terms and provisions as stated herein. Should the city still deem the contractor to have failed in its performance, said hearing shall be conducted in public by the city council and the contractor shall be allowed to be present, and shall be given the full opportunity to answer such claims that are set out against the contractor. If the city council makes a finding that the contractor has failed to provide adequate refuse and/or collection services for the city, or has otherwise substantially failed to perform its duties as specified herein, the city council may terminate this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1506, § 2, 5-18-10)  
Sec. 7-340. - Investigation and public hearings. 
The city council shall have full power to examine or to cause to be examined at any time, and at all times the books, papers and records of the contractor, with relation to the operation of the waste collection system within the city. In this connection, the city shall have the right, through the city council or its designee, to take testimony and to compel the attendance of witnesses or the production of books, papers, and records and to examine witnesses under oath and under such rules and regulations as it may adopt. If the contractor or any officer or agent or employee of the contractor does not give testimony, the city council shall have the power to declare this article in default and to terminate it in accordance with the provisions set forth in the section above. 
(Ord. No. 1506, § 2, 5-18-10)  
Sec. 7-350. - Access to records and reports. 
The city and contractor agree to maintain, at their respective places of business, adequate books and records relating to the performance of their respective duties under the provisions of this contract and such books and records shall be made available at any time during business hours for inspection by other party, at the inspecting party's expense, upon reasonable advance notice. 
(Ord. No. 1506, § 2, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 1739, § 2, 5-19-15)  
Sec. 7-360. - Interruption in service. 
In the event the collection and disposal of solid waste collection and recycling services should be interrupted for any reason for more than forty-eight (48) hours, the City shall have the right to make temporary independent arrangements for the purpose of continuing the services to its residents in order to provide and protect the public health and safety. 
If the interruption in service mentioned in the above paragraph continues for a period of seventy-two (72) hours, and is not caused by a catastrophe, riot, war, act of terrorism, governmental order or regulation, strike, fire, act of God, accident, changes in laws, statutes, regulations or ordinances of other similar or different contingency beyond the reasonable control of the contractor, then the City shall have the right to terminate this article and the rights and privileges granted to the contractor herein. 
(Ord. No. 1506, § 2, 5-18-10)  
Sec. 7-370. - Force majeure. 
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the contractor shall not be liable for the failure to perform its duties if such failure is caused by a catastrophe, riot, war, governmental order or regulation, fire, act of god, or other similar or different contingency beyond the reasonable control of the contractor. 
(Ord. No. 1506, § 2, 5-18-10)  
Sec. 7-380. - Indemnification; limits of liability. 
The contractor shall defend, indemnify, and hold the city and all of its officers, agents, employees, and elected officials whole and harmless against any and all claims for damages, costs, and expenses of persons or property that may arise out of, or be occasioned by, or from any negligent act, or omission of the contractor, or any agent, servant, or employee of the contractor in the execution of the performance of services as stated herein, without regard to whether such persons are under the direction of city agents or employees. Notwithstanding, the foregoing or any other provision in said agreement, however, the contractor shall have obligation to collect and no liability for, relating to, or arising out of any collected, hazardous waste or other waste that does not constitute acceptable waste. 
In no event shall either party be liable to the other or obligated in any manner to pay to the other party any special, incidental, consequential, punitive or similar damages based upon claims arising out of or in connection with the performance or non-performance of its obligations as stated herein, or the material falseness or inaccuracy of any representation made in this article, whether such claims are based upon contract, tort, negligence, warranty or other legal theory. 
(Ord. No. 1506, § 2, 5-18-10)  
Sec. 7-390. - Notices. 
Any notices, consents, demands, requests, approvals, and other communications to be given under this chapter by any party to the other shall be deemed to have been duly given if given in writing and personally delivered, sent by nationally recognized overnight courier, or sent by mail, registered or certified, postage prepaid with return receipt requested, at the address specified below: 
All notices shall be given to the City at the following address: 
Office of the City Manager 
City of Keller 
1100 Bear Creek Parkway 
P.O. Box 770 
Keller, TX 76244-0770 
Notices delivered personally or by courier shall be deemed communicated as of actual receipt; mailed notices shall be deemed communicated as of 10:00 a.m. on the third business day after mailing. Any party may change its address for notice hereunder by giving notice of such change in the manner provided in this paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 1506, § 2, 5-18-10)  
Sec. 7-400. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  This chapter and any and all rights and obligation of the contractor hereunder may be assigned by the contractor to any parent company, affiliate, or subsidiary of the contractor without the consent of the city, but may be assigned to any third-party only with the prior written consent of the city council of the City of Keller, Texas. 
(b)  The contractor and the city agree that the city manager will be the final authority for the approval of charges not contemplated by this chapter and for the disposition of any dispute between a customer and the contractor. The city manager may designate a city employee to act as an enforcement officer hereunder and to act as a liaison between the city and the contractor. 
(c)  The city and the contractor shall comply with all rules and regulations of the Texas Department of Health, the Texas Water Quality Board, and the Environmental Protection Agency. The contractor further agrees to comply with all State and applicable Federal laws, regulating the collection and disposal of garbage, waste, and trash. 
(d)  The city agrees to pass such ordinances as are necessary to effectuate all terms of this chapter, including all duties and obligations required of residential customers. 
(e)  If any provision or portion of this chapter is for any reason unenforceable, inapplicable, or invalidated, then such provision or portion shall be reformed in accordance with applicable laws. The invalidity, inapplicability, or unenforceability of any provision of this chapter shall not affect the validity, applicability or enforceability of the other provisions or portions of this chapter. 
(f)  The parties hereto shall pay all of their own expenses relating to the negotiation, documentation, and closing of the transactions contemplated by this chapter, including (without limitation) the fees and expenses of their respective counsel and other outside advisors. If any action at law or in equity is necessary to enforce or interpret the terms of this chapter, the prevailing party shall be entitled to reasonable attorneys' fees, costs, and necessary disbursements in addition to any other relief to which he or it may be entitled. 
(Ord. No. 1506, § 2, 5-18-10)  
Sec. 7-410. - Private disposal. 
No commercial enterprise, other than the city's contractor, shall be employed to remove and dispose of solid waste within the city, except as prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1506, § 2, 5-18-10)  
Sec. 7-420. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep, throw, or deposit any solid waste, recyclable materials, debris, brush, stagnant water, or dead animal into, upon, or along any public property or private property of another, except as may be specifically provided by this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning or otherwise in control of any premises within the city to permit any of the conditions described in subsection (a) hereof to exist upon property owned or controlled by him after having actual or constructive notice thereof. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place in any container any material other than as specifically provided in this chapter and specifically no hazardous or improper waste. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or maintain solid waste or debris except as provided for by this chapter. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any burning match, charcoal, ember, or other material in any container or lease container used for the disposal of solid waste, recyclable materials, brush, and debris. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful to dump solid waste, bulky waste materials, refuse or rubbish, or any kind of rubbish including hazardous waste, unacceptable waste, debris from construction, major remodeling or general cleanup of property in any place within the city or within five thousand (5,000) feet outside of the corporate city limits. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any commercial, institutional, or industrial customer to remove the drain plug from any container. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause damage to or permit excessive buildup of material in containers. 
(Ord. No. 1506, § 2, 5-18-10)  
Sec. 7-430. - Authority to assess costs. 
(a)  The city shall retain the authority to assess on residential customers the costs related to solid waste, recycling, and community clean-up services at a rate set forth through an agreement between the city and the contractor, or through a separate instrument, as established and approved by resolution. 
(b)  The city shall retain the authority to assess on commercial customers the costs related to solid waste service at a rate set forth through an agreement between the city and the contractor, or through a separate instrument, as established and approved by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1506, § 2, 5-18-10)  
Chapter 8 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Sanitation requirements in trailer parks, § 11-140; private wastewater disposal, § 19-300 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 897, § 1, adopted May 5, 1998, amended former Art. I, §§ 8-100—8-140, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former §§ 8-100-8-140 pertained to similar subject matter, and §§ 8-100—8-130 carried no history note. Former § 8-140 derived from Ord. No. 723, § 1, adopted 12-21-93. 
 
Sec. 8-100. - Growth of weeds and grass. 
Any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property, whether developed or undeveloped lot, tract, parcel of land, or a portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied within the corporate limits of the City of Keller shall comply with the provisions of this article. For the purpose of Sections 8-100, 8-110, 8-120, and 8-130 of this article, a developed lot, tract, parcel of land, or a portion thereof, is any real property upon which a primary structure or dwelling has been constructed. Grass and weeds shall not grow on any real property to a height that exceeds twelve (12) inches in accordance with the following: 
(1)  All real property that is a developed residential lot, or vacant lot within developed or platted subdivisions, shall be completely mowed to provide for an even growth that does not exceed twelve (12) inches in height. 
(2)  All real property that is a developed non-residential property shall comply with section 8-100, paragraph (1) above, or comply with the landscaping plan on file with the city for the development and shall maintain landscaping in accordance with the landscape plan. 
(3)  All other real property that is undeveloped shall be mowed to a height that does not exceed twelve (12) inches for a minimum distance of fifty (50) feet from the street right-of-way line. If the undeveloped real property is adjacent to a developed real property, the perimeter of the undeveloped real property not adjacent to a street right-of-way shall also be mowed to a height that does not exceed twelve (12) inches for a minimum distance of twenty (20) feet. 
(4)  A person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property shall be responsible for maintaining the real property between the sidewalk and the curb or pavement and between any fence, wall or barrier and the curb or pavement. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 1, 5-5-98; Ord. No. 1533, § 2, 12-7-10)  
Sec. 8-110. - Duty to maintain grass, weeds, rubbish or unsanitary matter. 
It shall be the duty of the person owning, claiming, occupying, or having supervision or control of any real property within the corporate limits of the City of Keller to keep such property free and clear of all such grass, weeds, rubbish and other unsanitary matters as often as may be necessary. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 1, 5-5-98)  
Sec. 8-120. - Reserved.  
Sec. 8-130. - Failure to comply, notice to owner and lien filing pursuant to state law. 
In the event that the person owning, claiming, occupying, or having supervision or control of any real property within the corporate limits of the City of Keller, shall fail to comply with Sections 8-100 and 8-120, then the city's building official, or his designee, shall notify such owner by letters, that in the event such owners fail to do so, the city shall enter upon the property and mow same at thirty (30) day intervals during such annual growing season, in the event such owner fails to comply with this section, and that thereafter the cost of such mowing shall be charged against the owner and the property as herein provided. The giving of such annual notice shall be deemed to be in compliance with the terms of this section. 
(Ord. No. 897, § 1, 5-5-98)  
ARTICLE II. - MASSAGE PARLORS AND MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
Sec. 8-200. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this article have the meaning and definition as hereinafter stated: 
Chief of police. The chief of police of the City of Keller, Texas, or his duly authorized representative. 
Health officer. The health officer appointed by the city council. 
Massage. Any process of kneading, rubbing or other such manipulating of the skin of the body of a human being either with the hands or by means of electrical instruments or apparatus. The term "massage" as used in this article shall not include kneading, rubbing, or otherwise manipulating of the skin or bone structure of a human body by duly licensed medical doctors, doctors of osteopathy, chiropractors or registered physical therapists who treat only patients referred by a licensed physician and who practice physical therapy under a physician's direction. The term "massage" shall not include massage of the face practiced by beauty parlors or barber shops duly licensed by the State of Texas. 
Massage parlor or massage establishment. Any building, house, room or place where massage is practiced upon the human body by any person other than a duly licensed medical doctor, doctor of osteopathy or chiropractor. This term shall not include duly licensed beauty parlors or barber shops or the office or place of business of a registered physical therapist.  
Sec. 8-210. - License required. 
No person or corporation shall operate a massage parlor or massage establishment in the City of Keller, Texas, without having first obtained a license therefor from the city.  
Sec. 8-220. - Application. 
An application shall be required by an applicant for a license to operate a massage establishment or a massage parlor in the city. The application shall be on such form as may be prescribed by the chief of police. Such application shall be filed with the chief of police. The application shall require the applicant to state under oath the proposed location of the establishment in an area properly zoned therefor and the name of all owners of the proposed business; and if a corporation the name of all shareholders, the names of all proposed employees and all such persons, both owners and employees, shall be required to state in writing under oath whether such person has ever been convicted in any court of theft, sodomy, procuring, pandering, keeping a bawdy house, engaging in prostitution or other criminal offense. No license shall be granted for the operation of any massage parlor or massage establishment if it should be determined that a person who has been convicted of any of the offenses stated in this section has become an owner, operator or employee of a massage parlor or massage establishment having a license issued by the city.  
Sec. 8-230. - License fee. 
A license to operate a massage establishment or massage parlor shall be issued to expire on the thirty-first day of December of each year. The annual license fee shall be as set by the city's fee ordinances and shall be payable in full regardless of the date upon which the license is granted. The license shall be posted and publicly displayed in a conspicuous place at the location of the massage parlor or massage establishment.  
Sec. 8-240. - Medical certificates required. 
Before commencing operation, the owner or operator of a massage parlor or establishment shall furnish to the chief of police a medical certificate for each employee signed by a medical doctor or doctor of osteopathy that such employee has been examined within three (3) days of the date of such medical certificate and that such examination established the fact that such person is free from any infectious or communicable disease. A medical certificate certifying that any such employee is free of infectious or communicable disease shall be furnished to the chief of police on January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1 during any period of employment by such massage parlor or massage establishment.  
Sec. 8-250. - License revocation. 
A license issued under this article shall be revoked upon the following: 
(1)  Conviction in any court of the holder of any such license or such licensee's employees of the offense of theft, sodomy, procuring, pandering, keeping a bawdy house, or engaging in prostitution; or 
(2)  Failure to furnish current medical certificates as required herein.  
Sec. 8-260. - Hours of operation. 
No massage parlor or massage establishment shall be kept open for any purpose before 8:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m.  
Sec. 8-270. - Not to be used as residence. 
No massage parlor or massage establishment shall be used for residence purposes.  
Sec. 8-280. - Inspection. 
The chief of police or his designated representative is authorized to make periodic inspection and examination of massage parlor or massage establishment premises. Such inspection shall be made to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the public.  
Sec. 8-290. - Sanitary requirements. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every person conducting or operating a massage establishment to keep the same at all times in a clean and sanitary condition. All instruments and mechanical, therapeutic, and bathing devices, or parts thereof that come into contact with the human body shall be sterilized by a modern and approved method of sterilization before initial use; and any such instruments and devices, or parts thereof, after having been used upon one (1) patron, shall be sterilized before being used upon another. All towels and linens furnished for use of one (1) patron shall not be furnished for use of another until thoroughly laundered. 
(b)  All masseurs and operators shall wash their hands thoroughly before administering massage manipulation to each patron accommodated. 
(c)  No person suffering from a communicable disease shall work or be employed in a massage establishment. 
(d)  No person shall be accommodated as a patron within a massage establishment when to the knowledge of the owner, person in control, or an employee, such person is suffering from a communicable disease.  
Sec. 8-300. - Clothing. 
Every person giving massages shall remain fully clothed in opaque material fully covering the body from the neck to knee with the exception of arms and hands.  
Sec. 8-310. - Advertising. 
No massage parlor shall advertise in any manner which would state or hint that a customer would receive anything besides a massage.  
ARTICLE III. - FOOD SANITATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1626, § 2, adopted Oct. 16, 2012, repealed former Art. III, §§ 8-350—8-380, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 529, § 1, 1-5-88; Ord. No. 668, §§ 1, 2, 1-7-92. 
 
Sec. 8-350. - Designation of health authority. 
The City of Keller designates the Tarrant County Health Department director as its health authority for the purpose of ensuring minimum standards of environmental health and sanitation within the scope of that department's function. 
(Ord. No. 1626, § 2, 10-16-12)  
Sec. 8-355. - State regulations adopted. 
(1)  The City of Keller adopts by reference the provisions of the current rules or rules as amended by The Executive Commission of the Health and Human Services Commission found in 25 Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 229, Sections 161 through 171 and 173 through 175 regarding the regulation of food establishments in this jurisdiction. 
(2)  A certified copy of each rule manual above shall be kept on file in the office of the City Secretary. 
(Ord. No. 1626, § 2, 10-16-12)  
Sec. 8-360. - Definitions. 
All definitions in "Rules on Food Service Sanitation" and "Rules on Retail Food Store Sanitation" are hereby adopted. In addition, the following definitions shall be understood: 
(1)  Authorized agent or employee shall be understood to mean the employees of the regulatory authority. 
(2)  Food establishment shall be understood to mean a food service establishment, a retail food store, a temporary food establishment, a mobile food unit, and/or a roadside food vendor. 
(3)  State Rules shall be understood to mean the State rules found in 25 Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 229, Sections 161 through 171 and Sections 173 through 175. These rules are also known as the Texas Food Establishment Rules. 
(4)  Regulatory authority shall be understood to mean the Tarrant County Public Health Department. 
(Ord. No. 1626, § 2, 10-16-12)  
Sec. 8-365. - Food permits. 
(1)  Requirement. A person may not operate a food establishment without a permit issued by the regulatory authority. 
(2)  Posting. A valid permit must be visibly posted in or on every food establishment regulated by this article. 
(3)  Nontransference. Permits are not transferrable from one person or entity to another or from one location to another location, except as otherwise permitted by this article. 
(4)  Application. Any person desiring to operate a food establishment must make a written application for a permit on forms provided by the regulatory authority. The application must contain the name and address of each applicant, the location and type of the proposed food establishment and the applicable fee. Failure to provide all required information, or falsifying information required may result in denial or revocation of the permit. Renewals of permits are required on an annual basis and the same information is required for a renewal permit as for an initial permit. 
(5)  Inspections. Prior to the approval of an initial permit or the renewal of an existing permit, the regulatory authority shall inspect the proposed food establishment to determine compliance with State laws and rules. An inspection of a food establishment shall be performed at least once annually and shall be prioritized based upon assessment of a food establishment's compliance and potential of causing foodborne illness according to 25 TAC 229.171(h). The regulatory authority shall classify food establishments as special priority, high priority, medium priority or low priority, according to the type of operations; particular foods that are prepared; number of people served; susceptibility of the population served; history of violations and any other risk factor deemed relevant to the operation. A food establishment that does not comply with State laws and rules will be denied a permit or the renewal of a permit. Refusal of an owner, manager or employee to allow the authorized representative of the regulatory authority, upon presentation of credentials, to inspect any permitted business or operation therein during normal business hours will result in an immediate suspension of the permit, requiring all permitted activities to abate until after such time as a hearing may be held per Section (9). 
(6)  Suspension of permit. 
(a)  The regulatory authority may, without warning, notice or hearing, suspend any permit to operate a food establishment if the operation of the food establishment constitutes an imminent hazard to public health. Suspension is effective upon service of the notice required by paragraph (6)(b) of this article. When a permit is suspended, food operations shall immediately cease. Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing within ten (10) days of receipt of a request for a hearing. 
(b)  Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit or the person in charge shall be notified in writing that the permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within ten (10) days. If no written request for hearing is filed within ten (10) days, the suspension is sustained. The regulatory authority may end the suspension at any time if reasons for suspension no longer exist. 
(7)  Revocation of permit. The regulatory authority may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, revoke a permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of these rules or for interference with the regulatory authority in the performance of its duties. Prior to revocation, the regulatory authority shall notify the holder of the permit or the person, in writing of the reason for which the permit is subject to revocation and that the permit shall be revoked at the end of the ten (10) days following service of such notice unless a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within such ten-day period. If no request for hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the permit becomes final. 
(8)  Administrative process. A notice as required in these rules is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit as shown on their permit application. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authority. 
(9)  Hearings. The hearings provided for in these rules shall be conducted by the regulatory authority at a time and place designated by it. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearing, the regulatory authority shall make final findings, and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit by the regulatory authority. 
(10)  Permit fees. Fees for permits issued under this Ordinance shall be established by the regulatory authority. 
(Ord. No. 1626, § 2, 10-16-12)  
Sec. 8-370. - Review of plans. 
(1)  Subdivision of plans. Whenever a food establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling or conversion shall be submitted to the regulatory authority for review before work is begun. Extensive remodeling means that twenty (20) percent or greater of the area of the food establishment is to be remodeled or when equipment required by the rules is to be relocated or removed. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, equipment arrangement, mechanical plans and construction of materials of work areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The plans and specifications will be approved by the regulatory authority if they meet the requirements of the rules adopted by this Ordinance. The approved plans and specifications must be followed in construction, remodeling or conversion.Failure to follow the approved plans and specifications will result in a permit denial, suspension, or revocation. 
(2)  Fees. The fees for the review of plans shall be established by the regulatory authority. 
(Ord. No. 1626, § 2, 10-16-12)  
Sec. 8-375. - Food manager certification. 
(1)  Requirement: 
(a)  Each food service establishment shall have at least one (1) person employed in a managerial capacity possessing a current food manager certificate approved by the regulatory authority. 
(b)  Each food service establishment with six (6) or more employees that is required to have certified food managers must have at least one (1) certified manager on site during all operations. 
(c)  Every employee of a food service establishment other than a certified food manager must maintain a valid Food Handler certification registered with the regulatory authority. 
(d)  Food handler certification shall be valid for a period of up to three (3) years as determined by the regulatory authority. 
(e)  Food manager and food handler certification documentation must be maintained in the food service establishment and presented up on request by the regulatory authority. 
(Ord. No. 1626, § 2, 10-16-12)  
ARTICLE IV. - NUISANCES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Public nuisances in regard to animals, § 3-240; garbage and trash, Ch. 7; inoperative motor vehicles, §§ 18-530, 18-540. 
 
Sec. 8-400. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Debris. Anything not covered in garbage, trash or rubbish that is objectionable or offensive to the senses, whether usable or not, to include, but not be limited to, tires, appliances, building material, curb cuts, broken up concrete or gunite, liquid wastes or grease, car parts, broken-down farm or construction equipment. 
Garbage. Kitchen refuse, animal or vegetable food stuffs and their packaging, domestic, commercial or industrial in nature; ashes or any other household waste which is damp or capable of emitting noxious odors. 
Rubbish. Loose and decaying material, leaves, grass clippings, limbs and brush, chipped or not, direct or scrapings from lot clearing or yard maintenance. 
Trash. Discarded items such as furniture, toys, paper, clothing, yard trash, etc. 
(Ord. No. 622, 7-3-90)  
Sec. 8-410. - Nuisances declared. 
Whatever is dangerous to human life or health, whatever renders the ground, the water, the air or food, a hazard or injury to human life or health or that is or threatens to become detrimental to the public health, or contributes to urban blight is hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be unlawful and the specific acts, conditions and things set forth in this article are, among others, declared to be nuisances and prohibited and made unlawful within the corporate city limits and within five thousand (5,000) feet outside the city limits. 
It shall be unlawful to suffer or permit any rubbish, brush or other objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter of whatever nature to accumulate or be present upon any property and all such accumulation shall be declared a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 622, 7-3-90)  
Sec. 8-420. - Accumulations of unsound meat, decayed vegetables, rubbish, etc. 
It shall be unlawful to allow to accumulate or remain in or on any property any putrid or unsound meat, pork, fish, hides, decayed vegetables or food, manure, filthy ash heaps, garbage, offal, rubbish, dirt or filth of any kind which, by its decay or putrefaction, is offensive to human beings or detrimental to health. 
(Ord. No. 622, 7-3-90)  
Sec. 8-430. - Ponds or pools of unwholesome water. 
It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain on any property within the city a pond, pool, depression or container which contains unwholesome, impure or offensive water, or which is conducive to the breeding of mosquitoes. 
(Ord. No. 622, 7-3-90; Ord. No. 1362, § 1, 2-20-07)  
Sec. 8-440. - Grading, erosion or improper drainage. 
It shall be unlawful to keep, possess or maintain any lot or piece of ground where grading, erosion, ponding or improper surface drainage causes materials to be washed or deposited upon streets, alleys or other public property. 
(Ord. No. 622, 7-3-90)  
Sec. 8-450. - Storage of debris, rubbish, trash, discarded furnishings, etc. 
It shall be unlawful to store or accumulate or permit the storage or accumulation on any property of any: 
(a)  Debris, rubbish or trash; 
(b)  Broken or discarded household furnishings, appliances, boxes and cartons, lawn maintenance equipment, play equipment, toys and similar items; 
(c)  Used or discarded building materials; 
(d)  Discarded, wrecked or inoperable appliances, machines and tools; 
(e)  Old tires, batteries, used oil or automobile parts, engine parts or scrap metal; 
(f)  Dirt gathered during cleaning of yards; 
(g)  Waste of mills or factories; 
(h)  Damaged merchandise; 
(i)  Wet, broken or leaking barrels, casks or boxes; 
(j)  Any other materials which are offensive or tend by decay to become putrid or to provide harborage for rodents. 
This prohibition shall not apply to lawful storage by a person engaged in the business of dealing in junk who is licensed by the city and is in compliance with the comprehensive zoning ordinance and other applicable laws and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 622, 7-3-90)  
Sec. 8-460. - Abatement. 
Any duly authorized employee of the city in the department of public safety, public works or public inspection or code enforcement that finds a nuisance as defined in this article exists in or on any building, structure or property within the city shall advise the property owner of the nuisance and direct him to abate the nuisance. The property owner shall be notified of the existence of the nuisance in writing. Such notification shall detail the violations and establish a reasonable abatement period. 
The owner may voluntarily abate the nuisance at any time within the abatement period by repair or removal and advise in writing the city employee issuing the abatement notification. The city shall inspect the premises to insure that the nuisance has been abated. Should any of the items which constitute a nuisance be placed on other public or private property, this will constitute a separate violation and appropriate enforcement action under this Chapter shall be taken. 
(Ord. No. 622, 7-3-90)  
Sec. 8-470. - Reimbursement. 
If any nuisance is not completely abated within the time prescribed by the city notification, the city manager is hereby authorized to direct the nuisance to be abated by city forces or private contract. In furtherance of this section, any city employee or private contractor, contractor, employee or agent is expressly authorized to enter upon the property to abate the nuisance. Reimbursement will be sought pursuant to the Texas Health and Safety Code, including but not limited to, Title 5, Chapter 342, Sections 342.001-342.007 of the Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. No. 622, 7-3-90)  
Sec. 8-480. - Disposition of certain articles of personal property. 
(a)  The city shall hold any articles of personal property, except motor vehicles, removed during nuisance abatement proceedings, which are still usable for the purpose for which they were originally intended. Any such items which remain in the custody of the department of public safety for a period of thirty (30) days without being claimed by the owner, whether known or unknown, may be sold by the city at public auction. Any proceeds from such a sale shall be credited first to costs of abatement of the nuisance and any excess shall be returned to the owner. 
(b)  At least ten (10) days notice of the time and place of sale of all property to be offered for sale and a descriptive list of the property to be offered for sale shall be posted at city hall and a copy thereof sent by registered mail to the last known address of the owner, if the name of such owner is known. Thereafter, such property shall be offered for sale at public auction to the highest bidder. Such property may be sold as individual items or assembled in lots at the discretion of the purchasing agent. 
(c)  Any such articles of personal property which are claimed by the owner from the director of public safety during such thirty-day period shall be returned only if the owner gives adequate assurances to the director that such property will not continue to be used or stored in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance. 
(d)  Any articles of personal property which are not usable for the purpose for which they were originally intended may be disposed of by the city. 
(e)  Motor vehicles removed during nuisance abatement proceedings shall be disposed of in accordance with Article V of the Texas Litter Abatement Act (Art. 4477-9a, Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat.). 
(Ord. No. 622, 7-3-90)  
Sec. 8-490. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys or omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense involving fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, and shall be fined not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for all other violations of this article. 
(b)  Any person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, agent or lessee, or other person having charge or control of any property in the city, who maintains any nuisance in violation of this article, or who violates any order of abatement served as provided in this section, shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense involving fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, and shall be fined not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for any other violations of this article. 
(c)  Any person, firm or corporation who obstructs, impedes or interferes with a representative of the city, or city department or with a person who has been ordered to abate a nuisance pursuant to this article and is lawfully engaged in such abatement, shall be fined not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense. 
(d)  Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(e)  Whenever any owner or agent of any building in the city shall rent, lease or hire out to be occupied any building or part thereof as a home or residence for more than two (2) families living independent of one another, or a building to different persons for stores or offices in such building, giving to each family or person the common right to halls, yards, water closets or privies, or some of them, then such owner or agent shall be liable for the condition of such halls, yards, water closets or privies, and such owner or agent may also be made a defendant in a prosecution for the violation of the provisions of this article, and be subject to fine, the same as the occupant of the premises, and any prosecution for violation of this article may be maintained against the occupants, owner or agent of the premises, or either or all of such parties. 
(Ord. No. 622, 7-3-90)  
ARTICLE V. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 643, § 1, adopted Feb. 5, 1991, added provisions to the Code designated as Art. IV of this chapter; said provisions have been redesignated as Art. V, at the discretion of the editor, as provisions pertaining to a different subject matter already existed as Art. IV. Section 2 of Ord. No. 643, which did not specifically amend the Code, has been included as § 8-595 of Art. V, also at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 8-500. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult arcade means any place which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
Adult bookstore or adult video store means a commercial establishment which is its principal business purposes offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
(a)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas;" or 
(b)  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities." 
Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features: 
(a)  Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or 
(b)  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities;" or 
(c)  Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities " or "specified anatomical areas." 
Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
(a)  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas;" and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or 
(b)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours; or 
(c)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours. 
Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction of description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities." 
Chief of police means the chief of police of the City of Keller or his designated agent. 
Escort means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model undergarments, lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
Escort agency means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes, for a fee, tip, or other consideration. 
Establishment means and includes any of the following: 
(a)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(b)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 
(c)  The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
(d)  The relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license. 
Nude model studio means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. 
Nudity or state of nudity means: 
(a)  The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast; or 
(b)  A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or areola of the female breast. 
Operates or causes to be operated means to cause to function or to put or keep in operation. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business. 
Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
Residential district means a single-family, duplex, townhouse, multifamily or mobile home zoning district as defined in the zoning ordinance of the city. 
Residential use means a single-family, duplex, multi-family, or mobile home used as defined in the zoning ordinance of the city. 
Semi-nude means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areolae of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
(a)  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
(b)  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude. 
Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center. 
Specified anatomical areas means human genitals in a state of sexual arousal. 
Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
(a)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; 
(b)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
(c)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
(d)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in (a) through (c) above. 
Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor area occupied by the business by more than twenty-five (25) percent, as the floor area exists on February 5, 1991. 
Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following: 
(a)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(b)  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(c)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Ord. No. 643, § 1, 2-5-91)  
Sec. 8-505. - Classification. 
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows: 
(1)  Adult arcades; 
(2)  Adult bookstores or adult video stores; 
(3)  Adult cabarets; 
(4)  Adult motels; 
(5)  Adult motion picture theaters; 
(6)  Adult theaters; 
(7)  Escort agencies; 
(8)  Nude model studios; and 
(9)  Sexual encounter centers. 
(Ord. No. 643, § 1, 2-5-91)  
Sec. 8-510. - License required. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he operates a sexually oriented business without a valid license, issued by the city for the particular type of business. 
(b)  An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the chief of police. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. Applicants who must comply with section 8-585 of this article shall submit a diagram meeting the requirements of section 8-585. 
(c)  The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this article. 
(d)  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a twenty (20) percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under section 8-515, and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(e)  The fact that a person possesses a valid theater license, dance hall license, or public house of amusement license does not exempt him from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business license. A person who operates a sexually oriented business and possesses a theater license, public house or amusement license or dance hall license shall comply with the requirements and provisions of this article as well as the other requirements and provisions of the Keller Code of Ordinances when applicable. 
(Ord. No. 643, § 1, 2-5-91)  
Sec. 8-515. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  The chief of police shall approve the issuance of a license to an applicant within thirty (30) days after receipt of an application unless the chief of police finds one (1) or more of the following to be true: 
(1)  An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(2)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant or the applicant's spouse in relation to a sexually oriented business. 
(3)  An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form 
(4)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a violation of a provision of this article, other than the offense of operating a sexually oriented business without a license, within two (2) years immediately preceding the application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect. 
(5)  The license fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(6)  An applicant has been employed in a sexually oriented business in a managerial capacity within the preceding twelve (12) months and has demonstrated an inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business premises in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers 
(7)  An applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with sections 8-525, 8-550, 8-555, 8-565, 8-570, 8-575, 8-580, 8-585 or 8-590. 
(8)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a crime: 
a.  Involving: 
(i)  Any of the following offenses as described in Chapter 43 of the Texas Penal Code: 
(aa)  Prostitution; 
(bb)  Promotion of prostitution; 
(cc)  Aggravated promotion of prostitution; 
(dd)  Compelling prostitution; 
(ee)  Obscenity; 
(ff)  Sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to a minor; 
(gg)  Sexual performance by a child; 
(hh)  Possession of child pornography; 
(ii)  Any of the following offenses as described in Chapter 21 of the Texas Penal Code: 
(aa)  Public lewdness; 
(bb)  Indecent exposure; 
(cc)  Indecency with a child; 
(iii)  Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as described in Chapter 22 of the Texas Penal Code; 
(iv)  Incest, solicitation of child, or harboring a runaway child as described in Chapter 25 of the Texas Penal Code; or 
(v)  Criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses; 
b.  For which: 
(i)  Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
(ii)  Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
(iii)  Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any twenty-four-month period. 
(b)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or applicant's spouse. 
(c)  An applicant who has been convicted or whose spouse has been convicted of an offense listed in subsection (a)(8) may qualify for a sexually oriented business license only when the time period required by sub-section (a)(8)b has elapsed. 
(d)  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. 
(Ord. No. 643, § 1, 2-5-91)  
Sec. 8-520. - Fees. 
The annual fee for a sexually oriented business license shall be set by the city's fee ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 643, § 1, 2-5-91)  
Sec. 8-525. - Inspection. 
(a)  An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the police department, health department, fire department and building inspection division to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(b)  A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or employee commits an offense if he refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by a representative of the police department at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(c)  The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for use as permanent or temporary habitation. 
(Ord. No. 643, § 1, 2-5-91)  
Sec. 8-530. - Expiration of license. 
Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided herein. Application for renewal should be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date, and when made less than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected. 
(Ord. No. 643, § 1, 2-5-91)  
Sec. 8-535. - Suspension. 
The chief of police shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if he determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with sections 8-525, 8-550, 8-555, 8-565, 8-570, 8-575, 8-580, 8-585 or 8-590 of this article. 
(2)  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this article; 
(3)  Demonstrated inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(Ord. No. 643, § 1, 2-5-91)  
Sec. 8-540. - Revocation. 
(a)  The chief of police shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in section 8-135 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months. 
(b)  The chief of police shall revoke a license if he determines that: 
(1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the chief of police during the application process; 
(2)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
(3)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(4)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(5)  A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in section 8-515(a)(8)a for which the time period required in section 8-515(a)(8)b has not elapsed; 
(6)  On two (2) or more occasions within a twelve-month period, a person or persons committed an offense occurring in or on the licensed premises of a crime listed in section 8-515(a)(8)a, for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were committed; 
(7)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in or on the licensed premises. The term "sexual contact" shall have the same meaning as it is defined in section 21.01, Texas Penal Code; or 
(8)  A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for hotel occupancy taxes, ad valorem taxes, or sales taxes related to the sexually oriented business. 
(c)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license. 
(d)  Subsection (b)(7) does not apply to adult motels as a ground for revoking the license unless the licensee or employee knowingly allowed the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in a public place or within public view. 
(e)  When the chief of police revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one (1) year, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one (1) year from the date the revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the chief of police finds that the basis of the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may make a new application for a license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. If the license was revoked under subsection (b)(5), an applicant may not be granted another license until the appropriate number of years required under section 8-515(a)(8)b has elapsed. 
(Ord. No. 643, § 1, 2-5-91)  
Sec. 8-545. - Appeal. 
If the chief of police denies the issuance of a license, or suspends or revokes a license, the chief of police shall send to the applicant, or licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the action and the right to an appeal. Upon receipt of written notice of the denial, suspension, or revocation, the licensee whose application for a license has been denied or whose license has been suspended or revoked shall have the right to appeal to the state district court. An appeal to the state district court must be filed within thirty (30) days after the receipt of notice of the decision of the chief of police. The licensee shall bear the burden of proof in court. 
(Ord. No. 643, § 1, 2-5-91)  
Sec. 8-550. - Transfer of license. 
A license shall not transfer his license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application. 
(Ord. No. 643, § 1, 2-5-91)  
Sec. 8-555. - Location of sexually oriented businesses. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within one thousand (1,000) feet of: 
(1)  A church; 
(2)  A public or private elementary or secondary school or day care facility; 
(3)  A boundary of a residential district as defined and located in the city's comprehensive zoning ordinance and map; 
(4)  A public park; or 
(5)  The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use as defined in this article. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within one thousand (1,000) feet of another sexually oriented business. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if he causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one (1) sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business. 
(d)  For the purposes of subsection (a), measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a church or public or private elementary or secondary school or day care facility, or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park, residential district, or residential lot. 
(e)  For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the distance between any two (2) sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. 
(f)  Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on February 5, 1991, that is in violation of subsections (a), (b), or (c) of this section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed three (3) years, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two (2) or more sexually oriented businesses are within one thousand (1,000) feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first established and continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the later-established business(es) is nonconforming. 
(g)  A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, or a church, public or private elementary or secondary school, public park, residential district, or residential lot within one thousand (1,000) feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application for a license is submitted after a license has expired or has been revoked. 
(Ord. No. 643, § 1, 2-5-91)  
Sec. 8-560. - Exemption from location restrictions. 
(a)  If the chief of police denies the issuance of a license to an applicant because the location of the sexually oriented business establishment is in violation of section 8-555 of this article, then the applicant may, not later than ten (10) calendar days after receiving notice of the denial, file with the city secretary a written request for an exemption from the locational restrictions of section 8-555. 
(b)  If the written request is filed with the city secretary within the ten-day limit, the zoning board of adjustment shall consider the request. A date for the hearing shall be set within sixty (60) days from the date the written request is received. 
(c)  The zoning board of adjustment may, in its discretion, grant an exemption from the locational restrictions of section 8-555 if it makes the following findings: 
(1)  That the location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not have a detrimental effect on nearby properties or contrary to the public safety or welfare; 
(2)  That the granting of the exemption will not violate the spirit and intent of this article of the City Code; 
(3)  That the location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not downgrade the property values or quality of life in the adjacent areas or encourage the development of urban blight; 
(4)  That the location of an additional sexually oriented business in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation nor will it interfere with any efforts of urban renewal or restoration; and 
(5)  That all other applicable provisions of this article will be observed. 
(d)  The board shall grant or deny the exemption by a majority vote. Failure to reach a majority vote shall result in denial of the exemption. Disputes of fact shall be decided on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence. The decision of the zoning board of adjustment is final. 
(e)  If the board grants the exemption, the exemption is valid for one (1) year from the date of the board's action. Upon the expiration of an exemption, the sexually oriented business is in violation of the locational restrictions of section 8-555 until the applicant applies for and receives another exemption. 
(f)  If the board denies the exemption, the applicant may not re-apply for an exemption until at least twelve-months have elapsed since the date of the board's action. 
(g)  The grant of an exemption does not exempt the applicant from any other provisions of this chapter other than the locational restrictions of section 8-555. 
(Ord. No. 643, § 1, 2-5-91)  
Sec. 8-565. - Additional regulations for escort agencies. 
(a)  An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of eighteen (18). 
(Ord. No. 643, § 1, 2-5-91)  
Sec. 8-570. - Additional regulations for nude model studios. 
(a)  A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(b)  A person under the age of eighteen (18) years commits an offense if he appears in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under the subsection if the person under eighteen (18) years was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if he appears in a state of nudity or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right-of-way. 
(d)  A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 643, § 1, 2-5-91)  
Sec. 8-575. - Additional regulations for adult theaters and adult motion picture theaters. 
(a)  The requirements and provisions of this article remain applicable to adult theaters and adult motion picture theaters. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he knowingly allows a person under the age of eighteen (18) to appear in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
(c)  A person under the age of eighteen (18) years commits an offense if he knowingly appears in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
(d)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsections (b) and (c) of this section if the person under eighteen (18) years was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex. 
(Ord. No. 643, § 1, 2-5-91)  
Sec. 8-580. - Additional regulations for adult motels. 
(a)  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two (2) or more times in a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this article. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented business license, he rents or subrents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten (10) hours from the time the room is rented, he rents or subrents the same sleeping room again. 
(c)  For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the terms "rent" or "subrent" means the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(Ord. No. 643, § 1, 2-5-91)  
Sec. 8-585. - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, a file, video cassette, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. The chief of police may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the chief of police or his designee. 
(4)  It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(5)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two (2) or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (5) remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any patron is present in the premises and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (1) of this section. 
(7)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one (1) footcandle as measured at the floor level. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the illumination described above, is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(b)  A person having a duty under subsections (1) through (8) of subsection (a) above commits an offense if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. No. 643, § 1, 2-5-91)  
Sec. 8-590. - Display of sexually explicit material to minors. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if, in a business establishment open to persons under the age of seventeen (17) years, he displays a book, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, film, or video cassette, the cover of which depicts, in a manner calculated to arouse sexual lust or passion for commercial gain or to exploit sexual lust or perversion for commercial gain, any of the following: 
(1)  Human sexual intercourse, masturbation, or sodomy; 
(2)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts; 
(3)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, buttocks, or that portion of the female breast below the top of the areola; or 
(4)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, whether covered or uncovered. 
(b)  In this section "display" means to locate an item in such a manner that, without obtaining assistance from an employee of the business establishment: 
(1)  It is available to the general public for handling and inspection; or 
(2)  The cover or outside packaging on the item is visible to members of the general public. 
(Ord. No. 643, § 1, 2-5-91)  
Sec. 8-595. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Except as provided by subsection (b), any person violating section 8-555 of this article, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(b)  If the sexually oriented business involved is a nude model studio or sexual encounter center, then violation of sections 8-510(a) or 8-555 of this article is punishable as a Class A misdemeanor. 
(c)  Except as provided by subsection (b), any person violating a provision of this article other than section 8-555, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(d)  It is a defense to prosecution under sections 8-510(a), 8-555 or 8-570(d) that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(1)  By a proprietary school licensed by the state of Texas, a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(2)  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferrable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
(3)  In a structure: 
a.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and 
b.  Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class; and 
c.  Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
(e)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 8-510(a) or section 8-555 that each item of descriptive, printed, film, or video material offered for sale or rental, taken as a whole, contains serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value. 
(Ord. No. 643, § 2, 2-5-91)  
Chapter 8.5 - IMPACT FEES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 740, § 1, adopted May 3, 1994, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as Ch. 8.5, §§ 8.5-100—8.5-520, was at the discretion of the editor. 
Subsequent to Ord. No. 740, the city has periodically updated provisions related to impact fees. These provisions have been incorporated by reference and are not set out herein. 
Cross reference— Impact fee advisory committee, § 2-1100 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 8.5-100. - Purpose and policy. 
This chapter is intended to assure the provision of adequate public facilities for water, wastewater and roadway facilities to serve new development by requiring each such development to pay its pro rata share of the costs of such improvements necessitated by and attributable to such new development, in conformance with the provisions of Tex. Loc. Gov't. Code Chapter 395. 
(Ord. No. 740, § 1, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 8.5-110. - Authority. 
This chapter is adopted pursuant to Tex. Loc. Gov't. Code Ch. 395, as amended, and pursuant to the Keller City Charter. The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to limit the power of the city to utilize other methods authorized by state law or pursuant to other city powers to accomplish the purposes set forth herein, either in substitution for or in conjunction with this chapter 
(Ord. No. 740, § 1, 5-3-94; Ord. No. 1087, § 3, 1-15-02)  
Sec. 8.5-120. - Definitions. 
Advisory committee means the capital improvements advisory committee established by the city for purposes of reviewing and making recommendations to the city council on adoption and amendment of the city's impact fee program. 
Area-related facility means a capital improvement or facility expansion which is designated in the impact fee capital improvements plan and which is not a site related facility. "Area-related facility" may include a capital improvement which is located offsite, or within or on the perimeter of the development site. 
Assessment means the determination of the amount of the maximum impact fee per service unit which can be imposed on new development pursuant to this chapter. 
Capital improvement means either a roadway facility, a water facility or a wastewater facility, with a life expectancy of three (3) or more years, to be owned and operated by or on behalf of the city. 
City means the City of Keller, Texas. 
Credit means the amount of the reduction of an impact fee due, determined under this ordinance or pursuant to administrative guidelines, that is equal to the value of area related facilities provided by a property owner pursuant to the city's subdivision or zoning regulations or requirements, for the same type of facility. 
Development agreement approval means an agreement between the city and a property owner which provides for the payment of the obligations assessed under this chapter as agreed to by both parties. 
Facility expansion means either a roadway facility expansion, a water facility expansion or a sewer facility expansion. 
Final plat approval means the point at which the applicant has complied with all conditions of approval in accordance with the city's subdivision regulations and the plat has been released for filing with Tarrant County. 
Impact fee means either a fee for roadway facilities, a fee for water facilities or a fee for wastewater facilities imposed on new development by the city pursuant to this chapter in order to generate revenue to find or recoup the costs of capital improvements or facility expansion necessitated by and attributable to such new development. "Impact fees" do not include the dedication of rights-of-way or easements for such facilities, or the construction of such improvements, imposed pursuant to the city's zoning or subdivision regulations. 
Impact fee capital improvements plan means either a roadway capital improvements plan, a water capital improvements plan or a wastewater capital improvements plan adopted or revised pursuant to these impact fee regulations. 
Land use assumptions means the projections of population and employment growth and associated changes in land uses, densities and intensities adopted by the city, as may be amended from time to time, upon which the capital improvements plans are based. 
Land use equivalency table means a table converting the demands for capital improvements generated by various land uses to numbers of service units, as may be amended from time to time. 
New development means a project involving the construction, reconstruction, redevelopment, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure; or any use or extension of the use of land; any of which has the effect of increasing the requirements for capital improvements or facility expansions, measured by the number of service units to be generated by such activity, and which requires either the approval of a plat pursuant to the city's subdivision regulations, the issuance of a building permit, or connection to the city's water or wastewater system, and which has not been exempted from these regulations by provisions herein. 
Plat has the meaning given the term in the city's subdivision regulations. "Plat" includes replat. 
Platting has the meaning given the term in the city's subdivision regulations. "Platting" includes replatting. 
Property owner has the meaning given the term in the city's subdivision regulations. "Property owner" includes the developer for the new development. 
Recoupment means the imposition of an impact fee to reimburse the city for capital improvements which the city has previously oversized to serve new development. 
Roadway means any freeway, expressway, principal or minor arterial or collector roadways designated in the city's adopted thoroughfare plan, as may be amended from time to time. "Roadway" does not include any roadway designated as a numbered highway on the official federal or Texas highway system. 
Roadway capital improvements plan means the adopted plan, as may be amended from time to time, which identifies the roadway facilities or roadway expansions and their costs for each road service area, which are necessitated by and which are attributable to new development, for a period not to exceed ten (10) years, which are to be financed in whole or in part through the imposition of road facilities fees pursuant to this chapter. 
Roadway expansion means the expansion of the capacity of an existing roadway in the city, but does not include the repair, maintenance, modernization, or expansion of an existing roadway to better serve existing development. 
Roadway facility means an improvement or appurtenance to a roadway which includes, but is not limited to, rights-of-way, whether conveyed by deed or easement; intersection improvements; traffic signals; turn lanes; drainage facilities associated with the roadway; street lighting or curbs. "Roadway facility" also includes any improvement or appurtenance to an intersection with a roadway officially enumerated in the federal or Texas highway system. "Roadway facility" excludes those improvements or appurtenances to a roadway which are site-related facilities. 
Service area means either a roadway service area, a water service area or wastewater benefit area within the city and, except for roadway facilities, within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, within which impact fees for capital improvements or facility expansion will be collected for new development occurring within such area and within which fees so collected will be expended for those types of improvements or expansions identified in the type of capital improvements plan applicable to the service area. 
Service unit means the applicable standard units of measure shown on the land use equivalency table in the impact fees capital improvements plan which can be converted to vehicle miles in p.m. peak hour, for roadway facilities, or five-eighths ( 5/8 ) inch water meter equivalents, for water or for wastewater facilities, which serves as the standardized measure of consumption, use or generation attributable to the new unit of development. 
Site-related facility means an improvement or facility which is for the primary use or benefit of a new development and/or which is for the primary purpose of safe and adequate provision of roadway, water or wastewater facilities to serve the new development, and which is not included in the impact fees capital improvements plan and for which the property owner is solely responsible under subdivision or other applicable development regulations. 
Unit cost(s) means the amount(s) identified in the capital improvements plan, as the value of each unit of measurement used for a particular capital improvement. 
Utility connection means installation of a water meter for connecting a new development to the city's water system, or connection to the city's wastewater system. 
Wastewater capital improvements plan means the adopted plan, as may be amended from time to time, which identifies the wastewater facilities or wastewater expansions and their associated costs which are necessitated by and which are attributable to new development, for a period not to exceed ten (10) years, and which are to be financed in whole or in part through the imposition of wastewater facilities fees pursuant to this chapter. 
Wastewater facility means a wastewater interceptor or main, lift station or other facility included within and comprising an integral component of the city's collection system for wastewater. "Wastewater facility" includes land, easements or structures associated with such facilities. "Wastewater facility" excludes a site-related facility. 
Wastewater facility expansion means the expansion of the capacity of any existing wastewater improvement for the purpose of serving new development, but does not include the repair, maintenance, modernization, or expansion of an existing sewer facility to serve existing development. 
Water facility means a water interceptor or main, pump station, storage tank or other facility included within and comprising an integral component of the city's water storage or distribution system. "Water facility" includes land, easements or structures associated with such facilities. "Water facility" excludes site-related facilities. 
Water facility expansion means the expansion of the capacity of any existing water facility for the purpose of serving new development, but does not include the repair, maintenance, modernization, or expansion of an existing water improvement to serve existing development. 
Water improvements plan means the adopted plan, as may be amended from time to time, which identifies the water facilities or water expansions and their associated costs which are necessitated by and which are attributable to new development, for a period not to exceed ten (10) years, and which are to be financed in whole or in part through the imposition of water facilities impact fees pursuant to this chapter. 
Water meter means a device for measuring the flow of water to a development, whether for domestic or for irrigation purposes. 
(Ord. No. 740, § 1, 5-3-94; Ord. No. 830, § 2, 7-16-97; Ord. No. 1087, § 4, 1-15-02)  
Sec. 8.5-130. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this chapter apply to all new development within the corporate boundaries of the city. The provisions of this chapter apply uniformly within each service area. 
(Ord. No. 740, § 1, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 8.5-140. - Impact fee as condition of development approval. 
No final plat for new development shall be approved within the service area without assessment of an impact fee pursuant to these impact fee regulations. No final plat for single-family residential development shall be approved, nor shall a building permit be issued or utility connection be made for other types of new development, until the property owner has paid the impact fee imposed by and calculated herein, unless a different time and/or method of payment has been authorized by contract between the city and the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 740, § 1, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 8.5-150. - Impact fees per service unit. 
(a)  The maximum impact fee per service unit for each service area shall be computed by dividing the total costs of capital improvements in the service area identified in the impact fee capital improvements plan for that category of capital improvements by the total number of service units anticipated within the service area, based upon the land use assumptions for that service area. Maximum impact fees per service unit for each service area shall be established by category of capital improvements and shall be as set forth in schedule 1, which is on file in the office of the city secretary and made a part of these regulations by reference. 
(b)  The impact fee per service unit which is to be paid by each new development within a service area shall be that established by the city council, as may be amended from time to time, and shall be an amount less than or equal to the maximum impact fee per service unit established in subsection (a). Impact fees which are to be paid shall be as set forth in schedule 2, which is on file in the office of the city secretary and made a part of these regulations by reference. 
(c)  Impact fee schedules 1 and 2 may be amended from time to time utilizing the amendment procedure set forth in section 8.5-250. 
(Ord. No. 740, § 1, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 8.5-160. - Service unit determination. 
(a)  The number of service units for roadways impact fees for a new development shall be determined by using the land use equivalency table, attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference as Exhibit A. 
(b)  In determining the number of service units for water and wastewater, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Each new freestanding building requires a new water meter, except as provided in subsection (2). 
(2)  Where a site is redeveloped (clearance and reconstruction), no new service units will be attributed to such redevelopment, provided that the water meter is of the same size as the development previously occupying the site. If meter size is increased, the number of service units will be based upon the increase in capacity of the meter. 
(3)  Existing buildings or land uses may be expanded using existing meter service. No service units will be attributed to such development if the water meter size remains the same. If the meter size is increased, the number of service units will be based upon the increase in capacity of the meter. 
(4)  In determining the number of service units for wastewater impact fees, no service units will be attributed to irrigation meters. 
(5)  Service units attributed to irrigation meters within the medians and parkways of thoroughfares as shown on the city's thoroughfare plan shall be paid in accordance with the development agreement between the city and the developer. 
(6)  Service units attributed to water or wastewater meters for city initiated capital improvement projects shall be paid from the capital projects funds. 
(7)  A one time credit for a five-eighths-inch ( 5/8 ?) irrigation meter shall be attributed for the landscaping of a residential subdivision's entryways. Additional charges for larger meter(s) shall be paid by the developer/owner. 
(8)  If an existing structure or use does not require a water meter for water or wastewater service, or does not generate the need for water or wastewater service, no service units will be attributable to such use or structure. 
(9)  Impact fees collected for the City of Fort Worth pursuant to an interlocal agreement between the City of Keller and the City of Fort Worth for the purchase of water shall be paid by all persons and entities developing land in the City of Keller. 
(Ord. No. 740, § 1, 5-3-94; Ord. No. 1087, § 5, 1-15-02)  
Sec. 8.5-170. - Assessment of impact fees. 
(a)  Assessment of the impact fee for any new development shall be made as follows: 
(1)  For land which is unplatted at the time of application for a building permit or utility connection, or for a new development which has received final plat approval prior to June 20, 1987, and for which no replatting is necessary pursuant to the city's subdivision regulations prior to development, assessment shall occur at the time application is made for the building permit or utility connection, whichever occurs first, and shall be the amount of the maximum impact fee per service unit then in effect, as set forth in schedule 1. 
(2)  For a new development which is submitted for approval pursuant to the city's subdivision regulations after June 20, 1987, or for which replatting results in an increase in the number of service units after such date, assessment shall be at the time of final plat approval, and shall be the amount of the maximum impact fee per service unit then in effect, as set forth in schedule 1. 
(b)  Following initial assessment of the impact fee for a new development pursuant to subsection (a), the amount of the maximum impact fee per service unit for that development cannot be increased, unless the owner proposes to change the approved development by the submission of a new development application, in which case the impact fee will be reassessed at the schedule 1 rate then in effect for such additional service units. 
(c)  Following the lapse or expiration of approval of a new development, a new assessment shall be performed at the time a new application for such development is filed. 
(Ord. No. 740, § 1, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 8.5-180. - Computation and collection of impact fees. 
(a)  The impact fees due for roadway facilities shall be collected at the time of issuance of a building permit for any work on the subject property, unless a development agreement between the developer and the city has been executed providing for a different time or method of payment, whichever comes first. 
(b)  For areas of the city where water and wastewater capacity is available: 
(1)  The city shall collect all impact fees due at the time the city issues a building permit. 
(2)  For land platted outside the corporate boundaries of the city, the city shall collect the fees for water or wastewater facilities at the time an application for an individual meter connection to the city's water or wastewater system is filed. 
(c)  If the building permit for which an impact fee has been paid has expired, and a new application is thereafter filed, the impact fees due shall be computed using schedule 2 then in effect, and previous payments of impact fees shall be credited against the new fees due. 
(d)  The city shall compute the impact fees due for the new development in the following manner: 
(1)  The amount of each impact fee due shall be determined by multiplying the number of service units generated by the new development by the impact fee due per service unit for the service area using schedule 2. The number of service units shall be determined according to section 8.5-150. 
(2)  The amount of each impact fee due shall be reduced by any allowable credits for that category of capital improvements, in the manner provided in section 8.5-190. 
(e)  The amount of each impact fee due for a new development shall not exceed an amount computed by multiplying the maximum impact fee per service unit under schedule 1 by the number of service units generated by the development. 
(f)  Whenever the property owner proposes to increase the number of service units for a development, the additional impact fees collected for such new service units shall be determined by using Schedule 2 then in effect and such additional fee shall be collected either prior to or at the time of issuance of a new building permit, or prior to or at the time of enlargement of the connection to the city's water or wastewater system. 
(Ord. No. 740, § 1, 5-3-94; Ord. No. 1087, § 6, 1-15-02)  
Sec. 8.5-190. - Credits against impact fees. 
(a)  Any construction of, contributions to, or dedications of off-site roadway facilities agreed to or required by the city as a condition of development approval shall be credited against roadway facilities impact fees otherwise due from the development. 
(b)  All offsets and credits against impact fees shall be based upon standards promulgated by the city, which may be adopted as administrative guidelines. 
(1)  No credit shall be given for the dedication or construction of site-related facilities. 
(2)  No credit shall exceed an amount equal to the eligible costs of the offset multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the impact fee per service unit due for the new development as computed using schedule 2 and the denominator of which is the maximum impact fee per service unit for the new development as computed using schedule 1. 
(3)  The unit costs used to calculate credits shall not exceed those assumed for the capital improvements included in the impact fees capital improvements plan for the category of facility for which the impact fee is imposed. 
(4)  In no event will the city reimburse the property owner or developer for a credit when no impact fees for the new development can be collected pursuant to these impact fee regulations or for any amount exceeding the total impact fees due for the development for that category of capital improvements, unless otherwise agreed to by the city. 
(5)  A credit created pursuant to prior impact fee ordinances in conjunction with a new development shall expire ten (10) years after the effective date of this amendatory ordinance. Credits created pursuant to this ordinance shall expire within ten (10) years from the date the credit was created. 
(c)  An applicant for new development shall apply for a credit against impact fees due for the development at the time of approval of a development agreement, unless the city agrees to a different time. The development agreement shall reflect the maximum amount of impact fee credits as agreed upon by the city and the developer. 
(d)  After the effective date of this amendatory ordinance, credits for construction of capital improvements to be applied against impact fees due shall be determined in accordance with a development agreement. The development agreement required may provide for participation by the city in the costs of the capital improvement to be constructed by the property owner, as provided in the city's subdivision regulations. The amount of any credit shall be reduced by the amount of the city's participation. 
(e)  For all developments, the credit shall be applied to reduce an impact fee at the time of application for the first building permit or at the time of application for the first utility connection for the property and, thereafter, to all subsequently issued building permits or utility connections, until the credit or offset is exhausted. Provided, however, that the city may enter into a development agreement to provide for the apportionment of credits. 
(Ord. No. 740, § 1, 5-3-94; Ord. No. 830, § 3, 7-16-97; Ord. No. 1087, § 7, 1-15-02)  
Sec. 8.5-200. - Establishment of accounts. 
(a)  The city shall establish an account to which interest is allocated for each service area for each type of capital facility for which an impact fee is imposed pursuant to this chapter. Each impact fee collected within the service area shall be deposited in such account. 
(b)  Interest earned on the account into which the impact fees are deposited shall be considered funds of the account and shall be used solely for the purposes authorized in section 8.5-210. 
(c)  The city shall establish adequate financial and accounting controls to ensure that impact fees disbursed from the account are utilized solely for the purposes authorized in section 8.5-200. Disbursement of funds shall be authorized by the city at such times as are reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes and intent of these regulations; provided, however, that funds shall be expended within a reasonable period of time, but not to exceed ten (10) years from the date impact fees are deposited into the account. 
(d)  The city shall maintain and keep financial records for impact fees, which shall show the source and disbursement of all fees collected in or expended within each service area. The records of the account into which impact fees are deposited shall be open for public inspection and copying during ordinary business hours. The city may establish a fee for copying services. 
(Ord. No. 740, § 1, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 8.5-210. - Use of proceeds of impact fee accounts. 
(a)  The impact fees collected for each service area pursuant to these regulations may be used to finance or to recoup the costs of any capital improvements or facility expansion identified in the applicable capital improvements plan for the service area, including but not limited to the construction contract price, surveying and engineering fees, land acquisition costs (including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorney's fees, and expert witness fees). Impact fees may also be used to pay the principal sum and interest and other finance costs on bonds, notes or other obligations issued by or on behalf of the city to finance such capital improvements or facility expansion. Impact fees also may be used to pay fees actually contracted to be paid to an independent qualified engineer or financial consultant for preparation of or updating the impact fee capital improvements plan. 
(b)  Impact fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall not be used to pay for any of the following expenses: 
(1)  Construction, acquisition or expansion of capital improvements or assets other than those identified in the applicable capital improvements plan; 
(2)  Repair, operation, or maintenance of existing or new capital improvements or facility expansion; 
(3)  Upgrade, expansion or replacement of existing capital improvements to serve existing development in order to meet stricter safety, efficiency, environmental or regulatory standards; 
(4)  Upgrade, expansion, or replacement of existing capital improvements to provide better service to existing development; provided, however, that impact fees may be used to pay the costs of upgrading, expanding or replacing existing capital improvements in order to meet the need for new capital improvements generated by new development; or 
(5)  Administrative and operating costs of the city. 
(Ord. No. 740, § 1, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 8.5-220. - Appeals. 
(a)  The property owner or applicant for new development may appeal the following administrative decisions to the city council: (1) The applicability of an impact fee to the development; (2) The amount of the impact fee due; (3) The availability of, the amount of, or the expiration of a credit; (4) The application of a credit against an impact fee due; (5) The amount of the impact fee in proportion to the benefit received by the new development; or (6) The amount of a refund due, if any. 
(b)  The burden of proof shall be on the appellant to demonstrate that the amount of the fee or the amount of the credit was not calculated according to the applicable schedule of impact fees or the guidelines established for determining credits. 
(c)  The appellant must file a written notice of appeal with the city within thirty (30) days following the decision. If the notice of appeal is accompanied by a payment or other security satisfactory to the city attorney in an amount equal to the original determination of the impact fee due, the development application may be processed while the appeal is pending. 
(Ord. No. 740, § 1, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 8.5-230. - Refunds. 
(a)  Upon application, any impact fee or portion thereof collected pursuant to these regulations, which has not been expended within the service area within ten (10) years from the date of payment, shall be refunded to the record owner of the property for which the impact fee was paid or, if the impact fee was paid by another governmental entity, to such governmental entity, together with interest calculated from the date of collection to the date of refund at the statutory rate as set forth in Article 1.03, Title 79, Revised Statutes (Article 5069-1.03, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes), or its successor statute. The application for refund pursuant to this section shall be submitted within sixty (60) days after the expiration of the ten-year period for expenditure of the fee. An impact fee shall be considered expended on a first-in, first-out basis. 
(b)  An impact fee collected pursuant to these regulations shall also be considered expended if the total expenditures for capital improvements or facility expansion authorized in section 8.5-210 within the service area within ten (10) years following the date of payment exceeds the total fees collected within the service area for such improvements or expansions during such period. 
(c)  If a refund is due pursuant to subsections (a) or (b), the city shall divide the difference between the amount of expenditures and the amount of the fees collected by the total number of service units assumed within the service area for the period to determine the refund due per service unit. The refund to the record owner shall be calculated by multiplying the refund due per service unit by the number of service units for the development for which the fee was paid, and interest due shall be calculated upon that amount. 
(d)  Upon completion of all the capital improvements or facility expansion identified in the capital improvements plan for the service area, the city shall recalculate the maximum impact fee per service unit using the actual costs for the improvements or expansions. If the maximum impact fee per service unit based on actual cost is less than the impact fee per service unit paid, the city shall refund the difference, if such difference exceeds the impact fee paid by more than ten (10) percent. If the difference is less than ten (10) percent, no refund shall be due. The refund to the record owner shall be calculated by multiplying such difference by the number of service units for the development for which the fee was paid, and interest due shall be calculated upon that amount. 
(e)  If a tract of land for which an impact fee has been paid is replatted, resulting in a reduction in the number of service units, and the new impact fee to be collected is less than that paid, the city shall refund the difference, provided that water meters to serve the development have not been installed. 
(f)  No refunds or credits against impact fees due shall be given for decreasing the number or size of water meters serving a development, except as provided in subsection (e). 
(Ord. No. 740, § 1, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 8.5-240. - Rebate. 
If the building permit for a new development for which an impact fee has been paid has expired, no utility connections for that category of capital improvements have been made to the development, and a modified or new application has not been filed within six (6) months of such expiration, the city shall, upon written application, rebate the amount of the impact fee to the record owner of the property for which the impact fee was paid. If no application for rebate pursuant to this subsection has been filed within this period, no rebate shall become due. 
(Ord. No. 740, § 1, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 8.5-250. - Updates to plan and revision of fees. 
(a)  The city shall update its land use assumptions and capital improvements plans at least every three (3) years, commencing from the date of adoption of such plans, and shall recalculate the impact fees based thereon in accordance with the procedures set forth in Texas Local Gov't. Code, Ch. 395, or in any successor statute. 
(b)  The city may review its land use assumptions, impact fees, capital improvements plans and other factors such as market conditions more frequently than provided in subsection (a) to determine whether the land use assumptions and capital improvements plans should be updated and the impact fee recalculated accordingly, or whether schedules 1 or 2 should be changed. Schedule 2 may be amended without revising land use assumptions and capital improvements plans at any time prior to the update provided for in subsection (a), provided that the impact fees to be collected under schedule 2 do not exceed the impact fees assessed under schedule 1. 
(c)  If, at the time an update is required pursuant to subsection (a), the city council determines that no change to the land use assumptions, capital improvements plan or impact fee is needed, it may dispense with such update by following the procedures in Texas Local Gov't. Code, section 395.0575. 
(d)  The city may amend by resolution the land use equivalency table (Exhibit A) at any time prior to the update provided for in subsection (a); provided that the number of service units associated with a particular land use shall not be increased. 
(Ord. No. 740, § 1, 5-3-94) 
Editor's note— Pursuant to the provisions of this chapter the city has updated land use assumptions, the roadway capital improvements plan; impact fee analysis, and schedules 1 and 2. Section 2 of Ord. No. 1241, adopted Jan. 18, 2005 provides as follows: 
"THAT, the revised Land Use Assumptions; Roadway Capital Improvements Plan; and Impact Fee Analysis; Schedule 1 Assessment Rates and Schedule 2 Collection Rates for Roadway Impact Fees, which are attached hereto as Exhibits "A", "B", and "C", incorporated herein by reference, are hereby adopted, replacing and superseding any other Land Use Assumptions; Capital Improvements Plan; or Roadway Impact Fees, previously approved and adopted by the City Council of the City of Keller, Texas."  
Sec. 8.5-260. - Functions of advisory committee. 
(a)  The advisory committee shall perform the following functions: 
(1)  Advise and assist the city in adopting land use assumptions; 
(2)  Review the capital improvements plans and file written comments thereon. 
(3)  Monitor and evaluate implementation of the capital improvements plans; 
(4)  Advise the city of the need to update or revise the land use assumptions, capital improvements plans and impact fees; and 
(5)  File a semiannual report evaluating the progress of the capital improvements plans and identifying perceived inequities in implementing the plans or administering the impact fees. 
(b)  The city shall make available to the advisory committee any professional reports prepared in the development or implementation of the capital improvements plans. 
(Ord. No. 740, § 1, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 8.5-270. - Contract for capital improvements. 
(a)  An owner of a new development may construct or finance a capital improvement or facility expansion designated in the capital improvements plan, if required or authorized by the city, by entering into an agreement with the city prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. The agreement shall be on a form approved by the city, and shall identify the estimated cost of the improvement or expansion, the schedule for initiation and completion of the improvement or expansion, a requirement that the improvement be designed and completed to city standards and such other terms and conditions as deemed necessary by the city. The agreement shall provide for the method to be used to determine the amount of the offset to be given against impact fees due for the development. 
(b)  In the event that the city elects to reimburse an owner for the dedication, construction or financing of a capital improvement or facility expansion designated in the capital improvements plan, the terms of reimbursement shall be incorporated in the agreement required by subsection (a). 
(Ord. No. 740, § 1, 5-3-94; Ord. No. 830, § 4, 7-16-97)  
Sec. 8.5-280. - Use of other financing mechanisms. 
(a)  The city may finance capital improvements or facility expansion designated in the capital improvements plan through the issuance of bonds, through the formation of public utility districts or other assessment districts, or through any other authorized mechanism, in such manner and subject to such limitations as may be provided by law, in addition to the use of impact fees. 
(b)  Except as herein otherwise provided, the assessment and collection of an impact fee shall be additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other tax, fee, charge or assessment which is lawfully imposed on and due against the property. 
(c)  The city may pay all or a part of impact fees due for a new development pursuant to duly adopted criteria. 
(Ord. No. 740, § 1, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 8.5-290. - Impact fee as additional and supplemental regulation. 
Impact fees established by these regulations are additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other requirements imposed by the city on the development of land or the issuance of building permits or certificates of occupancy. Such fee is intended to be consistent with and to further the policies of city's comprehensive land use plan, the capital improvements plan, the zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations and other city policies, ordinances and resolutions by which the city seeks to ensure the provision of adequate public facilities in conjunction with the development of land. 
(Ord. No. 740, § 1, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 8.5-300. - Relief procedures. 
(a)  Any person who has paid an impact fee or an owner of land upon which an impact fee has been paid may petition the city council to determine whether any duty required by this chapter has not been performed within the time so prescribed. The petition shall be in writing and shall state the nature of the unperformed duty and request that the duty be performed within sixty (60) days of the request. If the city council determines that the duty is required pursuant to this chapter and is late in being performed, it shall cause the duty to commence within sixty (60) days of the date of the request and to continue until completion. This subsection is not applicable to matters which may be appealed pursuant to section 8.5-220. 
(b)  The city council may grant a variance from any requirement of this chapter, upon written request by a developer or owner of property subject to this chapter, following a public hearing, and only upon finding that a strict application of such requirement would, when regarded as a whole, result in confiscation of the property. 
(c)  If the city council grants a variance to the amount of the impact fee due for a new development under this section, it shall cause to be appropriated from other city funds the amount of the reduction in the impact fee to the account for the service area in which the property is located. 
(Ord. No. 740, § 1, 5-3-94)  
ARTICLE II. - LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS 
 
Sec. 8.5-320. - Land use assumptions. 
(a)  The revised land use assumptions for the city hereby are adopted as Exhibit B, which is on file in the office of the city secretary and incorporated by reference herein. 
(b)  The land use assumptions may be amended from time to time, or new land use assumptions may be adopted, pursuant to the procedures in section 8.5-250. 
(Ord. No. 740, § 1, 5-3-94)  
ARTICLE III. - WATER FACILITIES IMPACT FEES 
 
Sec. 8.5-350. - Water service area. 
(a)  There is hereby established a water service area, constituting all of land within city boundaries, as depicted on Exhibit C, which is on file in the office of the city secretary and incorporated herein by reference. 
(b)  The boundaries of the water service area may be amended from time to time, or new water benefit areas may be delineated, pursuant to the procedures in section 8.5-250. 
(Ord. No. 740, § 1, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 8.5-360. - Water capital improvements plan. 
(a)  The water capital improvements plan for the city is hereby adopted as Exhibit D, which is on file in the office of the city secretary and incorporated by reference herein. 
(b)  The water capital improvements plan may be amended from time to time, pursuant to the procedures in section 8.5-250. 
(Ord. No. 740, § 1, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 8.5-370. - Water facilities impact fees. 
(a)  The maximum impact fees per service unit for water facilities are hereby adopted and incorporated in schedule 1, which is on file in the office of the city secretary and made a part hereof by reference. 
(b)  The impact fees per service unit for water facilities, which are to be paid by each new development, are hereby adopted and incorporated in schedule 2, which is on file in the office of the city secretary and made a part hereof by reference. 
(c)  The impact fees per service unit for water facilities may be amended from time to time, pursuant to the procedures in section 8.5-250. 
(Ord. No. 740, § 1, 5-3-94)  
ARTICLE IV. - WASTEWATER FACILITIES IMPACT FEES 
 
Sec. 8.5-400. - Wastewater service area. 
(a)  There is hereby established a wastewater service area, constituting all of the land within city boundaries, as depicted on Exhibit C above referenced. 
(b)  The boundaries of the wastewater service area may be amended from time to time or new wastewater service areas may be delineated, pursuant to the procedures in section 8.5-250. 
(Ord. No. 740, § 1, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 8.5-410. - Wastewater capital improvements plan. 
(a)  The wastewater capital improvements plan for the city is hereby adopted as Exhibit E, which is on file in the office of the city secretary and incorporated by reference herein. 
(b)  The wastewater capital improvements plan may be amended from time to time, pursuant to the procedures in section 8.5-250. 
(Ord. No. 740, § 1, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 8.5-420. - Wastewater facilities impact fees. 
(a)  The maximum impact fees per service unit for wastewater facilities are hereby adopted and incorporated in schedule 1, which is on file in the office of the city secretary and made a part hereof by reference. 
(b)  The impact fees per service unit for wastewater facilities, which are to be paid by each new development, are hereby adopted and incorporated in schedule 2, which is on file in the office of the city secretary and made a part hereof by reference. 
(c)  The impact fees per service unit for wastewater facilities may be amended from time to time, pursuant to the procedures in section 8.5-250. 
(Ord. No. 740, § 1, 5-3-94)  
ARTICLE V. - ROADWAY FACILITIES IMPACT FEES 
 
Sec. 8.5-500. - Roadway service area. 
(a)  There is hereby established five (5) roadway service areas, constituting all of the land within city boundaries, as depicted on Exhibit F, which is on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(b)  The boundaries of the roadway service areas may be amended from time to time, or new roadway service areas may be delineated, pursuant to the procedures in section 8.5-250. 
(Ord. No. 740, § 1, 5-3-94)  
Sec. 8.5-510. - Roadway capital improvements plan. 
(a)  The roadway capital improvements plan for the city is hereby adopted as Exhibit G, which is on file in the office of the city secretary and incorporated by reference herein. 
(b)  The roadway capital improvements plan may be amended from time to time, pursuant to the procedures in section 8.5-250. 
(Ord. No. 740, § 1, 5-3-94; Ord. No. 830, § 5, 7-16-97)  
Sec. 8.5-520. - Roadway facilities impact fees. 
(a)  The maximum impact fees per service unit for roadway facilities are hereby adopted and incorporated in schedule 1, which is on file in the office of the city secretary and made a part hereof by reference. 
(b)  The impact fees per service unit for roadway facilities, which are to be paid by each new development, are hereby adopted and incorporated in schedule 2, which is on file in the office of the city secretary and made a part hereof by reference. 
(c)  The impact fees per service unit for roadway facilities may be amended from time to time, pursuant to the procedures in section 8.5-250. 
(Ord. No. 740, § 1, 5-3-94)  
Chapter 9 - JUNKYARDS 
 
Sec. 9-100. - Definition. 
A "motor vehicle junkyard or business" is hereby defined as any business and any place of storage or deposit which displays, or in or upon which there are displayed, to view from a public highway, two (2) or more unregistered motor vehicles which are unfit for reconditioning for use on the public highways, or used parts of motor vehicles, or old iron, metal, glass, paper, cordage or other waste, discarded or secondhand material which has been a part or intended to be a part of any motor vehicle, the sum of which parts or material shall be equal in bulk to two (2) or more motor vehicles.  
Sec. 9-110. - Certificate of approval and license required. 
No motor vehicle junkyard or business shall be established or maintained in the city unless a certificate of approval has been procured from the city council and a license obtained from the assessor and collector of taxes.  
Sec. 9-120. - Application for certificate of approval; information to be shown. 
Application for a certificate of approval required by the preceding section shall be made to the city council and shall set forth the name and address of the applicant; the trade name under which the applicant does or proposes to do business; the location where such business is to be conducted; if the applicant is a firm or corporation, its organization and personnel; the size of the territory the applicant proposes to allot to such business; that the interests of the municipality require the establishing, operating or maintaining of such yard or business at the location designated; and any other information as may be required by the city council, upon printed forms to be prepared under its direction and available at the office of the city secretary.  
Sec. 9-130. - Investigation and consideration of application for certificate. 
The city council shall make or cause to be made such investigations as it may consider necessary, including any hearings that it may deem desirable, as to any application for a certificate of approval under this chapter, and shall determine whether or not, in the interest of the safety, health, decency, comfort, convenience, necessity and welfare of the inhabitants of the city, a requirement for the operation of such a business exists; whether or not the applicant is fit and proper to conduct such business; and may investigate the fitness of the stockholders and officers of any corporation making such application in determining whether or not a certificate should be issued. The city council, in considering such application, shall take into account the nature and development of surrounding property; the proximity of churches, schools, hospitals, public buildings and other places of public gathering; the sufficiency in number of such other yards or business in the vicinity; the health, safety and general welfare of the public; and the suitability of the applicant to establish, maintain or operate such yards or business and receive a license therefor.  
Sec. 9-140. - Granting or refusal of certificate. 
If the city council finds that the convenience, necessity, welfare and comfort of the public require the operation of a motor vehicle junkyard and that the applicant is fit to conduct the business and that the other requirements herein have been complied with, it shall notify the applicant of its findings. If it finds that the public convenience, necessity, welfare and comfort do not require the operation of such business in the location applied for or that the applicant is not fit to conduct such business, it shall forthwith refuse such application, and no certificate of approval or license shall issue to such applicant.  
Sec. 9-150. - Presentation of certificate to assessor and collector of taxes; issuance of license. 
Upon presentation of the certificate of approval required under this article within thirty (30) days of its date and satisfactory evidence that all license fees have been paid the city and that such other fees and taxes, including ad valorem taxes, as may be required by law, have been fully paid, the assessor and collector of taxes shall issue to such applicant a license to operate a motor vehicle junkyard; provided, however, that any certificate issued hereunder shall be effective until cancelled and no additional certificate shall be required for the purpose of obtaining a license so long as the original certificate remains in effect and the applicant strictly complies with all the requirements and provisions of this chapter. 
No license for the operation of a motor vehicle junkyard shall be issued unless and until the city council has issued the certificate of approval under the terms and provisions of this chapter.  
Sec. 9-160. - Certificate of approval and license not transferable without consent of council. 
The certificate of approval and license, when issued to an applicant, shall not be transferable without the consent and approval of the city council and after application and hearing as provided upon original application by the person to whom the certificate is issued.  
Sec. 9-170. - License fee or police tax; renewal of license. 
In order to defray a part of the expense necessary to provide for the surveillance, supervision and inspection of motor vehicle junkyards required under the terms and provisions of this chapter, there is hereby fixed a license fee or police tax, which shall be collected from any person operating a motor vehicle junkyard in the city. Fee amounts shall be set by the city's fee ordinances. 
The license required by this chapter may be renewed from year to year upon payment of the same fee as required for the original license.  
Sec. 9-180. - Operation of yards without certificate or license. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate or maintain a motor vehicle junkyard or business without procuring a certificate of approval and holding a license therefor, and each day of such operation without such certificate or license shall constitute a separate offense.  
Sec. 9-190. - Yards to be fenced so as to obscure view. 
Each motor vehicle junkyard in the city shall be completely surrounded by a fence or structure at least six (6) feet in height and of material which obscures the outside view. 
Cross reference— Fence regulations, § 10-200 et seq.  
Chapter 10 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10-100. - Unlawful to discharge firearm or gun within city—Generally. 
It shall hereinafter be unlawful for any person to fire off or discharge any gun, pistol, rifle or other firearm of any description within the corporation limits of the city. It shall likewise hereinafter be unlawful for any person to discharge any air gun or air rifle of any description within the corporate limits of the City of Keller, Texas.  
Sec. 10-110. - Same—Protection of person, premises or property; except. 
The preceding section shall not apply when such firing is done in the necessary and lawful protection of one's person, premises or property, unless such firing be recklessly or negligently done.  
Sec. 10-120. - Police officer and reserve officers exempted. 
Section 10-100 shall not apply to any official police officer of the City of Keller or reserve officer of the city practicing in a designated shooting range within the city limits.  
Sec. 10-130. - Library materials. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation, who willfully retains any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, manuscript, audiovisual material, video-recording, microcomputer software or any other property belonging to the Keller Public Library for a period of thirty (30) days following written notice being sent to the borrower at the address on file in the public library to return the same, such notice being sent after the expiration of the time by which the rules of the public library allow such property to be retained, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed that listed in section 1-500. 
(b)  Any person, firm or corporation who willfully injures or defaces any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, manuscript, audiovisual material, video recording, microcomputer software or any other property belonging to the Keller Public Library by writing, marking, tearing, breaking or otherwise mutilating such property loaned by the public library shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the fine set out in section 1-500 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 445, §§ 1, 2, 1-7-86)  
Sec. 10-140. - Trespass. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain on or in private or public property within the city limits where one's presence is unauthorized. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain on or in any private or public property located within the city limits and fail to immediately leave such property after having been notified by the owner, person in control, agent or Texas peace officer to leave the property. 
(Ord. No. 1448, § 1, 4-7-09)  
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1111, § 2, adopted Aug. 6, 2002, repealed former Art. II, §§ 10-200, 10-210 in its entirety by relocating the provisions of this former article to the city's unified land development code. Former Art. II pertained to fences and derived from this codification and Ord. No. 486, §§ 1, 2, 12-2-86. 
 
Secs. 10-200—10-210. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - REGISTRATION AND REGULATION OF RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL ALARM SYSTEMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1599, § 2, adopted May 1, 2012, repealed former Art. III, §§ 10-300—10-410, 10-430, in its entirety which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 498, § 1, 3-8-87; Ord. No. 552, §§ 1—4, 9-20-88; Ord. No. 1001, § 2, 2-1-00; Ord. No. 1042, § 2, 3-6-01. 
 
Sec. 10-300. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this section the following terms have the definitions herein ascribed to them: 
(a)  Alarm administrator means the chief of police or his designated representative who shall administer, control and review false alarm reduction efforts and administers the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Alarm site means a residential or commercial premises or location served by a general alarm system, local alarm system, or a community antenna (CATV) alarm system. 
(c)  Burglar alarm system means a device or system that transmits a signal intended to summon the Keller Police Department in response to a burglary. The term includes an alarm that emits an audible signal on the exterior of a structure. The term does not include an alarm installed on a vehicle unless the vehicle is used for a habitation at a permanent site or an alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants within the premises. 
(d)  Burglar/intrusion alarm notification is a notification intended to summon the police, which is initiated or triggered manually or by a stimulus characteristic of unauthorized intrusion. 
(e)  Chief means the Chief of Police of the City of Keller, Texas. 
(f)  City means the City of Keller, Texas. 
(g)  City alarm system means a device or system that transmits or relays a signal by community antenna television cable, directly or indirectly, intended to summon emergency police services of the city. General alarm system and CATV alarm system do not include: 
(1)  An alarm installed on a vehicle unless such vehicle is permanently installed at a permanent site; 
(2)  An alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants of a premises; or 
(3)  A general alarm system or CATV alarm system owned by the city. 
(h)  False burglar alarm means an alarm notification to the Keller Police Department when the police respond within thirty (30) minutes of the alarm notification and the responding police officer finds from an inspection of the interior or exterior of the premises that the alarm was false. 
(i)  False burglar/intrusion alarm notification means an alarm notification to the police when the responding police officer finds no evidence of unauthorized intrusion or attempted unauthorized intrusion. 
(j)  False robbery alarm notification means a robbery alarm notification to the police when the responding police officer finds no evidence of a robbery or attempted robbery. 
(k)  General alarm system means a device or system that transmits or relays a signal, directly or indirectly, other than by community antenna television cable, intended to summon emergency police services of the city. 
(l)  Local alarm means a general alarm system or CATV alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible or visible from the exterior of a premise. 
(m)  Police "alert" alarm notification means an alarm notification which does not differentiate between burglar/intrusion and robbery but is intended to summon the police whenever a real and immediate threat to life exists. 
(Ord. No. 1599, § 2, 5-1-12)  
Sec. 10-310. - Permit required, application, transferability, false statements. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if they operate or cause to be operated a general alarm system, local alarm, or CATV alarm system without first obtaining an alarm permit from the alarm administrator. An alarm permit may be obtained for the use of a general alarm system, local alarm system or CATV alarm system by the user or owner of either such alarm system equipment. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the completed permit application form and the alarm permit fee, the alarm administrator shall issue a permit, unless there is cause to believe the equipment responsible for initiating an alarm will not be maintained and operated in accordance with this article or the applicant will not comply with each provision of this article. 
(c)  Each permit application must contain the name, address and telephone number of the individual or alarm user representative who will be the permit holder and be responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the general alarm system, local alarm system, or CATV alarm system. The alarm registration shall contain the names and phone numbers of two (2) people that when notified by the police department will come to the alarm site within forty-five (45) minutes, if requested, to terminate the alarm signal and secure the property. An alarm permit cannot be transferred. However, the individual designated to respond to an alarm or relay an alarm may be changed. A permit holder shall inform the alarm administrator of any change that alters information listed on the original permit application. 
(d)  Any false statement or misrepresentation of a material fact made by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining an alarm permit or renewal or while making a change thereto, shall be sufficient cause for refusal to grant, or suspension of a permit. 
(e)  The alarm permit fee shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. No. 1599, § 2, 5-1-12)  
Sec. 10-320. - False burglar alarm fees. 
(a)  An alarm user shall be subject to fines, depending on the number of false alarms within a calendar year, with such fines being defined within the fee schedule as adopted by the city. 
(b)  If cancellation occurs prior to a police officer arriving at the scene, this is not a false alarm for the purposes of fines and no fines will be assessed. 
(c)  If it takes longer than thirty (30) minutes for a police officer to respond to the alarm notification, this is not a false alarm for the purposes of fines and no fines will be assessed. 
(d)  Notice of the right of appeal under this article will be included with any fines. 
(e)  A permit holder shall pay a fee assessed under this section within thirty (30) days after mailing of notice that fee has been assessed. The alarm administrator may suspend or refuse to renew a permit for failure to pay the fee assessed. 
(f)  The permit holder will be exempt from any fee charged for a false alarm notification which is later shown to have been justified or which was due to a natural or manmade catastrophe or other situation specifically exempted by the alarm administrator. 
(Ord. No. 1599, § 2, 5-1-12)  
Sec. 10-330. - Other types of alarms. 
(a)  A person shall not install or maintain a general alarm system or CATV alarm system except for the purpose of eliciting responses to burglaries, intrusions, robberies, real and immediate threat to life, fires, water flow or requests for emergency medical assistance, unless specifically authorized by the city. 
(b)  From the effective date of this article, no permit for a local alarm system shall be issued except for a local alarm system that either emits a flashing white light, said white light not to exceed or violate the standards contained in the zoning ordinance, that is tied directly into a light at the front of the house or omits an audible signal that can be heard within a radius of two hundred (200) feet from the exterior of the house and cannot be heard outside of said two hundred-foot radius. The outside exterior's audible signal shall cease after ten (10) consecutive minutes and be automatically reset after said ten (10) minutes. 
(c)  If innovations in alarm systems or other types of alarm devices adversely affect emergency police services of the city, the city may promulgate rules and regulations in order to protect the city's emergency police services. 
(Ord. No. 1599, § 2, 5-1-12)  
Sec. 10-340. - Permit duration, renewal. 
(a)  A permit is issued for twelve (12) months and is automatically renewed each year upon the payment of the alarm permit fee and verification of information on file, provided no violation of this article warrant suspension or non-renewal of the permit. If the permit is not renewed and the alarm is still active, a late fee of ten dollars ($10.00) will be assessed. 
(Ord. No. 1599, § 2, 5-1-12)  
Sec. 10-350. - Reporting of alarm signals. 
A permit holder shall not report their alarm signal through a relaying intermediary that does not meet the requirements of this chapter, and any rules and regulations promulgated by the city, or is not licensed by the State of Texas or the appropriate agency, board or department thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1599, § 2, 5-1-12)  
Sec. 10-360. - Proper alarm system operation and maintenance. 
(a)  A permit holder shall: 
(1)  Cause an adjustment to be made to the sensory mechanism of their general alarm system, local alarm system, or CATV alarm system in order to suppress false indications; and 
(2)  Maintain premises containing a general alarm system, local alarm system or CATV alarm system in a manner that does not inhibit proper operation of the alarm system. 
(b)  No alarm permit holder shall activate the general alarm system or CATV alarm system to send an alarm notification to the police for test purposes, unless the alarm permit holder first notifies the alarm administrator or its representative, and the alarm company monitoring control center, prior to the testing of the system that the signal is for testing purposes only. 
(Ord. No. 1599, § 2, 5-1-12)  
Sec. 10-370. - Reset required. 
(a)  A user of a general alarm system or CATV alarm system that causes an alarm notification to be sent directly to the city shall adjust or cause the adjustment of the mechanism so that upon activation, the system will transmit only one (1) alarm signal and will not transmit another alarm signal without first being reset in such a manner that it will not automatically resound, unless there is an outside stimulus characteristic of an unauthorized intrusion. 
(Ord. No. 1599, § 2, 5-1-12)  
Sec. 10-380. - Revocation/reinstatement of permit. 
(a)  The alarm administrator may suspend or refuse to renew a general alarm system, local alarm system, or CATV alarm system permit for any violation of this article. 
(b)  The alarm administrator may suspend or refuse to renew an alarm permit if a general alarm system, local alarm system or CATV alarm system generates ten (10) false robbery or police alert or burglar/intrusion alarm notifications in any twelve-month period described in 10-380. 
(c)  A revocation may be lifted or permit reinstated upon a sufficient showing that the conditions which caused the action have been corrected and if the alarm administrator determines that the general alarm system or CATV alarm system is likely to be maintained and operated in a responsible manner in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  The alarm administrator shall also have the authority to revoke an alarm permit if: 
(1)  An alarm user fails to pay any fees or fines assessed in this article within thirty (30) days of being invoiced; 
(2)  There is a statement of material fact known to be false in the alarm permit application; 
(3)  The alarm user has failed to submit a written certification from an alarm installation company that complies with the requirements of this article, stating that the alarm system has been inspected and repaired (if necessary) and/or additional training has been conducted by the alarm installation company; and/or 
(4)  The alarm user has ten (10) or more false alarms within a calendar year. 
(e)  If the alarm permit is reinstated pursuant to section 10-380, the alarm administrator may again revoke the alarm permit, if it is determined that three (3) false alarms have occurred within the calendar year after the reinstatement date. All false alarm fines after reinstatement shall be based on the fee assigned to eight (8) or more false alarms. 
(Ord. No. 1599, § 2, 5-1-12)  
Sec. 10-390. - Appeal from denial or suspension of a permit. 
(a)  If the alarm administrator refuses to issue or reinstate a permit, or suspends a permit, they shall send to the applicant or permit holder by certified mail, written notice of their action and a statement of the right to an appeal. The applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision of the city to the city manager by filing with the city manager a written request for a hearing, setting forth the reasons for the appeal, within ten (10) days after receipt of the notice from the city the filing of a request for an appeal hearing with the city manager stays any action of the alarm administrator in suspending or denying a permit until the city manager or their designated representative make a final decision. If a request for an appeal hearing is not made within a ten-day period, the action of the alarm administrator is final. 
(b)  The city manager or their representative shall serve as hearing officer at an appeal hearing and consider evidence by an interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply at an appeal hearing and the hearing officer shall make their decision on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing. The hearing officer must render a decision within thirty (30) days after the request for an appeal hearing is filed. The hearing officer shall affirm, reverse or modify the action of the alarm administrator, and their decision is final. 
(Ord. No. 1599, § 2, 5-1-12)  
Sec. 10-400. - Indirect alarm reporting. 
A person who is engaged in the business of relaying alarm notifications to the alarm administrator shall: 
(a)  Send notifications of an alarm to the alarm administrator by human operator; unless such notification is by a direct computer terminal; 
(b)  Keep their business premises in compliance with state law; 
(c)  Allow an inspection of their business premises by the alarm administrator or their representative; 
(d)  Report alarms only over a special telephone number, or numbers designated by the alarm administrator; and 
(e)  Send alarm notifications to the alarm administrator in a manner and form determined by the alarm administrator. 
(Ord. No. 1599, § 2, 5-1-12)  
Sec. 10-410. - Recorded message alarm notification prohibited. 
No permit will be issued for the use of systems using automatic telephone dialing to report an alarm condition by means of a recorded message. 
(Ord. No. 1599, § 2, 5-1-12)  
Sec. 10-420. - Working specifications. 
(a)  CATV alarm system alarm activation and deactivation panels may be of a key or keyless configuration. They must be installed on the interior of the structure. The system shall provide for variable entrance and exit grace times which shall be incorporated into the unit. 
(b)  No CATV alarm system, local alarm system, or general alarm system shall be so designed as to generate an alarm due to the premises or a particular area of the premises not being secured at the time of attempted arming. The alarm system shall utilize an internal audible alert signal to notify the user that they have a programmed grace period in which to deactivate the alarm system upon the user's entrance. In case of power failure, all alarm circuits shall automatically convert to stand-by battery supply, capable of supplying at least twelve (12) hours of emergency power. 
(c)  It is the duty of installers of general alarm systems, local alarm systems, and CATV alarm systems shall make the user aware that a permit must be obtained from the police department. 
(d)  The installer shall also instruct the user regarding the operation of the system, including but not limited to, the criteria for use of the police alert button device, stressing it is for the summoning of police only in the event of a real and immediate threat to life. 
(e)  The installer shall not install an alarm system contrary to the provisions of this article. Alarm systems that are installed contrary to the provisions of this article are in violation of this article and the installer is subject to the punishment phase of this article for each day the alarm system is installed, and each day or portion of a day thereafter are separate offenses until the alarm system adheres to the provisions of this article. 
(f)  Any keyless configuration activating or deactivating device which contains only a single button to activate a police alert alarm shall provide for a design of such equipment so that accidental activation will not occur and that activation is a deliberate act. 
(g)  Delay diode required CATV alarm systems and general alarm systems shall include a delay diode which will be engineered so that an alarm will not be sent due to momentary breaks in electrical current caused by lightning. 
(h)  All electrical equipment used for the installation of CATV alarm systems and general alarm systems shall be Underwriters, Laboratories, Inc., approved. 
(Ord. No. 1599, § 2, 5-1-12)  
Sec. 10-430. - Violations, corporations, partnerships and associations. 
(a)  A person, corporation, partnership or other association commits an offense hereunder by commission or omission of any provision of this article that imposes upon such person or entity a duty or responsibility. 
(b)  In addition to prohibiting or requiring certain conduct of individuals, it is the intent of this article to hold a corporation, partnership or other association criminally responsible for acts or omissions' performed by an agent acting in behalf of the corporation, partnership or other association and within the scope of his employment. 
(Ord. No. 1599, § 2, 5-1-12)  
ARTICLE IV. - WRECKERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1084, §§ 1—11, adopted Dec. 18, 2001, substantially amended §§ 10-510—10-630 of Art. IV to read as herein set out. These former sections pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 593, §§ 1, 2, adopted Aug. 1, 1989. 
 
Sec. 10-500. - Definitions. 
[The following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them as follows:] 
(a)  Disabled vehicle means a vehicle which has been rendered unsafe to be driven as the result of some occurrence including, but not limited to, mechanical failures or breakdowns, fire, accidents, vandalism, or a vehicle which is in a safe driving condition but the owner is not present or able or permitted to drive so as to reasonably necessitate that the vehicle be removed by a wrecker. 
(b)  Illegally or unauthorized parked vehicle means a vehicle parked in violation of any state law or city ordinance or without the effective consent of the owner of the property. 
(c)  Licensee means a person licensed to engage in wrecker service. 
(d)  Person means an individual, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation or other legal entity. 
(e)  Repossession means removal of a vehicle by means of another vehicle. 
(f)  Street means any street, alley, avenue, lane, square or highway within the corporate limits of the city. 
(g)  Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(h)  Wrecked vehicle means a vehicle that has been damaged as the result of overturning or colliding with another vehicle or object so as to reasonably necessitate that the vehicle be removed by a wrecker. 
(i)  Wrecker means a vehicle designed to be used primarily for removing wrecked or disabled vehicles. 
(j)  Wrecker service means the business of towing, moving or removing vehicles through the use of a vehicle for compensation, regardless of whether the purpose of the removal is to transport wrecked or disabled vehicles, repair, wreck, store, trade, purchase, repossess vehicles or to remove illegally or unauthorized parked vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 593, § 1(1.01), 8-1-89)  
Sec. 10-510. - City towing and recovery service agreement. 
(a)  Minimum standards. Each bidder for the appointment as franchisee of the towing and recovery service agreement for the city must meet each of the following minimum standards: 
(1)  It must maintain, either within the city or within five (5) miles of the city limits, a storage facility for recovered automobiles, which shall be fenced with a privacy fence to prevent visibility from outside the facility, must be lighted during the night time hours, must be secured during all hours, and must be accessible upon request to interested persons of the Keller Police Department and any interested law enforcement official upon the giving of thirty (30) minutes notice. Such location must be in an area approved by the city zoning board and the chief law enforcement officer of the jurisdiction in which it is located. There must be room for large vehicles as well as seized vehicles. 
(2)  The storage facility of the service must be licensed by the State of Texas as a storage facility for recovered vehicles. 
(3)  The successful bidder will carry insurance coverage in the minimum amounts as required by the Texas Department of Transportation under the Texas Tow Truck Act. 
(4)  The successful bidder must be licensed by the Texas Department of Transportation to regulation by that agency, unless excluded by local ordinance inside the city limits where the storage facility is located. 
(5)  The successful bidder must be prepared to guarantee, under normal weather and non-catastrophe conditions, a response time of twenty (20) minutes. 
(6)  The successful bidder must maintain, in suitable and operable condition, at least the following rolling stock: 
a.  Four-wheel-lifts-boom-combo recovery vehicles; 
b.  One (1) flatbed trailer; and 
c.  The franchisee shall have access to one (1) heavy-duty recovery vehicle and one (1) framelift for motor homes. 
All of the above equipment is considered essential by the city for the safety of the consumers' vehicles, for efficiency in clearing the site of a major accident, and to restore normal traffic conditions safely, quickly, and efficiently. 
(b)  Rates for services. Bidders must supply their rates for the following services: 
(1)  Basic police department wrecker fee; 
(2)  Impoundment fee (must cover jump-starts, cars out of fuel, air tires, retrieving paper work for releases, etc.); 
(3)  Winching per foot; 
(4)  Unlocking vehicle; 
(5)  Storage per day for first ten (10) days; storage per day after the first ten (10) days; and 
(6)  Trailer for motorcycle. 
(c)  Hours or release. Vehicles will be released Monday through Friday from 0800 hours to 1700 hours and for a minimum of one (1) hour each day on Saturday and Sunday. 
(d)  Charges to city. All city vehicles and equipment will be towed at no expense to the city. All vehicles stored for the city, which are involved inseizure or for forfeiture will be stored at no charge to the city. A vehicle, which is recovered by the owners, may be charged. 
(e)  Right of termination. The wrecker operator shall provide all services specifically set forth in its application to provide towing and recovery services to the city. Failure to provide the services promised in any application shall be deemed a violation of this article. In addition to all other rights and powers pertinent to the city by virtue of any franchise or otherwise, the city shall have the power and rights to terminate and cancel all rights and privileges of any wrecker to operate within the city in the event that the operator: 
(1)  Violates any material provision of its franchise; 
(2)  Attempts to evade any material provision of its franchise or practices any fraud or deceit upon the city; and 
(3)  Fails to operate a system in accordance with State of Texas standards. 
(f)  Procedure for termination. The city manager may make a written demand that the operator do or comply with any provision of its franchise or of this article. If the violation by the operator continues for a period of thirty (30) days following such written demand without written proof that the corrective action has been taken or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, the city may place consideration of termination of the franchise upon the next regular city council meeting agenda. The city secretary shall cause to be served upon the operator, at least (10) days prior to the date of such meeting, a written notice of intent to request such meeting, a written notice of intent to request such termination and the time and place of the meeting, notice of which shall be published at least ten (10) days before such meeting in the official newspaper of the city. The city council shall consider the termination and shall hear any person interested therein and shall determine in its discretion whether or not any violation by the operator was with just cause. If such violation by the operator is found to have been with just cause, the city council shall direct the operator to comply therewith within such time and manner and upon such terms and conditions as are just and reasonable. If the city council shall determine such violation by the operator was without just cause, then the city council may, by ordinance, declare that the franchise of the operator shall be terminated and forfeited unless there is compliance by the operator within such period as the council may fix. 
(Ord. No. 593, § 1(1.02), 8-1-89; Ord. No. 1084, § 2, 12-18-01)  
Sec. 10-520. - Procedures for police dispatched wrecker service. 
The chief of police shall cause to be prepared a form to be used for each wrecker pull involving a police dispatched wrecker service in the City of Keller. A police officer is hereby authorized to move a vehicle, require the driver or other person in charge of a vehicle to move the same or have the vehicle removed by the police wrecker operator to the nearest place of safety or to the premises of the police wrecker operator. 
(Ord. No. 593, § 1(1.03), 8-1-89; Ord. No. 1084, § 3, 12-18-01)  
Sec. 10-530. - Debris at accident scene to be removed. 
Each wrecker company called to the scene of an accident shall completely remove from the street all resulting wreckage or debris, including all broken glass, before leaving the site. 
(Ord. No. 593, § 1(1.04), 8-1-89; Ord. No. 1084, § 4, 12-18-01)  
Sec. 10-540. - No wrecker at scene unless called by police. 
No wrecker shall arrive at the scene of an accident within the city unless such wrecker has been called to the scene by the owner of the vehicle or his authorized representative or by the police department. Each wrecker operator, when called by the owner of a vehicle or his authorized representative, shall notify the police dispatcher before proceeding to the scene of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 593, § 1(1.05), 8-1-89; Ord. No. 1084, § 5, 12-18-01)  
Sec. 10-550. - Solicitation of wrecker business prohibited. 
No persons shall solicit any wrecker business in any manner, directly or indirectly, on the streets of Keller, at the scene of a wrecked or disabled vehicle, regardless of whether the solicitation is for the purpose of soliciting the business of towing, repairing, wrecking, storing, trading or purchasing the vehicle. The presence of any person engaged in the wrecker business, who has not been notified by a police dispatcher, on any street at the accident scene or place of disablement shall be prima facie evidence of solicitation and violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 593, § 1(2.01), 8-1-89; Ord. No. 1084, § 6, 12-18-01)  
Sec. 10-560. - City employees not to recommend wrecker. 
No employee of the city shall recommend to any person, directly or indirectly, either by word, gesture, sign or otherwise, the name of any particular wrecker service. 
(Ord. No. 593, § 1(3.01), 8-1-89; Ord. No. 1084, § 7, 12-18-01)  
Sec. 10-570. - Coverage applicable to off-street vehicles. 
The prohibitions and requirements of this article shall apply to all accidents and disablements, regardless of whether or not the final resting place of a vehicle is upon a street immediately after the accident or disablement. 
(Ord. No. 593, § 1(3.02), 8-1-89; Ord. No. 1084, § 8, 12-18-01)  
Sec. 10-580. - Pushing or towing exempted from prohibitions in certain instances. 
Vehicles may be pushed or towed by another vehicle (except by a wrecker for compensation) only when they do not reasonable require removal by a wrecker and only when such may be done in a safe manner. Such removal is exempted from the provisions of this article except section 10-550. 
(Ord. No. 593, § 1(3.03), 8-1-89; Ord. No. 1084, § 9, 12-18-01)  
Sec. 10-590. - Location notice. 
The wrecker company or the garage keeper or his duly authorized agent is required to notify the owner or driver of the location of the vehicle within twenty-four (24) hours, unless exempted by regulations promulgated by the chief of police. If not a police pull (repo, etc.), the wrecker company will notify the police department within one (1) hour of the pull. 
(Ord. No. 593, § 1(3.04), 8-1-89; Ord. No. 1084, § 10, 12-18-01)  
Sec. 10-600. - Penalty for violation. 
Whoever shall violate any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable to a penalty of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first offense and not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second and every subsequent offense. The penalties provided in this section shall be enforced by appropriate proceedings instituted by the City of Keller. 
(Ord. No. 593, § 1(3.05), 8-1-89; Ord. No. 1084, § 11, 12-18-01)  
ARTICLE V. - SALE OR SERVING OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 699, §§ 1—4, adopted April 20, 1993, amended the Code by adding a new Art. V, §§ 10-600—10-630. In order to avoid duplication of section numbers, the editor has redesignated the provisions of Ord. No. 699 as §§ 10-700—10-730. 
Cross reference— Zoning, App. A. 
 
Sec. 10-700. - Sale or serving of alcoholic beverages. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the sale, serving or consumption of any alcoholic beverages, when permitted by the laws of the State of Texas, shall be regulated and governed by the following use regulations and requirements: 
(1)  For the purpose of this article the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows: 
a.  Alcoholic beverage means alcohol or any beverage containing more than one-half (½) of one (1) percent of alcohol by volume, which is capable of use for beverage purposes, either alone or when diluted. 
b.  Food shall mean nutriment for human consumption in solid form and beverages which have no alcohol content but the meaning of food shall not include any beverages having any alcoholic content, alcoholic beverage mixes or other ingredients used for the preparation of alcoholic beverages. 
c.  Mixed beverage means one (1) or more servings of a beverage composed in whole or part of an alcoholic beverage in a sealed or unsealed container of any legal size for consumption on the premises where served or sold by the holder of a mixed beverage permit. 
d.  The term person shall include association, trustee, receiver, organization, corporations, firms, partnerships, and natural persons. 
(Ord. No. 699, § 1, 4-20-93)  
Sec. 10-710. - Distances required from schools, hospitals and churches. 
The sale of alcoholic beverages within three hundred (300) feet of a church, public school or public hospital is hereby prohibited. Such measurement shall be made in accordance with the requirements set forth in Section 109.33 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code. 
(Ord. No. 699, § 2, 4-20-93)  
Sec. 10-720. - Applicability of zoning ordinance. 
The location of any business which derives more than seventy-five (75) percent of its gross revenues from the on-premise sale of alcoholic beverages shall be regulated by the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 699, § 3, 4-20-93)  
Sec. 10-730. - Quarterly report required. 
The person operating an establishment with the on-premise sale of alcoholic beverages shall on a quarterly basis, no later than on the tenth day of the month following each quarter, file with the city secretary an affidavit on an officially approved form provided by the city secretary that reflects gross sales for the preceding three (3) months and gross sales for the preceding twelve-month period, or since the establishment began its operation, whichever is shorter, breaking down the sales between the sale of food and the sale of alcoholic beverages. The person operating this establishment shall on a quarterly basis file with the city secretary a copy of the filing supplied to the State of Texas for sales tax and mixed beverage (alcoholic beverages) tax purposes. The city reserve the right to request persons to submit an annual certified audit of the gross sales broken down between food sales and mixed beverage sales at the person's expense. All filings including all sales and beverage tax filings shall remain confidential. 
(Ord. No. 699, § 4, 4-20-93)  
ARTICLE VI. - ILLEGAL SMOKING PRODUCTS AND INGESTION DEVICES 
 
Sec. 10-800. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the use, possession, sale, ingestion or smoking of illegal smoking products and ingestion devices hereinafter defined within the city limits of the City of Keller. 
(Ord. No. 1531, § 2, 11-16-10)  
Sec. 10-810. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases as used in this section shall have the meanings as set forth in this subsection. 
Illegal smoking product shall mean any plant or other substance, whether described as tobacco, herbs, incense, spice, or any blend thereof, regardless of whether the substance is marked for the purpose of being smoked, which includes any one or more of the following substances or chemicals: 
(1)  Salvinorin A: Contained within the Salvia Divinorum plant, whether growing or not; or possessed as an extract, compound, manufacture, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such plant; or 
(2)  2-[(1R, 3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl}-5-(2-methylocatan-2-y1) phenol (also known as CP 47, 497) and homologues; or 
(3)  1-Pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-018); or 
(4)  Butyl-3(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-073); or 
(5)  Any products sold, distributed or possessed in the form of incense or herbal smoking blends under the names such at "K-2," "K-2 Summit," "K-2 Sex," "Genie," "Spice," "Dascents," "Zohai," "Sage," "Pep Spice," "Solar Flare," "K-O Knockout 2," "Spice Gold," "Spice Diamond," "Spice Cannabinoid," "Yucatan Fire," "Fire N Ice," "Salvia Divinorum," or related products or chemicals when ingested produce intoxicating effects similar to marijuana. 
Ingestion device shall mean equipment, a product or material that is used or intended for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing an illegal smoking product into the human body, including: 
(1)  A metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipe with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head, or punctured metal bowl; 
(2)  A water pipe; 
(3)  A carburetion tube or device; 
(4)  A smoking or carburetion mask; 
(5)  A chamber pipe; 
(6)  A carburetor pipe; 
(7)  An electric pipe; 
(8)  An air-driven pipe; 
(9)  A chillum; 
(10)  A bong; or 
(11)  An ice pipe or chiller. 
"Person" shall mean an individual, corporation, partnership, wholesaler, retailer or any licensed or unlicensed business. 
(Ord. No. 1531, § 2, 11-16-10)  
Sec. 10-820. - Violation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any Person to use, possess, purchase, barter, give, publicly display, sell or offer for sale any illegal smoking product. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or possess an Ingestion Device with the intent to inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body an illegal smoking product. 
(c)  The culpable mental state required by Chapter 6.02 of the Texas Penal Code, as amended, is specifically negated and dispensed with and a violation is a strict liability offense. 
(d)  Any person, firm or corporation found to be violating any term or provision of this article, shall be subject to a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00), or the maximum amount allowed by law, for each offense. Every day a violation continues shall constitute a specific offense. 
(Ord. No. 1531, § 2, 11-16-10)  
Sec. 10-830. - Affirmative defense. 
(a)  It shall be an affirmative defense for a person charged with an offense for possession or use of an illegal smoking product that the use or possession was pursuant to the direction or prescription of a licensed physician or dentist authorized to direct or prescribe such act. 
(b)  It shall be a primary affirmative defense that the sale or possession by a person of Salvinorin A was in conjunction with ornamental landscaping and used solely for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 1531, § 2, 11-16-10)  
ARTICLE VII. - GAS WELL DRILLING AND PRODUCTION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1465, § 2, adopted July 21, 2009, repealed former Art. VII, §§ 10-1000—1150, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Art. VII pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1316, § 2, adopted March 21, 2006. 
 
Sec. 10-1000. - Purpose. 
The exploration, development, and production of gas in the city are activities which necessitate reasonable regulation to ensure that all property owners, mineral and otherwise, have the right to peaceably enjoy their property and its benefits and revenues. It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this article to establish reasonable and uniform limitations, safeguards and regulations for present and future operations related to the exploring, drilling, developing, producing, transporting and storing of gas and other substances produced in association with gas within the city to protect the health and general welfare of the public; minimize the potential impact to property and mineral rights owners, protect the quality of the environment and encourage the orderly production of available mineral resources. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 2, 7-21-09)  
Sec. 10-1010. - Definitions. 
All technical industry words or phrases related to the drilling and production of gas wells not specifically defined in this article shall have the meanings customarily attributable thereto by prudent and reasonable gas industry operators. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Abandonment means "Abandonment" as defined by the Railroad Commission of Texas and includes the plugging of the well and the restoration of any well site as required by this article. 
(2)  Ambient noise level means the all encompassing noise level associated with a given environment, being a composite of sounds from all sources at the location, constituting the normal or existing level of environmental noise at a given location. 
(3)  Blowout preventer means a mechanical, hydraulic, pneumatic or other device or combination of such devices secured to the top of a well casing, including valves, fittings and control mechanisms connected therewith, which can be closed around the drill pipe, or other tubular goods which completely close the top of the casing and are designed for preventing blowouts. 
(4)  Building means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. The term "Building" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or portions thereof." 
(5)  Cathodic protection means an electrochemical corrosion control technique accomplished by applying a direct current to the structure that causes the structure potential to change from the corrosion potential to a protective potential in the immunity region. The required cathodic protection current is supplied by sacrificial anode materials or by an impressed current system. 
(6)  Cessation of drilling activities means the time when the Blowout Protectors (BOPs) are removed or otherwise rendered inoperable and/or there are no further activities to trip drill pipe, casing or insert other tools into or out of the hole. 
(7)  City means the City of Keller. 
(8)  City Code means the Code of the City of Keller. 
(9)  City attorney means the city attorney of the City of Keller. 
(10)  City regulated pipelines means those pipelines within the city that under federal and state rules and regulations are not exempt from city regulations and articles regarding mapping, inventorying, locating or relocating of pipelines, including, but not limited to, pipelines over, under, along, or across a public street or alley, pipelines from the well to the first point of custody transfer or in private residential areas within the boundaries of the city. 
(11)  Closed loop mud system means a system utilized while drilling so that reserve pits are not used and instead steel bins are used to collect all drilling waste. 
(12)  Commission means the Railroad Commission of Texas and all state rules. 
(13)  Commencement of drilling activities means the reflection of either "Spud well" or "Nipple Up" the blow out protectors (BOPs) by the drilling contractors on the IADC-API Daily Drilling Report Form maintained by the operator's tool pusher on the pad site. 
(14)  Completion of drilling, re-drilling and re-working means the date the work is completed for the drilling, re-drilling or re-working and the crew is released by completing their work or contract or by their employer. 
(15)  Daytime means the period from 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
(16)  Decibel (db) means a unit for measuring the intensity of a sound/noise and is equal to ten (10) times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the measured sound pressure squared to a reference pressure which is 20 micropascals. 
(17)  Demobilization means those activities when the drilling has ceased and the rig equipment and related pad site equipment is being dismantled for the purpose of moving off the drill pad site. 
(18)  Derrick means any portable framework, tower, mast and/or structure which is required or used in connection with drilling or re-working a well for the production of gas. 
(19)  Development review committee (DRC) means a committee consisting of applicable city departments assembled for the purpose of reviewing gas well land use and permit applications for compliance with city regulations. 
(20)  Drilling means digging or boring a new well for the purpose of exploring for, developing or producing gas or other hydrocarbons, or for the purpose of injecting gas, water or any other fluid or substance into the earth. 
(21)  Drilling equipment means the derrick, together with all parts of and appurtenances to such structure, every piece of apparatus, machinery or equipment used or erected or maintained for use in connection with drilling. 
(22)  Drilling operations means drilling with drill pipe and bit, running casing, circulating mud and fluids, tripping tools and setting production casing/tubing. 
(23)  Exploration means geologic or geophysical activities, including seismic surveys, related to the search for or other subsurface hydrocarbons. 
(24)  FEMA means Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(25)  FIRM means flood insurance rate map. 
(26)  Fire department means the fire department of the City of Keller. 
(27)  Flowback means the process of flowing a completed/fractured well for the purpose of recovering water and residual sand from the gas stream prior to sending gas down a sales line. 
(28)  Fracture or fracturing means the process of fracture stimulation of a rock formation. 
(29)  Freshwater fracture pond means a pit used for the collection and storage of fresh water for the purpose of fracture stimulation of gas wells. 
(30)  Fresh water means water obtained from any source (natural or reuse) that contains three thousand (3,000) ppm chlorides or less or as defined by the Railroad Commission of Texas. 
(31)  Gas means any fluid, either combustible or noncombustible, which is produced in a natural state from the earth and which maintains a gaseous or rarefied state at standard temperature and pressure conditions and/or the gaseous components or vapors occurring in or derived from petroleum or natural gas. 
(32)  Gas well means any well drilled, to be drilled, or used for the intended or actual production of natural gas. 
(33)  Habitable structure means any structure for which a certificate of occupancy is required. A habitable structure shall not include detached accessory buildings, garages and sheds. 
(34)  Hospital building means any building used or designed to and intended to be used for medical, surgical, psychiatric, nursing or custodial care on a twenty-four (24) hour basis, including convalescent facilities, social rehabilitation centers, mental hospitals, detoxification facilities, and alcohol and drug centers. 
(35)  Lift compressor means a device that raises the pressure of a compressible fluid (gas) in order to lift gas from the well. 
(36)  Line compressor means a device that raises the pressure of a compressible fluid (gas) in order for the gas to be transported through a pipeline. 
(37)  Mobilization means those activities when the drilling rig and related equipment and personnel arrive at the well site and are conducting activities to rig up or position the rig equipment at the well and prepare for drilling. This includes all activities and services prior to the drill bit being lowered below the rotary table and entering the conductor pipe in an attempt to make hole ("spud in") for the first time at the pad site. 
(38)  Multiple well site permit means that permit issued for the sole purpose of allowing future wells to be drilled on an existing Pad Site and within six hundred feet (600) of protected uses without obtaining waivers and/or variances. 
(39)  Nighttime means the period between 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(40)  Operator means, for each well, the person listed on the Railroad Commission Form W-1 or Form P-4 for a gas well that is, or will be, actually in charge and in control of drilling, maintaining, operating, pumping or controlling any well, including, without limitation, a unit operator. If the operator, as herein defined, is not the lessee under a gas lease of any premises affected by the provisions of this article, then such lessee shall also be deemed to be an operator. In the event that there is no gas lease relating to any premises affected by this article, the owner of the fee mineral estate in the premises shall be deemed an operator. 
(41)  Outer boundary surface property line means the outer boundary of any property for which a preliminary plat or concept plan has been filed with the City of Keller. 
(42)  Pad site means the area used for drilling, development and production and all operational activities associated with gas production. 
(43)  Person means both the singular and the plural and means a natural person, a corporation, association, guardian, partnership, receiver, trustee, administrator, executor, and fiduciary or representative of any kind. 
(44)  Pipeline means all parts of those physical facilities through which gas, hazardous liquids, fresh water, salt water, or chemicals move in transportation, including but not limited to, pipe, valves and other appurtenance attached to pipe, whether or not laid in public or private easement or public or private right-of-way within the city, including but not limited to gathering lines, production lines and transmission lines. This definition does not include pipelines associated with franchise utilities. 
(45)  Pipeline construction means the initiation of any excavation or other disturbance of property for the purpose of installation, construction, maintenance, repair, replacement, modification or removal of a pipeline. 
(46)  Pipeline or well emergency means a pipeline or well incident that is required to be reported to the Railroad Commission, the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, or any federal, State, or local regulatory agency. 
(47)  Pipeline permit means a permit for the movement of gas, oil, water or other products. 
(48)  Pipeline operator means any person owning, operating or responsible for operating a pipeline. 
(49)  Planning and zoning commission means a committee appointed by the city council that makes recommendations to the city council on cases relating to gas well drilling land use applications, pipeline permit applications for gas pipelines through a private residential area, permit applications involving non-commercial truck routes, and gas well development applications. 
(50)  Private residential area means any area within the territorial limits of the city zoned and used as single or multi-family residential. 
(51)  Property owner means the owner of the surface property. 
(52)  Protected use means a residence, religious institution, hospital building, school or public park. 
(53)  Public building means all buildings with occupancies of fifty (50) or more persons and more than seven hundred fifty (750) square feet used or designed to and intended to be used for motion picture theaters, symphony and concert halls, television and radio studios admitting an audience, theaters, banquet halls, night clubs, restaurants, taverns and bars, amusement arcades, art galleries, bowling alleys, community halls, courtrooms, dance halls, exhibition halls, funeral parlors, gymnasiums without spectator seating, indoor swimming pools and tennis courts without spectator seating, lecture halls, libraries, museums, waiting areas in transportation terminals, pool and billiard parlors, arenas with spectator seating, skating rinks with spectator seating, swimming pools with spectator seating, tennis courts with spectator seating and amusement park structures, bleachers, grandstands and stadiums used for viewing outdoor activities. 
(54)  Public park means any land area dedicated to the city for traditional park-like recreational purposes. 
(55)  Re-drill means re-completion of an existing well by deepening or sidetrack operations extending more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the existing well bore. 
(56)  Reduced emission completion means techniques or methods that minimize the release of natural gas and vapors to the environment when a well is being flowed during the completion or re-completion phase of a Barnett Shale well. 
(57)  Religious institution means any building in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship and activities intended primarily for purposes connected with such worship or for propagating a particular form of religious belief. 
(58)  Residence means a house, duplex, apartment, townhouse, condominium, city-inspected mobile home or other building designed for dwelling purposes, including those for which a building permit has been issued on the date the application for a gas well permit is filed with the fire marshal. Residence shall include assisted living facilities, nursing homes (both intermediate care facilities and skilled nursing facilities), residential board and care facilities, group homes, twenty-four (24) hour shelters, half-way houses, hotels, motels and jails. 
(59)  Re-working means re-completion or re-entry of existing well within the existing bore hole or by deepening or sidetrack operations which do not extend more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the existing well bore, or replacement of well liners or casings. 
(60)  Right-of-way means public rights-of-way including streets, easements and other property within the city and which is dedicated to the use and benefit of the public. 
(61)  School means any public and private, primary and secondary educational facilities providing education or off-site related School sports venues up through and including the twelfth (12th) grade level and any licensed day care centers, meaning a facility licensed by the State of Texas or by the City of Keller that provides care, training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for more than six (6) children under fourteen (14) years of age, and for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day. 
(62)  Shut-in means a gas well that is temporarily closed off so that it does not produce a fluid or gas product of any kind. A shut-in well is considered a completed well and subject to all development standards regarding completed well sites. 
(63)  Site preparation means any grading, tree removal, construction of access roads, delivery of fill material, removal of waste or spoil staging of equipment or any other activity that would disturb the surface of the property. 
(64)  State or federal regulated pipelines means those pipelines within the city that under state and federal rules and regulations are exempt from city regulations and articles regarding mapping, inventorying, locating and relocating of pipelines. 
(65)  Street means any street, highway, sidewalk, alley, avenue, recessed parking area or other public right-of-way, including the entire right-of-way whether prescriptive or dedicated. 
(66)  Tank means a container, covered or uncovered, used in conjunction with the drilling or production of gas or other hydrocarbons for holding or storing fluids. 
(67)  Technical advisor means such person(s) familiar with and educated in the gas industry or the law as it relates to gas matters that may be retained from time to time by the city (see section 10-1180 for more details). 
(68)  Well means a hole or holes, bore or bores, to any horizon, formation, or strata for the purpose of producing gas, liquid hydrocarbon, brine water or sulphur water, or for use as an injection well for secondary recovery, disposal or production of gas, or other hydrocarbons from the earth. 
(69)  Workover operation means work performed in a well after its completion in an effort to secure production where there has been none, restore production that has ceased or increase production. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 2, 7-21-09)  
Sec. 10-1020. - Inspections. 
(a)  The city manager, or his designee, shall enforce the provisions of this article. The fire marshal shall have the authority to issue any orders or directives required to carry out the intent and purpose of this article and its particular provisions. Failure of any person to comply with any such order or directive shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(b)  The city manager or his designee shall have the authority to enter and inspect any premises covered by the provisions of this article to determine compliance with the provisions of this article and all applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards or directives of the state and to issue citations for violations of this article. Failure of any person to permit access to the fire marshal shall constitute a violation of this article. The fire marshal or his designee shall conduct periodic inspections at least once a year of all permitted wells in the city to determine that the wells are operating in accordance within proper parameters as set out in this article and all regulations of the Commission. 
(c)  The city manager or his designee shall have the authority to request and receive any records, including any records sent to the Commission, logs, reports and the like, relating to the status or condition of any permitted well necessary to establish and determine compliance with the applicable gas well and pipeline permits or other permits as required by this article. Failure of any person to provide any such requested material shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(d)  The city manager or his designee shall have the authority to recommend alternatives to the technical standards of this article such as new technology, if the operator has demonstrated to the fire marshal satisfaction that the alternatives provide equal or greater protection of the environment or public. 
(e)  As determined by the city manager, or his designee, the city may procure the services of a technical advisor to review technical standards or provide expertise (See section 10-1180 for more details). 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 2, 7-21-09)  
Sec. 10-1030. - Agent. 
Every operator of any well shall designate an agent, who is a resident of the State of Texas, upon whom all orders and notices provided in this article may be served in person or by registered or certified mail. Every operator so designating such agent shall within ten (10) days notify the city secretary and city manager's office in writing of any change in such agent or such mailing address unless operations within the city are discontinued. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 2, 7-21-09)  
Sec. 10-1040. - Planned development zoning district application. 
(a)  Gas well drilling and production by planned development zoning district, application and requirements. 
(1)  No person, acting for himself or acting as an agent, employee, independent contractor, or servant for any person, shall engage in drilling or production of a gas well within the corporate limits of the city without approval of a planned development zoning district as required by this article and by Article 8, Section 8.04, of the Unified Development Code, of the City of Keller, Texas. 
(2)  An application for a planned development zoning district for the drilling and production of a gas well shall be filed by the person having legal authority. That person is presumed to be the record owner, mineral owner, or the duly authorized agent of either the record owner or the mineral owner. The application shall be submitted to the community development department of the City of Keller. 
(3)  No application shall be accepted for filing until it is complete in its entirety and the fee established by the city council of the City of Keller has been paid. Incomplete applications shall be returned less a fee for processing determined by the director of community development. All applicable requirements of the Unified Development Code Section 8.04 for planned development zoning and this article shall be met for a complete submittal. 
(4)  Within sixty (60) days from the receipt of a complete planned development zoning application, the application shall be placed on the planning and zoning commission (P&Z) agenda for a public hearing. 
(5)  All other requirements for a zoning change application shall be followed for a planned development zoning application for gas well drilling. 
(b)  Approval process. The planning and zoning commission (P&Z) and the city council shall review the application and any other related information. The following factors may be considered in deciding whether to approve a planned development zoning for gas well drilling: 
(1)  Whether the operations proposed are reasonable under the circumstances and conditions prevailing in the area considering the particular location and the character of the improvements located there; 
(2)  Whether the drilling of such wells would conflict with the orderly growth and development of the city; 
(3)  Whether there are other alternative well site locations; 
(4)  Whether the operations proposed are consistent with the health, safety and welfare of the public when and if conducted in accordance with the approved conditions; and 
(5)  Whether the impact upon the adjacent property and the general public by operations conducted in compliance with the gas well permit conditions are reasonable and justified, balancing the following factors: 
a.  The right of the owners of the mineral estate to explore, develop and produce the minerals; and 
b.  The availability of alternative drill sites. 
The city council may modify distances or require additional distance the well is setback from the property line or require any reasonable changes in operation, plan design, layout or any change in the onsite requirements including, but not limited to, fencing, landscaping, lighting, delivery times, noise levels, tank height or other matters reasonably required to protect the public's interests. 
The city council may accept, reject or modify the application in the interest of securing compliance with this article, the Unified Development Code and/or the City's Code of Ordinances to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(c)  Standards for gas well drilling and production. The drilling and production of a gas well by a planned development zoning district required by this article shall include, at a minimum, the following standards: 
(1)  Compliance with the site plan/development plan requirement. No drilling or production of a gas well shall begin until a gas well development plan or site plan that has been approved by the development review committee (DRC) and that is on file with the community development department and conforms to the requirements of Article 4, Section 4.14 of the Unified Development Code, of the City of Keller, Texas. 
(2)  The property owner/applicant shall provide for adequate public facilities, as determined by the director of public works and in accordance with Article 5, Section 5.01 of the Unified Development Code of the City of Keller including water supply, access roads, drainage, erosion control and other necessary supporting facilities identified on the gas well development site plan. In addition, the applicant/owner shall enter into and comply with the provisions of the City's Road Damage Remediation Agreement, attached hereto as Exhibit "A". 
(3)  The design, location, and arrangement of all driveways and parking spaces shall provide for the safe and convenient movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic without adversely affecting the general public or adjacent developments/properties. 
(4)  Road damage remediation agreement indicating that the operator shall repair, at his expense, any damage to public roads, streets or highways caused by the use of heavy vehicles for any activity associated with the preparation, drilling, production and operation of gas wells shall be prepared and filed with the Public Works Department of the City of Keller, Texas. Prior to commencing with construction or re-fracing or hydraulic re-stimulating of a natural gas well bore, applicable road damage remediation fees shall be paid to the city. 
(5)  Following approval of the planned development zoning district, a gas well drilling permit shall be applied for from the Keller Fire Department. 
(d)  Development review committee (DRC). 
(1)  The DRC shall review applications for planned development zoning districts and gas well permits in accordance with all applicable regulations within this article and the Unified Development Code. 
(e)  Planning and zoning commission. 
(1)  All applications where a zoning change is requested for the purposes of gas well drilling and production, development standard waiver is required, gas pipelines or gas pipeline facilities located in a private residential area shall be reviewed by the planning and zoning commission prior to the application being presented to the city council. 
(2)  Notice of planning and zoning commission meeting shall be mailed twenty (20) days prior to the public hearing to: 
a.  All property owners within one thousand (1,000) feet of the proposed well; 
b.  All property owners fronting or along the non-commercial truck route; and 
c.  All property owners along the proposed private residential area pipeline route. 
Notices shall follow the same format used for adoption of zoning regulations and district boundary changes and shall include a description of the application, the proposed truck route, a location map and the planning and zoning commission meeting date and time. Notices shall include the phone contact information for the operator and the street address for the well location. The applicant shall pay the postage of all property owner notifications at a rate equivalent to United States Postal Service first class postage. 
(3)  The planning and zoning commission shall submit a recommendation to the city council on all applications that involve a zoning change as requested for the purposes of gas well drilling and production, development standard waiver is required, all applications that involve non-commercial truck routes and all applications for gas pipelines or gas pipeline facilities located in a private residential area. 
(4)  Following said public hearing, the planning and zoning commission (P&Z) shall forward a recommendation for approval, denial or approval with conditions on the application to the city council. Not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the regularly scheduled meeting of the city council, a notice of public hearing shall be placed in the newspaper of record. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 2, 7-21-09; Ord. No. 1534, § 3, 12-7-10)  
Sec. 10-1050. - Gas well permits required. 
(a)  Any person wanting to engage in and operate in gas production activities shall apply for and obtain a gas well permit under this article and shall indicate what type of gas well permit is requested. It shall be unlawful for any person acting either for himself or acting as agent, employee, independent contractor, or servant for any person to drill any well, assist in any way in the site preparation, re-working, fracturing or operation of any such well or to conduct any activity related to the production of gas without first obtaining a gas well permit issued by the city in accordance with this article. Such activities include, but are not limited to re-working, initial site preparation, drilling, operation, construction of rigs or tank batteries, fracturing and pressurizing. A permit shall not be required for seismic surveys unless the survey is conducted on city-owned property or city rights-of-way unless such requirement is waived by the city. 
(b)  Operator must apply for and obtain a gas well permit for the drilling, re-drilling, deepening, re-entering, activating or converting of each well. 
(c)  A gas well permit shall not constitute authority for the re-entering and drilling of an abandoned well. An operator shall obtain a new gas well permit in accordance with the provisions of this article if the operator is re-entering and drilling an abandoned well. 
(d)  When a gas well permit has been issued to the operator for the drilling, re-drilling, deepening, re-entering, activating or converting of a well, such gas well permit shall constitute sufficient authority for drilling, operation, production gathering or production maintenance, repair, re-working, testing, plugging and abandonment of the well and/or any other activity associated with mineral exploration at the site of such well, provided; however, that a new or supplemental permit shall be obtained before such well may be re-worked for purposes of re-drilling, deepening or converting such well to a depth or use other than that set forth in the then current permit for such well. 
(e)  Any person who intends to re-work a permitted well using a drilling rig, to fracture stimulate a permitted well after initial completion or to conduct seismic surveys or other exploration activities shall give written notice to the fire marshal and post a sign as described below no less than ten (10) days before the activities begin and ensure that all applicable road damage remediation fees are paid. 
The notice must identify where the activities will be conducted and must describe the activities in detail, including whether explosive charges will be used, the duration of the activities and the time the activities will be conducted. The notice must also provide the address and twenty-four (24) hour phone number of the person conducting the activities. The person conducting the activities will post a sign on the property giving the public notice of the activities, including the name, address and twenty-four (24) hour phone number of the person conducting the activities. If the fire marshal determines that an inspection by a technical advisor is necessary, the operator will pay the city for the inspection. 
(f)  A gas well permit shall automatically terminate if drilling of the well bore has not commenced within three hundred sixty-five (365) days from the date of the issuance of the gas well permit. 
A gas well permit may be extended one (1) time by the city council for an additional three hundred sixty-five (365) days upon request by the operator if: 
(1)  Operator provides proof that there are no additional protected uses within six hundred (600) feet from the time of the filing of the original permit applications; and 
(2)  The request is submitted prior to the expiration of the original permit. 
No permit shall be extended beyond the expiration date of the current Railroad Commission permit. 
(g)  The gas well permits required by this article are in addition to and are not in lieu of any permit which may be required by any other provision of this Code or by any other governmental agency. 
(h)  No additional gas well permit or filing fees shall be required for: 
(1)  Any wells that are existing, previously permitted or approved by the city, within the corporate limits of the city on the effective date of 2002 gas well drilling and production ordinance (Ordinance No. 1125); or 
(2)  Any wells where drilling has commenced on the effective date of the 2002 gas well drilling and production ordinance (Ordinance No. 1125); or 
(3)  Any wells in existence or on any wells on which drilling has commenced on land annexed into the city after the effective date of the 2002 gas well drilling and production ordinance (Ordinance No. 1125); or 
(4)  Any well that was planned for the land before the 90th day before the effective date of its annexation and one (1) or more licenses, certificates, permits, approvals, or other forms of authorization by a governmental entity were required by law for such well and the completed application for the initial authorization was filed before the date the annexation proceedings were instituted. 
A person shall have forty-five (45) days after annexation into the city to designate a gas operation as a pre-existing operation by filing a site plan drawn to scale that shows the proposed location of the well or Pad Site with respect to survey lines and the proposed associated production facilities, if any, or designate an existing pad site as a multiple well site with the fire marshal. 
An operator or property owner shall have forty-five (45) days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives to notify the city of well sites existing prior to July 21, 2009, that have a protected use (permitted or built) or a residential lot that is located between three hundred (300) feet and two hundred (200) feet from an existing well site. Sites that meet the above notice and distance requirements will be grandfathered to the setback requirements existing prior to July 21, 2009. For residential lots only, if the above required notice is not received by the city within forty-five (45) days, the minimum setback distance may be reduced by the city council to two hundred (200) feet. 
(i)  No gas well permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled within any public park without the prior consent of the city council. The city council shall review the insurance and security requirements on an individual basis prior to issuing the permit. 
(j)  No gas well permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled within any floodway as identified by FEMA on the most current FIRM. A gas well permit can be issued within a FEMA designated floodplain upon approval of a floodplain development permit by the director of public works. This permit shall meet all requirements of the Unified Development Code for development in a floodplain. 
(k)  No gas well permit shall be issued without an approved erosion control, drainage plan, and grading plan as required by the city to prevent any off site migration of silt and sediment or potential downstream flooding. No site work will be allowed until all erosion protection is in place and approved by the City of Keller. 
(l)  Multiple gas well pad site permit. At the time the operator submits an application for the issuance for a single well permit, the operator, at his option, may also request the issuance of a multiple well site permit for drilling future wells. Applications for gas wells drilled on a multiple well site shall comply with the following: 
(1)  For all purposes, the measurement shall be from the boundary line of the pad site. 
(2)  If the pad site is located within six hundred (600) feet of a protected use at the time of the filing of a multiple well site permit application, the applicant must obtain a variance granted by the city council or waivers from all protected uses within a six hundred-foot radius before the multiple well site permit may be issued. 
(3)  Notice that a multiple well site permit application has been filed with the city must be included in any notice to property owners and in the published newspaper notice as required by section 10-1040 for the initial gas well permit. 
(4)  All multiple well site permits must be filed of record by the operator, at his expense in the applicable county deed records and indicated on all applicable plats filed in the deed records. Each filed multiple well site permit shall contain the address, lot and block, subdivision name and plat volume and page of each lot, tract or parcel located within one thousand (1,000) feet of the multiple well site permit. 
(5)  Prior to the issuance of a multiple well site permit by the city, the operator must place at least one (1) sign on the property located in a conspicuous place or places upon the property at a point or points visible from the nearest right-of-way, street, roadway, public thoroughfare or protected use adjacent to such property. The fire marshal may require additional signage if the pad site fronts on more than one (1) right-of-way, street, roadway, or public thoroughfare. The sign shall indicate that a multiple well site permit to drill multiple wells for gas on this site has been applied for, and shall further set forth that additional information can be acquired by telephoning the applicant/operator at the number indicated on the sign. A permanent sign approved by the fire marshal indicating that a multiple well site permit has been issued shall remain posted at the pad site location for the duration of the multiple well site permit. 
(6)  Prior to the commencement of drilling of each additional gas well on a permitted multiple well site permit pad site, the operator must submit an application for the issuance of a gas well permit, for each such future well, in accordance with this article. 
(7)  All subsequent gas wells drilled on a permitted gas well pad site permit shall comply with all regulations, including the notice and landscape provisions, and all other provisions of this article, except for the distance setback requirements related to drilling a well from a protected use. No variance or waiver for a distance setback from a protected use shall be required for subsequent wells. 
(8)  No multiple well site permit shall be issued for a gas well pad site greater than five (5) acres in surface area. 
(9)  All wells will be set back a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet from the outer pad site boundary. 
(10)  The multiple well site permit shall automatically terminate if drilling of the initial well bore has not commenced within three hundred sixty-five (365) days from the date of the issuance of the gas well permit unless the initial gas well permit is extended by the city council. 
(11)  All gas wells drilled upon a permitted gas well pad site must comply with any drilling distance regulations from a protected use or other structure as required by state law and applicable fire code regulations and all other provisions of this article. 
(12)  With each mobilization to the well site, an approved and executed road damage remediation agreement must be filed with the city. This agreement includes the payment of all applicable fees. By acceptance of any gas well permit issued pursuant to this article, the operator expressly stipulates and agrees to be bound by and comply with the provisions of this article. The terms of this article shall be deemed to be incorporated in any gas well permit issued pursuant to this article with the same force and effect as if this article was set forth verbatim in such gas well permit. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 2, 7-21-09; Ord. No. 1484, § 2, 12-15-09; Ors. No. 1534, § 4, 12-7-10)  
Sec. 10-1060. - Gas well permit application and filing. 
Every application for a gas well permit issued pursuant to this article shall be in writing signed by the operator, or a person duly authorized to sign on his behalf, and filed with the fire marshal. 
(a)  Every application shall be accompanied by a ten thousand dollar ($10,000.00) gas well permit fee, for each well bore. 
(b)  The application shall include the following information: 
(1)  The date of the application and type of gas well permit requested. 
(2)  An accurate legal description of the lease property to be used for the gas operation, the parcel and the production unit and name of the geologic formation as used by the commission. Property recorded by plat should reference subdivision, block and lot numbers. 
(3)  Map showing proposed transportation route and road for equipment, chemicals or waste products used or produced by the gas operation indicating commercial and non-commercial routes. 
(4)  Proposed well name. 
(5)  Surface owner name(s) and address(es) of the pad site property. 
(6)  Operator/applicant name and address and if the operator is a corporation, the state of incorporation, and if the operator is a partnership, the name and addresses of the general partners. 
(7)  Name and address of individual designated to receive notice. 
(8)  Name of representative with regulatory response and supervisory authority over all gas operation site activities and a phone number that is answered on a twenty-four (24) hour basis. 
(9)  Location and description of all improvements and structures within six hundred (600) feet of the well. 
(10)  Owner and address of each parcel of property within one thousand (1,000) feet of the proposed drill site. 
(11)  A surveyed site plan of the proposed operation site shall display a registered professional land surveyor seal, a legend with scale for measurements and a complete legal description. The site plan shall include specific details to the projected location of the major components of the drilling site, the location of all improvements and equipment, including the location of the proposed well(s) and other facilities, including, but not limited to, tanks, city regulated pipelines, compressors, separators, lights, storage sheds, fencing, driveway approaches and any access roads. Surveyed site plan shall show the location of specific wells, pipelines, tanks and reservoir(s) in relationship to existing and proposed water and sanitary sewer lines and any other utility easements. The site plan shall also indicate flood way, floodplain or city recognized drainage ways and the elevation and slope of the pad site which indicates compliance with the then current fill article, impacted vegetation, tree survey, creeks and other topographic features, compliance with the landscaping requirements as set out in section 10-1130 of this article, adjacent buildings and other structures and the measured distance from the well site to these buildings and structures, temporary and permanent fencing and landscaping. 
(12)  The name, address and a phone number that is answered on a twenty-four (24) hour basis of the person to be notified in case of an emergency. 
(13)  The exact and correct acreage and number of wells, if applicable, included in the gas well permit application. 
(14)  Copies of all reports submitted to the Railroad Commission as required by the city. 
(15)  An original executed road damage remediation agreement signed and approved by the city must be filed with the city secretary that provides that the operator shall repair, at his own expense, any damage to roads, streets, or highways caused by the use of heavy vehicles for any activity associated with the preparation, drilling, production, and operation of gas wells. 
(16)  Copies of erosion control and grading plans. 
(17)  A description of the water source to be used during drilling. 
(18)  A copy of any storm water permits or plans filed with any state or federal agency as may be required by state law, federal law, including, but not limited to, the 1987 Water Quality Act, as amended. A copy of the notice of intent shall be submitted to the city public works department three (3) days prior to the commencement of any on-site activity. 
(19)  A copy of the determination by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) of the depth of usable quality ground water and protection thereof. 
(20)  Evidence of insurance and security requirements under this article. 
(21)  A statement, under oath, signed by the operator, or designated representative, that the information submitted with the application is, to the best knowledge and belief of the operator or designated representative, true and correct. 
(22)  Fracture pond permit/approval. 
(23)  A surface reclamation plan. 
(24)  The proposed gathering pipeline route from the well to the transmission pipeline, including all existing and proposed city rights-of-way and public or private property crossed by the proposed gathering pipeline. 
(25)  Noise management plan as outlined in subsection 10-1120(b)(1). 
(26)  All required application and gas well permit fees. 
(27)  A copy of the approved Railroad Commission permit to drill together with attachments and survey plats which are applicable to the drill site. 
(28)  Incorporate, by reference, the conditions of the applicable development plan, and/or planned development zoning district. 
(29)  Specify that no drilling operations (including the construction of internal private access roads) shall commence until the operator has provided the security required by this article. 
No permit shall be issued until a copy of the approved Railroad Commission permit to drill together with all submitted attachments and survey plats which are applicable to the drill and operation sites are submitted to the gas inspector fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 2, 7-21-09; Ord. No. 1484, § 3, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 1534, § 5, 12-7-10)  
Sec. 10-1070. - Issuance of gas well permits. 
(a)  It is the responsibility of the fire marshal to review and approve or disapprove all applications for gas well drilling permits based on the criteria established by this article. The fire marshal, after the filing of a completed application and remittance of all fees, insurance and security per the requirements of this article for a gas well permit, shall determine whether or not the application complies in all respects with the provisions of this article and determine if the proposed well to be drilled or the facility to be installed is in compliance with the distance requirements for the requested gas well permit on the date the completed application is received by the fire marshal. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall apply to any dwellings or buildings for which an application for a building permit has been submitted on the date the application for a gas well permit is filed with the fire marshal. 
(c)  If all the requirements of this article are met, the fire marshal shall issue a gas well permit for the drilling of the well or the installation of the facilities applied for. 
(d)  If the fire marshal denies a gas well permit application for reasons other than lack of required distance as set out in this article for the requested gas well permit, he shall notify the operator in writing of such denial stating the reasons for the denial. Within thirty (30) days of the date of the written decision of the fire marshal to deny the gas well permit, the operator may: 1) cure those conditions that caused the denial and resubmit the application to the fire marshal for approval and issuance of the gas well permit; or 2) file an appeal to the city council under the provisions outlined in this article pursuant to section 10-1190. 
(e)  If the fire marshal determines that the operator has complied with all of the provisions of this article but that the proposed drill site does not comply with the distance requirements of this article the fire marshal shall notify the operator. The operator may modify the well location to be in compliance with the regulations within this article or resubmit the planned development zoning application. (See section 10-1060) 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 2, 7-21-09)  
Sec. 10-1080. - Amended gas well permit application. 
An operator may request to amend a gas well permit application without re-noticing, to relocate a drill site or operation site that is shown on (or incorporated by reference as part of) the application, provided that the distance to protected uses is not decreased. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 2, 7-21-09)  
Sec. 10-1090. - Suspension or revocation of gas well permit; issuance of a citation, effect. 
(a)  If an operator (or its officers, employees, agents, contractors, or representatives) fails to comply with any requirement of a gas well permit (including any requirement incorporated by reference as part of the gas well permit), the fire marshal shall give written notice to the operator specifying the nature of the failure and giving the operator a reasonable time to cure, taking into consideration the nature and extent of the failure, the extent of the efforts required to cure, and the potential impact on the health and welfare of the community. In no event, however, shall the cure period be less than ten (10) days unless the failure presents a violation of the noise provisions, a risk of imminent destruction of property or injury to persons or unless the failure involves the operator's failure to provide periodic reports as required by this article. 
(b)  If the operator fails to correct the noncompliance within ten (10) days from the date of the notice, the fire marshal may suspend or revoke the gas well permit or issue a citation pursuant to the provisions of this article. A citation may be immediately issued for failure to comply with the provisions of subsection 10-1120(b), "Noise." However, if the operator is in compliance with the approved noise management plan, and a violation still occurs, the operator will be given twenty-four (24) hours from notice of noncompliance to correct the violation from an identified source before a citation is issued. Additional extensions of the twenty-four-hour period may be granted in the event that the source of the violation cannot be identified after reasonable diligence by the operator. 
(c)  No person shall carry on any operations performed under the terms of the gas well permit issued under this article during any period of any gas well permit suspension or revocation or pending a review of the decision or order of the city in suspending or revoking the gas well permit. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent the necessary, diligent and bona fide efforts to cure and remedy the default or violation for which the suspension or revocation of the gas well permit was ordered for the safety of persons or as required by the commission. 
(d)  If the operator does not cure the noncompliance within the time specified in this article, the fire marshal, upon written notice to the operator, may notify the Railroad Commission and request that the Commission take any appropriate action. 
(e)  Operator may, within thirty (30) days of the date of the decision of the fire marshal in writing to suspend or revoke a gas well permit, file an appeal to the city council under the provisions outlined in this article pursuant to section 10-1190. 
(f)  If an application for a gas well permit is denied by the fire marshal, nothing herein contained shall prevent a new application from being submitted to the fire marshal for the same well. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 2, 7-21-09)  
Sec. 10-1100. - Periodic reports. 
(a)  The operator shall notify the fire marshal of any changes to the following information within one (1) business week after the change occurs: 
(1)  The name, address, and phone number of the operator; 
(2)  The name, address, and phone number of the person designated to receive notices from the city (which person must be a resident of texas that can be served in person or by registered or certified mail); and 
(3)  The operator's emergency response plan (including "drive-to-maps" from public rights-of-way to each drill site). 
(b)  The operator shall notify the fire marshal of any change to the name, address, and twenty-four (24) hour phone number of the person(s) with supervisory authority over drilling or operations activities within one (1) business day. 
(c)  The operator shall provide a copy of any "incident reports" or written complaints submitted to the commission within thirty (30) days after the operator has notice of the existence of such reports or complaints. 
(d)  Beginning on December 31st after each well is completed, and continuing on each December 31st thereafter until the operator notifies the fire marshal that the well has been abandoned and the site restored, the operator shall submit a written report to the Fire marshal identifying any changes to the information that was included in the application for the applicable gas well permit that have not been previously reported to the city. 
(e)  Beginning on December 31st after each well is permitted by the city, the operator shall provide an operational status report for every well permitted to the operator within the city. The report shall include the well name, API number, lease name, city case number, Commission permit number, Commission lease ID number and current status whether pending, drilling, completing, producing, plugged or abandoned. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 2, 7-21-09)  
Sec. 10-1110. - Insurance, bond and indemnity. 
(a)  General Requirements. The operator shall be required to: 
(1)  Comply with the terms and conditions of this article and the gas well permit issued hereunder. 
(2)  Promptly clear drill and operation sites of all litter, trash, waste and other substances used, allowed, or occurring in the operations, and after abandonment or completion grade, level and restore such property to the same surface conditions as nearly as possible as existed before operations. 
(3)  Indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents, and employees from and against any and all claims, losses, damages, causes of action, suits and liability of every kind, including all expenses of litigation, court costs, and attorney's fees, for injury to or death of any person or for damage to any property arising out of or in connection with the work done by operator under a gas well permit: 
a.  Where such injuries, death or damages are caused by operator's sole negligence or the joint negligence of operator and any other person or entity; and 
b.  Regardless of whether such injuries, death or damages are caused in whole or in part by the negligence of operator. 
(4)  Promptly pay all fines, penalties and other assessments imposed due to breach of any terms of the gas well permit. 
(5)  Promptly restore to its former condition any public property damaged by the gas operation. 
(b)  Bond, irrevocable letter of credit. 
(1)  Prior to the issuance of a gas well permit the operator shall provide the fire marshal with a security instrument in the form of a bond or an irrevocable letter of credit in accordance with this subsection b. Evidence of the execution of a letter of credit shall be submitted to the fire marshal by submitting an original signed letter of credit from the banking institution, with a copy of the same provided to the city secretary. 
a.  During drilling. An operator drilling between one (1) and five (5) wells in the city at any time shall provide a blanket bond or letter of credit that meets the requirements of this subsection (b) in the principal minimum amount of one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00). Such blanket bond or letter of credit shall be increased by fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for the sixth and each additional well being drilled in the city. 
b.  During production. An operator with wells that are producing and for which all drilling operations have ceased shall provide a blanket bond or letter of credit that meets the requirements of this subsection (b) in the principal minimum amounts as follows: 
(i)  Up to seventy-five (75) wells: one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00); 
(ii)  Between seventy-six (76) and one hundred (150) wells: one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00); and 
(iii)  More than one hundred fifty (150) wells: two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00). 
(2)  The city shall be authorized to draw upon such bond or letter of credit to (i) recover any fines or penalties assessed under this article or (ii) to pay the city for the cost of doing any work required to remedy any default by the operator under any provision of this article. If the city determines that a default has occurred in the performance of any requirement or condition imposed by this article, a written notice shall be given to the operator. Such notice shall specify the work to be done, the estimated cost and the period of time deemed to be reasonably necessary for the completion of such work. After receipt of such notice, the operator shall, within the time therein specified, either cause or require the work to be performed, or failing to do so, shall pay over to the city one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the estimated cost of doing the work as set forth in the notice. In no event, however, shall the cure period be less than thirty (30) days unless the failure presents a risk of imminent destruction of property or injury to persons or unless the failure involves the operator's failure to provide periodic reports as required by this article. 
The city shall be authorized to draw against the bond or letter of credit provided hereunder to recover such amount due from the operator. Upon receipt of such monies, the city shall proceed by such mode as deemed convenient and necessary to cause the required work to be performed and completed, but no liability shall be incurred other than for the expenditure of said sum in hand. In the event that the well has not been properly abandoned under the regulations of the commission, such additional money may be demanded from the operator as is necessary to properly plug and abandon the well and restore the drill site in conformity with the regulations of this article. In the event the operator does not cause the work to be performed and fails or refuses to pay over to the city the estimated cost of the work to be done as set forth in the notice, or the issuer of the security instrument refuses to honor any draft by the city against the applicable irrevocable letter of credit or bond the city may proceed to obtain compliance and abate the default by way of civil action against the operator, or by criminal action against the operator, or by both such methods. 
(3)  Requirements for bonds. A bond shall be executed by a reliable bonding or insurance institution authorized to do business in Texas, acceptable to the city. The bond shall become effective on or before the date the gas well permit is issued and shall remain in force and effect for at least a period of six (6) months after the expiration of the gas well permit term or until the well is plugged and abandoned and the site is restored, whichever occurs first. The operator shall be listed as principal and the instrument shall run to the city, as obligee, and shall be conditioned that the operator will comply with the terms and regulations of this article and the city. The original bond shall be submitted to the fire marshal with a copy of the same provided to the city secretary. 
(4)  Requirements for letters of credit. A letter of credit shall be issued by a reliable bank authorized to do business in Texas and shall become effective on or before the date the gas well permit is issued. The letter of credit shall remain in force and effect for at least a period of six (6) months after the expiration of the gas well permit term. If the letter of credit is for a time period less than the life of the well as required by this Article, the operator must agree to either renew the letter of credit or replace the letter of credit with a bond in the amount required by this article, on or before sixty (60) days prior to the expiration date of the letter of credit. If the operator fails to deliver to the city either the renewal letter of credit or replacement bond in the appropriate amount on or before sixty (60) days prior to the expiration date of the letter of credit, the city may draw the entire face amount of the attached letter of credit to be held by the City of Keller as security for operator's performance of its obligations under this article. 
(5)  When the well or wells covered by said irrevocable letters of credit or bond have been properly abandoned in conformity with all regulations of this article, and in conformity with all regulations of the commission and notice to that effect has been received by the city, or upon receipt of a satisfactory substitute, the irrevocable letter of credit or bond issued in compliance with these regulations shall be terminated and cancelled. 
(c)  Insurance. In addition to the bond or letter of credit required pursuant to this article, the operator shall carry a policy or policies of insurance issued by an insurance company or companies authorized to do business in Texas. In the event such insurance policy or policies are cancelled, the gas well permit shall be suspended on such date of cancellation and the operator's right to operate under such gas well permit shall immediately cease until the operator files additional insurance as provided herein. 
(1)  General requirements applicable to all policies. 
a.  The city, its officials, employees, agents and officers shall be endorsed as an "Additional insured" to all policies except employers liability coverage under the operator's workers compensation policy. 
b.  All policies shall be written on an occurrence basis except for environmental pollution liability (seepage and pollution coverage) and excess or umbrella liability, which may be on a claims-made basis. 
c.  All policies shall be written by an insurer with an A- VIII or better rating by the most current version of the A. M. Best Key Rating Guide or with such other financially sound insurance carriers acceptable to the city. 
d.  Deductibles shall be listed on the certificate of insurance and shall be on a "per occurrence" basis unless otherwise stipulated herein. 
e.  Certificates of insurance shall be delivered to the City of Keller, evidencing all the required coverage, including endorsements, prior to the issuance of a gas well permit. 
f.  All policies shall be endorsed with a waiver of subrogation providing rights of recovery in favor of the city. 
g.  Any failure on the part of the city to request required insurance documentation shall not constitute a waiver of the insurance requirement specified herein. 
h.  Each policy shall be endorsed to provide the city a minimum thirty-day notice of cancellation, non-renewal, and/or material change in policy terms or coverage. A ten-day notice shall be acceptable in the event of non-payment of premium. 
i.  During the term of the gas well permit, the operator shall report, in a timely manner, to the fire marshal any known loss occurrence which could give rise to a liability claim or lawsuit or which could result in a property loss. 
j.  Upon request, certified copies of all insurance policies shall be furnished to the city. 
(2)  Standard commercial general liability policy. This coverage must include premises, operations, blowout or explosion, products, completed operations, sudden and accidental pollution, blanket contractual liability, underground resources and equipment hazard damage, broad form property damage, independent contractors' protective liability and personal injury. This coverage shall be a minimum combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000) per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage. 
(3)  Excess or umbrella liability. Five million dollars ($5,000,000) excess when necessary. 
(4)  Environmental pollution liability coverage. 
a.  Operator shall purchase and maintain in force for the duration of the gas well permit, insurance for environmental pollution liability applicable to bodily injury, property damage, including loss of use of damaged property or of property that has not been physically injured or destroyed; cleanup costs; and defense, including costs and expenses incurred in the investigation, defense or settlement of claims; all in connection with any loss arising from the insured site. Coverage shall be maintained in an amount of at least five million dollars ($5,000,000) per loss. 
b.  Coverage shall apply to sudden and accidental, as well as gradual pollution conditions resulting from the escape or release of smoke, vapors, fumes, acids, alkalis, toxic chemicals, liquids or gases, waste material or other irritants, contaminants or pollutants. 
c.  The operator shall maintain continuous coverage and shall purchase extended coverage period insurance when necessary. The extended coverage period insurance must provide that any retroactive date applicable to coverage under the policy precedes the effective date of the issuance of the permit by the city. 
(5)  Control of well. The policy should cover the cost of controlling a well that is out of control, re-drilling or restoration expenses, seepage and pollution damage as first party recovery for the operator and related expenses, including, but not limited to, loss of equipment, experts and evacuation of residents. 
Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) per occurrence/combined single limit. 
Five hundred thousand dollar ($500,000.00) sub-limit endorsement may be added for damage to property for which the operator has care, custody and control. 
(6)  Workers compensation and employers liability insurance. 
a.  Workers compensation benefits shall be Texas statutory limits. 
b.  Employers liability shall be a minimum of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) per accident. 
c.  Such coverage shall include a waiver of subrogation in favor of the city and provide coverage in accordance with applicable state and federal laws. 
(7)  Automobile liability insurance. 
a.  Combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000) per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage. 
b.  overage must include all owned, hired and not-owned automobiles. 
(8)  Certificates of insurance. 
a.  The company must be admitted or approved to do business in the State of Texas, unless the coverage is written by a surplus lines insurer. 
b.  The insurance set forth by the insurance company must be: 
(i)  Underwritten on forms that have been approved by the Texas State Board of Insurance or ISO, or an equivalent policy form acceptable to the city, with the exception of environmental pollution liability and control of well coverage; 
(ii)  Set forth all endorsements and insurance coverage according to requirements and instructions contained herein; and 
(iii)  Shall specifically set forth the notice of cancellation, termination, or change in coverage provisions to the city. All policies shall be endorsed to read "THIS POLICY WILL NOT BE CANCELLED OR NON-RENEWED WITHOUT 30 DAYS ADVANCED WRITTEN NOTICE TO THE OWNER AND THE CITY EXCEPT WHEN THIS POLICY IS BEING CANCELLED FOR NONPAYMENT OF PREMIUM, IN WHICH CASE 10 DAYS ADVANCE WRITTEN NOTICE IS REQUIRED". 
c.  Original endorsements affecting coverage required by this section shall be furnished with the certificates of insurance. 
(d)  Indemnification and express negligence provisions. 
(1)  Each gas well permit issued by the fire marshal shall include the following language: Operator does hereby expressly release and discharge all claims, demands, actions, judgments, and executions which it ever had, or now has or may have, or assigns may have, or claim to have, against the City of Keller, and/or its departments, agents, officers, servants, successors, assigns, sponsors, volunteers, or employees, created by, or arising out of personal injuries, known or unknown, and injuries to property, real or personal, or in any way incidental to or in connection with the performance of the work performed by the operator under a gas well permit. The operator shall fully defend, protect, indemnify, and hold harmless the City of Keller, Texas, its departments, agents, officers, servants, employees, successors, assigns, sponsors, or volunteers from and against each and every claim, demand, or cause of action and any and all liability, damages, obligations, judgments, losses, fines, penalties, costs, fees, and expenses incurred in defense of the City of Keller, Texas, its departments, agents, officers, servants, or employees, including, without limitation, personal injuries and death in connection therewith which may be made or asserted by operator, its agents, assigns, or any third parties on account of, arising out of, or in any way incidental to or in connection with the performance of the work performed by the operator under a gas well permit. THE OPERATOR AGREES TO INDEMNIFY AND HOLD HARMLESS THE CITY OF KELLER, TEXAS, ITS DEPARTMENTS, ITS OFFICERS, AGENTS, SERVANTS, EMPLOYEES, SUCCESSORS, ASSIGNS, SPONSORS, OR VOLUNTEERS FROM ANY LIABILITIES OR DAMAGES SUFFERED AS A RESULT OF CLAIMS, DEMANDS, COSTS, OR JUDGMENTS AGAINST THE CITY, ITS DEPARTMENTS, ITS OFFICERS, AGENTS, SERVANTS, OR EMPLOYEES, CREATED BY, OR ARISING OUT OF THE ACTS OR OMISSIONS OF THE CITY OF KELLER OCCURRING ON THE DRILL SITE OR IN THE COURSE AND SCOPE OF INSPECTING AND PERMITTING THE GAS wellS INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, CLAIMS AND DAMAGES ARISING IN WHOLE OR IN PART FROM THE NEGLIGENCE OF THE CITY OF KELLER OCCURRING ON THE DRILL SITE OR IN THE COURSE AND SCOPE OF INSPECTING AND PERMITTING THE GAS wellS. IT IS UNDERSTOOD AND AGREED THAT THE INDEMNITY PROVIDED FOR IN THIS SECTION IS AN INDEMNITY EXTENDED BY THE OPERATOR TO INDEMNIFY AND PROTECT THE CITY OF KELLER, TEXAS AND/OR ITS DEPARTMENTS, AGENTS, OFFICERS, SERVANTS, OR EMPLOYEES FROM THE CONSEQUENCES OF THE NEGLIGENCE OF THE CITY OF KELLER, TEXAS AND/OR ITS DEPARTMENTS, AGENTS, OFFICERS, SERVANTS, OR EMPLOYEES, WHETHER THAT NEGLIGENCE IS THE SOLE OR CONTRIBUTING CAUSE OF THE RESULTANT INJURY, DEATH, AND/OR DAMAGE. 
(e)  Notice. The individual designated to receive notice shall be a resident of Texas upon whom all orders and notices provided in this article may be served in person or by registered or certified mail. Every operator shall within ten (10) days notify the fire marshal in writing of any change in such agent or mailing address unless operations in the city are discontinued and abandonment is complete. 
(f)  Acceptance and indemnity agreement. The operator who has a net worth of not less than fifty million dollars ($50,000,000.00), as shown in such owner's or operator's most recent audited financial statements, may substitute an acceptance and indemnity agreement in lieu of the bond or irrevocable letter of credit and insurance requirements set forth in this article, provided that such acceptance and indemnity agreement shall be in a form acceptable to, and approved by, the city attorney and the city manager or his designee. The fire marshal may request an annual review of the operator's most recent audited financial statements to assure compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 2, 7-21-09)  
Sec. 10-1120. - Technical regulations. 
(a)  On site requirements. 
(1)  Abandoned wells. All wells shall be abandoned in accordance with the rules of the Railroad Commission and pursuant to section 10-1150 of this article. 
(2)  Blowout prevention. In all cases, blowout prevention equipment shall be used on all wells being drilled, worked-over or in which tubing is being changed. Protection shall be provided to prevent blowout during gas operations as required by and in conformance with the requirements of the commission and the recommendations of the American Petroleum Institute. The operator must equip all drilling wells with adequate blowout preventers, flow lines and valves commensurate with the working pressures involved as required by the Commission. 
(3)  Closed loop mud systems. A closed loop mud system shall be required for all drilling and reworking operations for all gas wells. Gas wells located on an open space of not less than twenty-five (25) acres with no operations to be conducted within one thousand (1,000) feet of a protected use may use a lined earthen pit instead of a closed loop mud system. 
(4)  Compliance. Operator shall comply with all applicable federal, state and city requirements at all times. 
(5)  Discharge. No person shall place, deposit, discharge, or cause or permit to be placed, deposited or discharged, any oil, naphtha, petroleum, asphalt, tar, hydrocarbon substances or any refuse including wastewater or brine from any gas operation or the contents of any container used in connection with any gas operation in or upon any body of water or any private property in the city or in or upon any public Rights-of-way, alleys, streets, lots, storm drain, ditch or sewer, sanitary drain. 
(6)  Drilling notice. The operator shall provide one week (7 days) notice to the fire marshal before the start of drilling operations, fracture stimulation, or work over. The operator shall provide a milestone schedule of future activities that meets the requirements of the fire marshal. 
(7)  Drill stem testing. All open hole formation or drill stem testing shall be done during daytime hours. Drill stem tests may be conducted only if the well effluent during the test is produced through an adequate gas separator to storage tanks and the effluent remaining in the drill pipe prior to the time the tool is closed is flushed to the surface by circulating drilling fluid down the annulus and up the drill pipe. 
(8)  Dust, vibration, odors. All drilling and production operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to minimize so far as practicable, dust, vibration, or noxious odors, and shall be in accordance with the best accepted practices incident to drilling for the production of gas and other hydrocarbon substances in urban areas. A dust mitigation plan shall be submitted to the public works department for all phases of Site development and production. All equipment used shall be constructed and operated so that vibrations, dust, odor or other harmful or annoying substances or effects are minimized by the operations carried on at any drilling or production site or from anything incident thereto to avoid injury to or annoyance of persons living in the vicinity. The site or structures shall not be permitted to become dilapidated, unsightly or unsafe. Proven technological improvements in industry standards of drilling and production in this area shall be adopted as they become available if capable of reducing factors of dust, vibration and odor. 
(9)  Electric lines. All new permanent electric lines to production facilities shall be located underground unless otherwise permitted by the city council. 
(10)  Electric motors. Only electric prime movers or motors shall be permitted for the purpose of pumping wells. No electric power shall be generated on location. All electrical installations and equipment shall conform to the city articles and the appropriate national codes. 
(11)  Emergency response plan. Prior to the commencement of any gas or other hydrocarbons production activities, operator shall submit to the Fire Marshal an emergency response plan establishing written procedures to minimize any hazard resulting from drilling, completion or producing of gas wells. Said plan shall use existing guidelines established by the Commission, Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), Department of Transportation and/or the Environmental Protection Agency and city fire code. A copy of the emergency response plan shall be kept on site during pre-drilling, drilling, fracturing or any other construction activity. 
(12)  Equipment painted. All production equipment on the site shall be painted and maintained at all times, including pumping units, storage tanks, buildings and structures. No company logos or advertisement shall be allowed. 
(13)  Explosives. Use of explosive charges within the city limits shall require a permit issued by the city fire department. 
(14)  Fire notice. In the event of a fire or discovery of a fire, smoke, or unauthorized release of flammable or hazardous materials on any property, the operator shall immediately report such condition to the fire department in accordance with the city fire code. The reporting limits for hazardous materials release shall conform to the requirements of the Railroad Commission and not exceed any State or federal permitting limit. A copy of the hazardous materials release records required by Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) shall be forwarded to the fire marshal on an annual basis. 
(15)  Fire prevention; sources of ignition. Firefighting apparatus and supplies as approved by the fire department and required by any applicable federal, state, or local law shall be provided by the operator, at the operator's cost, and shall be maintained on the drilling site at all times during drilling and production operations. The operator shall be responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of such equipment. Each well shall be equipped with an automated valve that closes the well in the event of an abnormal change in operating pressure. All well heads shall contain an appropriately labeled emergency shut off valve to the well distribution line. 
(16)  Fracturing operations. 
a.  All formation fracture stimulation operations shall be conducted during daytime hours. 
b.  At least one week (7 days) before operations are commenced, the operator shall notify the fire marshal and post a sign at the entrance of the well site advising the public of the date the operations will commence. 
c.  "Flowback" operations to recover fluids used during fracture stimulation shall be exempt from work hour restrictions, subject to noise restrictions of subsection 10-1120(b). 
d.  A watchman shall be required at all times during such operations. 
e.  At no time shall the well be allowed to flow or vent directly to the atmosphere without first directing the flow through separation equipment or into a portable tank. 
(17)  Fresh water fracture ponds. 
a.  Permit required. The construction of a fresh water fracture pond shall require a permit from the city, in accordance to subsection 10-1060(c)(22). 
b.  No construction of the fracture pond shall commence until a permit is issued by the city manager or his designee. 
c.  No fresh water fracture pond may be placed in any city recognized drainage way, FEMA floodplain or floodway, existing city right-of-way or city easements. 
d.  Construction and maintenance of the fresh water fracture pond must comply with all city, state and federal regulations. 
e.  All fracture ponds located on a tract of land not adjacent to a gas drilling pad site shall be located in "SF-LD" Single Family Residential - Low Density, and "LI" Light Industrial zoning districts unless otherwise authorized by the fire marshal for the purpose of reducing total number of fracture ponds. 
f.  The permit or authorization issued by the city shall be maintained on the location at all times during construction of the fresh water fracture pond. 
g.  All ponds shall meet the following requirements: 
(i)  Fresh water fracture ponds shall not be lined with a synthetic impervious liner unless approved by the fire marshal. Existing liners shall be removed at the time any pond is reworked, enlarged, restored or altered unless otherwise authorized by the fire marshal; 
(ii)  The fresh water fracture pond shall be enclosed with open design chain link black or dark green fencing on all four (4) sides; 
(iii)  Ponds shall be maintained in a manner utilizing best management practices to ensure the integrity of pit walls and liners. For purposes of this subsection, "best management practices" shall mean structural, nonstructural and managerial techniques that are recognized to be the most effective and practical means to control water storage in open ponds in an urban or rural setting; 
(iv)  No oil and gas waste by-products or salt water shall be allowed in the fresh water fracture pond; and 
(v)  A sign at a conspicuous place or places on the property near any Right-of-way, street, road, or public thoroughfare. The sign shall provide the operator's phone number for additional information. 
h.  The operator shall enter into a specific surface use agreement with the surface owner that provides for the maintenance and operation of the fracture pond when the pond is no longer under the control or use of the operator or that the operator will restore the property to its condition prior to the construction of the fracture pond. The agreement shall be provided to the city. 
i.  Periodic water quality tests may be required by the city's gas well inspector. All costs for testing shall be borne by the operator or permittee of the fresh water fracture pond. All samples collected for testing shall be witnessed by the fire marshal or other designated city personnel. 
(18)  Fresh water wells. It shall be unlawful to drill any well the center of which, at the surface of the ground, is located within two hundred (200) feet of any existing fresh water well unless a waiver is obtained from the property owner. The measurement shall be in a direct line from the closest well bore to the fresh water well bore. 
a.  The operator of a gas well shall provide the fire marshal with a "pre-drilling" and "post-drilling" water analysis and flow rate from any existing fresh water well within five hundred (500) feet of the gas well. 
b.  An operator may drill a fresh water well in compliance with State law within two hundred (200) feet of the wellbore to use for drilling and completion operations. A fresh water well that is used for drilling and production operations is excluded from the two hundred-foot setback for future gas wells drilled on the permitted pad site. 
c.  A copy of the Texas Water Development Board permit shall be provided to the city engineer along with the geographic coordinates of every water well within five hundred (500) feet of the well bore. 
d.  A copy of all plugging and abandonment reports filed with the state and/or transfer of ownership notice shall be provided to the fire marshal and the city engineer. 
e.  The operator of a gas well shall provide the fire marshal with a "pre-drilling" and "post-drilling" water analysis from the fresh water well if the well is transferred to private or public use. 
(19)  Gas lift compressor. Any on-site compressor used to "lift gas" shall be designed to comply with the requirements of this article. (See subsection 10-1120(d)) 
(20)  Gas processing onsite. Except for a conventional gas separator or line heater, no refinery, processing, treating or absorption plant of any kind shall be constructed, established or maintained on the premises. 
(21)  Grass, weeds, trash. All drill sites shall be kept clear of high grass, weeds, and combustible trash within a radius of one hundred (100) feet around any gas tank or tanks or producing wells. 
(22)  Hazardous plan. Hazardous materials management plan (HMMP) and all material safety data sheets (MSDS) for all hazardous materials that will be located, stored, transported and/or temporarily used on the operations site shall be submitted to the fire marshal for distribution to the director of the emergency management office. 
(23)  Lights. No person shall permit any lights located on any site to be directed in such a manner so that they shine directly on public roads, adjacent property or property in the general vicinity of the site. To the extent practicable, and taking into account safety considerations, site lighting shall be directed downward and internally so as to avoid glare on public roads and adjacent dwellings and Buildings within three hundred (300) feet. 
(24)  Mobilization and demobilization. Mobilization and demobilization shall be prohibited before 9:00 a.m. and after 6:00 p.m. on Sundays. Other than mobilization and demobilization and advancing the bore hole, no other activities shall be allowed on the site on Sundays. 
(25)  Muffling exhaust. Exhaust from any internal combustion engine or compressor, stationary or mounted on wheels, used in connection with the drilling of any well or for use on any production equipment shall not be discharged into the open air unless equipped with an exhaust muffler, or mufflers or an exhaust muffler box constructed of noncombustible materials sufficient to suppress noise and disruptive vibrations and prevent the escape of obnoxious gases, fumes or ignited carbon or soot. 
(26)  Ponds or pits. The following applies for pits used for drilling and completion operations: 
a.  Only a closed loop mud system may be used for gas wells unless the regulations in section subsection 10-1120(a)(3) are met. 
b.  All pits shall be approved by the city manager or his designee. 
c.  All pits and contents shall be de-watered, back-filled and compacted following the schedule established by the statewide rules of the Railroad Commission. 
d.  No drill cuttings, rotary mud or wastewater generated during drilling operations may be buried on site unless permitted by the commission and approved by the city after submission of an acceptable pre-burial test. 
e.  No fresh water fracture pond may be placed in any city recognized drainage way, FEMA floodplain or floodway, existing city right-of-way or city easements. 
f.  Every drill pit used for drilling operations shall be fenced on all open sides during drilling operations and enclosed on all four (4) sides with a chain link fence after drilling operations have ceased. 
g.  No flowback water produced by fracture operations shall be placed in any open pit. 
(27)  Private roads and drill sites. Prior to the commencement of any drilling operations, all private roads used for access to the drill site and the site itself shall be at least fifteen (15) feet wide, drain appropriately, have an overhead clearance of fourteen (14) feet and maintained to prevent dust and mud. All temporary driveway approaches must be approved by the city prior to the commencement of any drilling operations. In particular cases these requirements governing surfacing of private roads may be altered at the discretion of the director of public works after consideration of all circumstances including, but not limited to, the following: distances from public streets and highways; distances from adjoining and nearby property owners whose surface rights are not leased by the operation; the purpose for which the property of such owners is or may be used; topographical features; nature of the soil; and exposure to wind. Watering, wetting or other methods or materials must be used to control the dust on all roads adjacent to residential property in accordance with subsection 10-1120(a)(8). 
A gated permanent approach meeting the city design requirements shall be constructed at the entrance of the access road onto a public street within sixty (60) days after drilling operations have ceased or at the request of the fire marshal. The private road from the drill site to the public road shall be paved with a minimum two-inch HMAC (Type D) top course after drilling operations have ceased and paving shall be completed within the sixty-day timeframe of the completion of the first well as stated above. The operator may propose an alternative road section for consideration and approval by the city director of public works. 
(28)  Reduced emission completion. After fracturing or re-fracturing, operators shall employ appropriate equipment and processes to prevent natural gas and associated vapor releases to the environment. All salable gas shall be directed to the sales line or shut-in and conserved. All wells that have a sales line shall be required to employ reduced emission completion techniques and methods, but operators may request a variance from the Fire Marshal if they believe that reduced emission completion techniques or methods are not feasible or would endanger the safety of personnel or the public. 
Flaring may be allowed in some instances for up to five (5) days as a temporary alternative to venting as approved in writing by the fire marshal. If burning of gases by open flame is authorized by the Fire Marshal then such open flame shall not be located closer than three hundred (300) feet from any building not used in operations on the drilling site, such open flame shall be screened in such a way as to minimize detrimental effects to adjacent property owners, and shall comply with the noise limitations. 
(29)  Salt water wells. No commercial salt water disposal wells shall be located within the city. 
(30)  Signs. 
a.  A sign shall be immediately and prominently displayed at any fencing erected pursuant to section 10-1130 of this article. Such sign shall be made from durable material, maintained in good condition and, unless otherwise required by the Commission, shall have a surface area of not less than two (2) square feet nor more than four (4) square feet and shall be lettered with the following: 
(i)  Well name and number; 
(ii)  Name of operator; 
(iii)  The emergency 911 number; 
(iv)  Telephone numbers of two (2) persons responsible for the well who may be contacted in case of emergency; and 
(v)  Indicate if it is multiple well site. 
b.  Permanent weatherproof signs reading "DANGER NO SMOKING OR OPEN FLAME ALLOWED IN THIS AREA" "PELIGRO NO FUMAR O INICIAR LLAMA EN ESTA AREA" shall be posted immediately upon completion of the well site fencing at the entrance of each well site and tank battery or in any other location approved or designated by the fire chief of the city. Sign lettering shall be four (4) inches in height and shall be red on a white background or white on a red background. Each sign shall include the emergency notification numbers of the Fire department and the operator, well and lease designations required by the Commission. 
c.  In accordance with the Keller Fire Code, Sections 2703.5 and 2703.6, a National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 704 diamond hazard identification signs are required on each tank and at the entrance to the site adjacent to the operator's sign. A label must be located on each tank indicating exact chemicals that may be contained in the tank. Text shall be a minimum of six (6) inches in height, contrasting with the background color. 
(31)  Storage of equipment. On-site storage is prohibited. No equipment shall be stored on the drilling or production operation site, unless it is necessary to the everyday operation of the well. Lumber, pipes, tubing and casing shall not be left on the operation site except when drilling or well servicing operations are being conducted on the site. 
(32)  Storage tanks. All tanks and permanent structures shall conform to the American Petroleum Institute (A.P.I.) specifications unless other specifications are approved by the fire chief. The top of the tanks shall be no higher than ten (10) feet above the terrain surrounding the tanks. All storage tanks shall be equipped with a secondary containment system including lining with an impervious synthetic material. The secondary containment system shall be a minimum of three (3) feet in height and one and one-half (1½) times the contents of the largest tank in accordance with the fire code, and buried at least one (1) foot deep. Drip pots shall be provided at the pump out connections to contain the liquids from the storage tanks. 
a.  Secondary containment shall be required for all equipment. Secondary containment shall be capable of containing a release of one hundred fifty (150) percent of the largest storage container within the containment and have adequate freeboard to contain an average annual rain event. 
b.  Temporary flowback tanks shall be removed within ninety (90) days after completion of the gas well(s) at the pad site unless permission is obtained from the fire marshal to extend the time period for no more than thirty (30) days. 
c.  Each storage tank shall be equipped with a level control devicethat will automatically activate a valve to close the well in the event of excess liquid accumulation in the tank. 
d.  No meters, storage tanks, separation facilities, well heads or flow lines or other aboveground facilities shall be placed in a floodway identified by FEMA on the most current FIRM or the 100-year floodplain without a floodplain development permit obtained from the department of public works. 
e.  All tanks shall be set back at least seventy-five (75) feet from any public street, road, highway or future street, or right-of-way or future rights-of-way in accordance with the City of Keller's Master Thoroughfare Plan the nearest rail of an operating railway. 
f.  Tank batteries, separators and equipment shall be set back at least two hundred (200) feet from the protected use, public building or habitable structure or one hundred (100) feet from the property line, whichever is greater. The setback shall apply for any protected use, public building or habitable structure for which a building permit has been issued on the date of the application for a drilling permit. The distance shall be calculated from the closest tank batteries, well facilities and/or equipment, in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the closest exterior point of the building. 
g.  Tanks, separators, and all other equipment shall be located on the pad site, unless otherwise determined by city council. 
h.  All draining of storage tanks shall have electric pumps to transfer water from storage tanks to the trucks, if tanks and equipment is located off the pad site. 
(33)  Tank battery facilities. Tank battery facilities shall be equipped with a lightning arrestor system. 
(34)  Surface casing. Surface casing shall be run and set in full compliance with the applicable rules and regulations of the commission. 
(35)  Valves. Each well must have a shutoff valve to terminate the well's production. The fire department shall have access to the well site and the shut-off valve in an emergency. Each well shall be equipped with an automated valve that closes the well in the event of any abnormal increase in operating pressure. 
(36)  Vapor recovery for storage tanks. Vapor recovery equipment shall be required for tank batteries that have an estimated rolling annual aggregate emissions rate of twenty-five (25) tons or greater of total volatile organic hydrocarbons per year per well head. Vapor recovery equipment must be operated and maintained in such a way to ensure a ninety-five-percent recovery efficiency between the internal and external atmospheres of the tank(s). 
(37)  Vehicle truck routes. Vehicles associated with drilling and/or production in excess of three (3) tons shall be restricted to such streets designated as either truck routes or commercial delivery routes designated by the City Code wherever capable of being used. The vehicles shall be operated on a truck route wherever capable of being used; they shall be operated on a commercial delivery route only when it is not possible to use a truck route to fulfill the purpose for which such vehicle is then being operated. Commercial delivery route means any street or highway so designated by the city council for the use by any commercial motor vehicle, truck-tractor, trailer, semi-trailer, or any combination thereof. All vehicle truck routes must be approved by the director of public works before the gas well permit is issued and shall be attached to the road remediation agreement. The director of public works shall have the authority to require an alternate route to minimize the impact to surrounding uses. 
(38)  Waste disposal. Unless otherwise directed by the commission, all tanks used for storage shall conform to the following: 
a.  Operator must use portable closed steel storage tanks for storing liquid hydrocarbons. Tanks must meet the American Petroleum Institute standards. All tanks must have a vent line, flame arrester and pressure relief valve. All tanks must be enclosed by a fence applicable to the issued permit classification. 
b.  Except as provided in subsection (3) above, drilling mud, cuttings, liquid hydrocarbons and all other field waste derived or resulting from or connected with the drilling, re-working or deepening of any well shall be discharged into a closed loop mud system. All disposals must be in accordance with the rules of the commission and any other appropriate local, state or federal agency. 
c.  Unless otherwise directed by the commission, waste materials shall be removed from the site and transported to an off-site disposal facility not less often than every thirty (30) days. Water stored in on-site tanks shall be removed as necessary. 
d.  All waste shall be disposed of in such a manner as to comply with the air and water pollution control regulations of the state, this article and any other applicable ordinance of the city. 
(39)  Watchman. The operator must keep a watchman or security personnel on site during the drilling or re-working of a well when other workmen are not on the premises. 
(40)  wellhead status. Wellbores, mouse holes, rat holes, cellars and conduit casings shall be: 
a.  Covered at all times when not in use by one-half (½) inch steel plating, adequately covering the entire bore hole annulus to prevent accidental entrapment of persons or animals; 
b.  Completed through the production casing flange with a metal plate or blind flange bolted across the head; and 
c.  Surrounded with a six-foot tall chain link fence having a gate and lock. 
The cellar shall be filled or closed. The Braden head shall be piped to the surface and open to the atmosphere or have an observable and adequate pressure gauge with operable test valve. 
(41)  Work hours. No construction activities involving excavation of, alteration to, or repair work on any access road or pad site shall occur during nighttime hours or at any time on Sunday. Truck deliveries of equipment and materials associated with drilling and/or production, well servicing, site preparation and other related work conducted on the well site shall be limited to daytime hours except in cases of fires, blowouts, explosions and any other emergencies or where the delivery of equipment is necessary to prevent the cessation of drilling or production. Other than mobilization and demobilization and advancing the bore hole, no other activities shall be allowed on the wells site on Sundays. See subsection 10-1120(a)(24) (mobilization and demobilization). 
(b)  Noise—Gas wells. 
(1)  At the time of application of a planned development rezoning request, the operator shall submit a noise management plan detailing how the equipment used in the drilling, completion, transportation, or production of a well complies with the maximum permissible noise levels of this section. The noise management plan must: 
a.  Identify operation sources and noise impacts; 
b.  Provide documentation establishing the ambient noise level prior to construction of any wellhead, compressor or compression facility; and 
c.  Detail how the impacts will be mitigated. In determining noise mitigation, specific site characteristics shall be considered, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(i)  Nature and proximity of adjacent development, location, and type; 
(ii)  Seasonal and prevailing weather patterns, including wind directions; 
(iii)  Vegetative cover on or adjacent to the site; 
(iv)  Topography; and 
(v)  Description and explanation of the performance effectiveness of noise control devices. 
The operator shall be responsible for verifying compliance with this Section and the noise management plan after the installation of the noise generation equipment. 
(2)  No well shall be drilled, re-drilled or any equipment operated at any location within the city in such a manner so as to create any noise which causes the exterior noise level when measured at the protected use receiver's/receptor's property, that: 
a.  Exceeds the ambient noise level by more than five (5) decibels during daytime hours and more than three (3) decibels during nighttime hours; 
b.  Exceeds the ambient noise level by more than ten (10) decibels over the daytime average ambient noise level during fracturing operations during daytime hours. No fracturing shall be allowed during nighttime hours except for flowback operations related to fracturing as provided in c. below; 
c.  Exceeds the ambient noise level by more than three (3) decibels during flowback operations during nighttime hours; 
d.  Creates timbre/spectrum where any A and C weighted one-third ( 1/3 ) octave band hourly sound-pressure level L(A)eq and L(C)eq exceeds the arithmetic average of the sound-pressure levels of two (2) contiguous one-third ( 1/3 ) octave bands by five (5) dB for center frequencies of 500 Hertz and above, and by eight (8) dB for center frequencies between 160 and 400 Hertz, and by fifteen (15) dB for center frequencies less than or equal to 125 Hertz; 
e.  Exceeds zero (0) Decibels (dbA and dbC) over ambient during normal steady-state operations and production; 
f.  Exceeds ambient by five (5) decibels (dbA and dbC) during daytime hours and three (3) decibels (dba and dbc) during evening hours during normal routine maintenance, such as, but not limited to, vehicle traffic, landscape maintenance and other similar activities, such similar activities being subject to prior exception by the fire marshal. 
(3)  The operator shall be responsible for establishing and reporting to the city a continuous seventy-two-hour pre-drilling ambient noise level prior to the issuance of a gas well permit. The seventy-two-hour time span shall include at least one (1) twenty-four-hour reading during either a Saturday or Sunday. The operator shall use the prior established ambient noise level for the installation of any new noise generation equipment unless the operator can demonstrate that the increase in the ambient noise level is not associated with drilling and production activities located either on or off-site. 
(4)  Adjustments to the noise standards as set forth above in subsections (1)a,, b., and c. of this section may be permitted intermittently upon approval by city council in accordance with the following: 
Permitted 
Increase (dBA) 	Duration of Increase (minutes)* 
10 	5 
15 	1 
20 	less than 1 
 
*Cumulative minutes during any one (1) hour 
(5)  All workover operations shall be restricted to daytime hours. 
(6)  The exterior noise level generated by the drilling, re-drilling or other operations of all gas wells located within six hundred (600) feet of a protected use shall be continuously monitored, to ensure compliance. The cost of such monitoring shall be borne by the operator. If a complaint is received by either the operator or the City of Keller from any protected use the operator shall, within one (1) business day of notice of the complaint, continuously monitor for a seventy-two-hour period the exterior noise level generated by the drilling, re-drilling or other operations to ensure compliance. At the request of the fire marshal, the operator shall monitor the exterior noise level at the source of the complaint. 
(7)  Acoustical blankets, sound walls, mufflers or other alternative methods as approved by the fire marshal may be used to ensure compliance. All soundproofing shall comply with accepted industry standards and be subject to approval by the city's fire department. 
(8)  The sound level meter used in conducting noise evaluations shall meet the American National Standard Institute's Standard for sound meters or an instrument and the associated recording and analyzing equipment which will provide equivalent data. 
(9)  A citation may be immediately issued for failure to comply with the provisions of this Section. However, if the operator is in compliance with the approved noise management plan, and a violation still occurs, the operator will be given twenty-four (24) hours from notice of non-compliance to correct the violation from an identified source before a citation is issued. Additional extensions of the twenty-four-hour period may be granted in the event that the source of the violation cannot be identified after reasonable diligence by the operator. 
(c)  Setbacks. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to drill any well, the center of which, at the surface of the ground, is located: 
a.  Within twenty-five (25) feet from any storage tank, or source of ignition; 
b.  Within seventy-five (75) feet of any public street, road, highway, future street, right-of-way, future rights-of way, or the nearest rail of an operating railway; 
c.  Within six hundred (600) feet from any protected use; 
d.  Within three hundred (300) feet from any public building; 
e.  Within two hundred (200) feet from any habitable structure; 
f.  Within one hundred (100) feet of any building accessory to, but not necessary to the operation of the well; 
g.  Within two hundred (200) feet to any fresh water well not drilled by the operator as a specific source of water used for drilling or completion operations without the express written permission of the owner of the water well; 
h.  Within three hundred (300) feet from an outer boundary surface property line or three hundred (300) feet minus the required zoning setback of the adjacent property at the time of permitting the first gas well unless one of the following conditions exist: 
(i)  The oil, gas and mineral lease precedes the formation of an outer boundary surface property line; or 
(ii)  The adjacent property is owned or under lease by the operator; 
i.  Within two hundred (200) feet from a property line, unless the adjacent property is owned by the operator. The distance may be reduced to one hundred (100) feet by city council; or 
j.  Within seventy-five (75) feet from the outer boundary of a pad site to the operator's property line. 
The distance shall be calculated from the well bore, in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the closest exterior point of any object listed in a. through f. and h. through j. above. The measurement of the six-hundred-foot distance shall be made from the well bore, in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the closest exterior point of the building or boundary line of a public park or property line of a school. 
The measurement for g. above shall be in a direct line from the closest well bore to the fresh water well bore. The distance requirement for fresh water wells is subject to the Railroad Commission regulations and any other state or federal requirements. 
(2)  Distance reduction for protected uses. 
a.  The distance set out in subsection (c) of this section may be reduced to four hundred (400) feet from any protected use, with a: 
(i)  Waiver granted by the city council; or 
(ii)  Written notarized waivers granted by all the protected use property owners within a six hundred-foot radius around the proposed well, pursuant to section 10-1060 of this article. 
b.  The distance set out in subsection (c) of this section may be reduced to three hundred (300) feet from any protected use, with a: 
(i)  Waiver granted by the city council; and 
(ii)  Written notarized waivers granted by all the protected use property owners within a six hundred-foot radius around the proposed well, pursuant to section 10-1060 of this article. 
(d)  Lift and line compressor stations—Natural gas facilities. 
(1)  Lift and line compressor noise regulations. For purposes of this subsection, "Operator" shall refer to either the pipeline operator or the gas well operator, as applicable. 
a.  Maximum permitted sound levels for all lift or line compressors shall be limited by the following: 
(i)  A measured sound level not to exceed 68.0 dBA Leq for a period of time as determined by the fire marshal, at five (5) feet in height and ten (10) feet in distance from all sides of the enclosure; and 
(ii)  A measured low frequency noise of C-scale not to exceed 88 dBC Leq for a period of time as determined by the fire marshal, at five (5) feet in height and ten (10) feet in distance from all sides of the enclosure. 
b.  Noise measurement will be taken at ten (10) feet from the compressor station to determine ambient. To determine compliance with the noise requirements all measurements will be taken at ten (10) feet from the source. 
(2)  Lift compressors. 
a.  Lift compressors shall be allowed in all zoning districts, but shall be restricted to the gas drilling pad site. 
b.  Except as outlined below, lift compressors shall be required to meet all the noise standards of subsection 10-1120(a), "On-site requirements." [subsection 10-1120(b), Noise—gas wells] 
(i)  Temporary lift compressor for each well shall be classified as temporary for six (6) months for noise regulations purposes and shall be allowed five (5) dBA over ambient during the day and three (3) dBA over ambient at night as measured at the property line of a protected use. 
(ii)  No compressor shall be considered temporary if installed within six (6) months of removal of the initial compressor for that well. 
(iii)  Permanent lift compressors shall be required to meet the zoning noise requirements for their zoning location as outlined in subsection (1) above. 
(iv)  Sound blankets shall be permitted for noise abatement on temporary lift compressors. 
(v)  No sound blankets shall be permitted for permanent lift compressors. All acoustical structures for permanent compressors must be constructed of permanent material constructed of metal, masonry or other structurally sound material as approved by the city council that significantly screens the equipment, is painted in a non-contrasting soft earth tone color to match the nearby surroundings as nearly as possible and meets all applicable building and fire codes. 
c.  All lift compressors shall be set back a minimum of three hundred (300) feet from any protected use, public building or habitable structure property line not necessary to the operation of the compressor. Equipment and buildings not part of the operation of the compressor shall be set back a minimum of two hundred (200) feet from the protected use, public building or habitable structure or one hundred (100) feet from the property line, whichever is greater. 
d.  All compressor and associated equipment and buildings shall be enclosed by an eight-foot security fence constructed per section 10-1130 "fences and landscaping" of this article. 
e.  One (1) three-inch caliper tree shall be planted every forty (40) linear feet along the property line abutting a public right-of-way. No heavy equipment, including but not limited to trucks, tractors, trailers, bulldozers, bobcat tractors, trenchers, compressors and hoists shall be allowed inside the critical root zone of any protected tree on any compressor site without the specific approval of the director of community development. This requirement shall supersede other landscaping requirements, except for the tree preservation and/or planting percentage requirements in section 10-1130. 
f.  All equipment or buildings associated with the operation of the compressor located in or within six hundred (600) feet of residentially used property or from the public right-of-way shall be screened from public view by appropriate landscaping, berming, structure or wall constructed of metal, masonry or other structurally sound material as approved bythe city council that significantly screens the equipment and is painted in a non-contrasting soft earth tone color to match the nearby surroundings as nearly as possible. 
g.  Secondary containment. Secondary containment shall be required around all compressor stations. All secondary containment must meet the requirements of subsection (a)(32) of section 10-1120, "Technical regulations." 
h.  Exhaust from any internal combustion engine or compressor, stationary or mounted on wheels, used in connection with the Drilling of any well or for use on any production equipment shall not be discharged into the open air unless it is equipped with an exhaust muffler or mufflers or an exhaust muffler box constructed of non-combustible materials sufficient to suppress noise and disruptive vibrations and prevent the escape of noxious gases, fumes or ignited carbon or soot. 
i.  All facilities shall be inspected by the fire marshal for compliance with relative fire codes prior to operation of the compressor. 
(3)  Line compressors. 
a.  Line compressors shall be permitted only in non-residential zoning districts. 
b.  Setback. 
(i)  All line compressors shall be set back a minimum of one thousand (1,000) feet from any protected use. The setback from a protected use may be reduced to six hundred (600) feet provided the line compressor is fully enclosed. Such a reduction to six hundred (600) feet must be requested at the time of the application for a planned development district for gas well uses. 
(ii)  All line compressors shall be set back six hundred (600) feet from all public buildings and habitable structures not necessary to the operation of the compressor. 
(iii)  Equipment and buildings not part of the operation of the compressor shall be set back a minimum of two hundred (200) feet from the protected use, public building or habitable structure or one hundred (100) feet from the property line, whichever is greater. 
c.  Line compressors located in non-residential zoning districts shall be required to meet the following standards: 
(i)  Line compressors stations located in non-residential zoning districts shall meet the noise standards as set out in subsection (1) above. Landscaping, buffering or acoustical structures shall be required as required by this section and as required by the zoning regulations for the applicable zoning district. 
(ii)  No sound blankets shall be allowed. 
(iii)  All acoustical structures must be constructed of permanent material constructed of metal, masonry or other structurally sound material as approved by the city council that significantly screens the equipment is a non-contrasting soft earth tone color to match the nearby surroundings as nearly as possible and meets all applicable building and fire codes. 
(iv)  All facilities shall be inspected by the fire marshal for compliance with relative fire codes, and the fire marshal prior to operation of the compressor. 
(v)  Exhaust from any internal combustion engine or compressor, stationary or mounted on wheels shall not be discharged into the open air unless it is equipped with an exhaust muffler, or mufflers or an exhaust muffler box constructed of noncombustible materials sufficient to suppress noise and disruptive vibrations and prevent the escape of noxious gases, fumes or ignited carbon or soot. 
d.  Line compressors shall be permitted in all other zoning districts only by approval of city council. In order city council to grant a special exception, a site plat must be submitted and approved. City council shall grant the application only when the location of the compressor is clearly defined on the site plan by the applicant; and the compressor will be compatible with the existing uses and the development of adjacent properties either as filed, or subject to such requirements as the city council finds necessary to protect and maintain the stability of adjacent properties. 
e.  All compressor and associated equipment and buildings shall be enclosed by an eight-foot security fence constructed per section 10-1130 "Fences and landscaping" of this article. 
f.  One (1) three-inch caliper tree shall be planted every forty (40) linear feet along the property line abutting a public right-of-way. No heavy equipment, including but not limited to trucks, tractors, trailers, bulldozers, bobcat tractors, trenchers, compressors and hoists shall be allow inside the critical root zone of any protected tree on any compressor site without the specific approval of the director of community development. This requirement shall supersede other landscaping requirements, except for the tree preservation and/or planting percentage requirements in section 10-1130. 
g.  All equipment, that is located in or within six hundred (600) feet of residentially used property or from the public right-of-way shall be screened from public view by appropriate landscaping, berming, structure or wall constructed of metal, masonry or other structurally sound material as approved by the city council that significantly screens the equipment and is painted in a non-contrasting soft earth tone color to match the nearby surroundings as nearly as possible. 
h.  Secondary containment shall be required around all compressor stations. All secondary containment must meet the requirements of subsection (a)(32) of section 10-1120, "Technical regulations." 
i.  In addition to the regulations set out above, line compressors located in a non-residential zoning district adjacent to residential zoning shall be required to meet the following standards: 
(i)  The eight-foot security fence constructed per section 10-1130 "Fences and landscaping" shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from the residential property line and a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the public right-of-way. 
(ii)  A ten-foot landscaped bufferyard along the entire length of the boundary line between any compressor station site and the residential zoning shall be required and maintained. The bufferyard shall consist of an open space of grass and other landscaping that screens or blocks vision, noise pollutants and other negative by products. The bufferyard shall be required even when an alley is located between the compressor site and the residential district. 
(iii)  A minimum twenty-foot (20') landscaped bufferyard shall be required along all street frontages across the street from residential zoning to screen the view of the property from the public rights-of-way. 
(iv)  A minimum of one (1) three-inch caliper large canopy tree, as defined in Chapter 6 of the Zoning Ordinance, with a mature height of twenty-five (25) feet shall be required every forty (40) feet and screening shall be provided using hedges, berms or mass planting to a height of not less than twenty-four (24) inches with live groundcover. 
(v)  The bufferyard is intended to serve as a buffer between the compressor station and the residential zoned property. Structures and equipment or any type of storage shall not be permitted in the bufferyard. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 2, 7-21-09; Ord. No. 1484, §§ 4—6, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 1676, § 2, 1-21-14)  
Sec. 10-1130. - Fences and landscaping. 
(a)  Fences. All pad sites and off-site fracture ponds shall be secured with a permanent fence with a secured gate and Knox box as follows: 
(1)  The fence shall be at least eight (8) feet in height. The height may be reduced to six (6) feet, with approval from city council; 
(2)  Support posts shall be set in concrete and shall be imbedded into the ground to a depth sufficient to maintain the stability of the fence; 
(3)  The pad site shall be completely enclosed by a masonry fence. An alternative temporary fence material may be approved by city council; 
(4)  Fences shall not be required on drill sites during initial drilling, completion or re-working operations as long as twenty-four-hour on-site supervision is provided. A secured entrance gate on the access road containing a Knox box shall be required and all gates are to be kept locked when the operator or his employees are not on the premises; and 
(5)  The area to be fenced may be increased or reduced as determined by city council. 
(b)  Gate specifications. All fences shall be equipped with at least one (1) gate. The gate shall meet the following specifications: 
(1)  Each gate shall not be less than twelve (12) feet wide and be composed of two (2) gates, each of which is not less than six (6) feet wide, or one (1) sliding gate not less than twelve (12) feet wide. If two (2) gates are used, gates shall latch and lock in the center of the span; 
(2)  The gates shall be of black or dark green metal construction that meets the applicable specifications, or of other approved material that are at least as secure as a chain link fence and shall be included in the metal or wrought iron portion of the fence; 
(3)  The gates shall be provided with a combination catch and locking attachment device for a padlock, and shall be kept locked except when being used for access to the site; 
(4)  Gates shall be designed so that they do not interfere or obstruct the public rights-of-way; and 
(5)  Operator must provide the fire chief with a "Knox Padlock" or "Knox Box with a key" to access the well site to be used only in case of an emergency. 
(c)  Landscaping. 
(1)  All gas well, compressor and fracture pond permits will require tree preservation and/or planting measures. A tree canopy requirement through preservation and/or planting will apply as follows: 
a.  A forty (40) percent requirement in all zoning districts. 
b.  Payment to the tree fund of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per diameter inch will be required for twenty-five (25) percent of the removed trees greater than six (6) inches on pad sites located in all zoning districts. 
c.  Masonry screening walls shall be one hundred (100) percent screened with shrubs where visible from public rights-of-way and residential uses. Shrubs shall be a minimum of two (2) feet in height at time of planting. Shrubs shall be planted and maintained so as to form a continuous, unbroken, solid visual screen which will be three (3) feet high within one (1) year after time of planting. Planting requirements may be reduced by city council. 
The following requirements shall apply to all wells, including wells located along city rights-of-way. 
a.  A minimum retention of twenty-five (25) percent of the existing trees will be required as with other land uses unless removal necessary for location of equipment as determined by the Fire Marshal. 
b.  No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the same species may be planted at one (1) site. 
c.  A minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the planted trees must be an evergreen species. 
d.  A minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of the planted trees must be located between the gas well site and protected uses or public right-of-way. An administrative waiver of the seventy-five-percent placement can be approved by the director of community development with proof that the proposed planting will screen the views into the well site from the protected uses. 
e.  The percent coverage is established by the actual canopy coverage area retained and tree plantings. For planted trees, two-thousand (2,000) square feet will be credited for large canopy trees, seven hundred (700) square feet will be credited for medium canopy trees and one hundred (100) square feet will be credited for small canopy trees at normal grow out. 
f.  The minimum size of trees planted will be three (3) inches in diameter measured one (1) foot above ground level. If the tree is multi trunk, the main stem will be given full credit for its diameter and all other stems will receive one-half (½) credit. The total of all must be three (3) inches or greater. All planted trees will be credited its canopy coverage at normal grow out. 
g.  All trees that die within two (2) years of the date of project completion will be replaced by another replacement tree. The replacement tree carries the same two-year replacement requirement. A replacement of any tree that dies within two (2) years of planting will be replaced by the operator or agent and a new two-year guarantee will begin at the time of replacement. 
h.  All other interpretations of the tree canopy coverage and regulations will be made by the director of community development and/or the designated city board or commission. 
i.  Landscaping shall be installed no later than one hundred eighty (180) days after completion of the first well. 
(2)  Except as allowed in subsection (3) below, Fracture ponds established for the intent of storing and supplying water for Fracturing operations are required to comply with the city's tree preservation ordinance. The document shall identify the delineated scope of work area of any surface disruption related to the "Fracture pond" installation, operations and shall exhibit any existing tree canopy coverage based on the applicable zoning classification. 
(3)  All landscaping must be installed in accordance with the provisions of this article. City council may permit payment to the city's tree fund at a rate of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per diameter of caliper inch or as determined by Council in lieu of planting. 
_____ 
(4)  The following list of trees is considered desirable and adapted trees for the Keller area. Planting of trees from this list is acceptable. Other trees will be considered by the Director of Community Development and granted on a case-by-case basis. The approval of additional species will be judged on adaptability, long-term health and growing characteristic of the tree type. 
Common Name 	Scientific Name 	Canopy 
Size 
Redbud 	Cercis Canadensis 	Small 
Cherry Laurel 	Prunus caroliniana 	Medium 
Eve's Necklace 	Sophora affinis 	Medium 
Golden Raintree 	Koelrueteria paniculata 	Medium 
Cado Maple 	Acer saccharum 	Large 
Red Maple 	Acer rubrum 	Large 
Bigtooth Maple 	Acer grandidentatum 	Large 
Bur Oak 	Quercus macrocarpa 	Large 
Chinquapin Oak 	Quercus muhlenbergii 	Large 
Live Oak 	Quercus virginiana 	Large 
Shumard Red Oak 	Quercus shumardii 	Large 
Texas Red Oak 	Quercus texana 	Large 
Post Oak 	Quercus stallata 	Large 
Blackjack Oak 	Quercus marilandica 	Large 
Pecan 	Carya Illinoensis 	Large 
Lacebark Elm 	Ulmas parvifolia 	Large 
Cedar Elm 	Ulmas crassifolia 	Large 
American Elm 	Ulmas Americana 	Large 
Bald Cypress 	Taxodium distichum 	Large 
Black Walnut 	Carya nigra 	Large 
Green Ash 	Fraxinus pennsylvanica 	Large 
Texas Ash 	Fraxinus 	Large 
Southern Magnolia 	Magnolia grandiflora 	Large 
 
_____ 
(5)  Landscaping and planting designs that incorporate xeriscape and drought tolerant principles may be considered on a case-by-case basis by the city council. 
(6)  The city council may waive or reduce any of the above stated landscaping requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 2, 7-21-09)  
Sec. 10-1140. - Cleanup and maintenance. 
(a)  Clean-up after well servicing. After the well has been completed or plugged and abandoned, the operator shall clean the site, complete restoration activities and repair all damage to public property caused by such operations within sixty (60) days. 
(b)  Clean-up after spills, leaks and malfunctions. After any spill, leak or malfunction, the operator shall remove or cause to be removed to the satisfaction of the fire chief and the city engineer all waste materials from any public or private property affected by such spill, leak or malfunction. Clean-up operations must begin immediately. If the owner fails to begin site clean-up immediately, the fire marshal may then employ any clean-up expert or experts or other contractors or suppliers of special services, or may incur any other expenses for labor and material which the fire marshal deems necessary to clean-up such spill, leak or malfunction. 
(c)  Free from debris. The public street entrance and property on which a well site is located shall at all times be kept free of mud, debris, pools of water or other liquids, contaminated soil, weeds, brush, trash or other waste material within a radius of one hundred (100) feet around any separators, Tanks and producing wells. 
(d)  Painting. All production equipment shall be painted and maintained at all times, including wellheads, pumping units, tanks, secondary containment and buildings or structures. When requiring painting of such facilities, the fire marshal shall consider the deterioration of the quality of the material of which such facility or structure is constructed, the degree of rust, and its appearance. Paint shall be of a neutral color, compatible with surrounding uses. Neutral colors shall include sand and unobtrusive shades of black or dark green. No company logos or advertisement shall be allowed. 
(e)  Blowouts. In the event of the loss of control of any well, operator shall immediately take all reasonable steps to regain control regardless of any other provision of this article and shall notify the fire marshal as soon as practicable. The fire marshal shall certify in writing, briefly describing the same, to the city manager. If the fire marshal, in his opinion, believes that danger to persons and property exists because of such loss of well control and that the operator is not taking or is unable to take all reasonable and necessary steps to regain control of such well, the fire marshal may then employ any well control expert or experts or other contractors or suppliers of special services, or may incur any other expenses for labor and material which the fire marshal deems necessary to regain control of such well. The city shall then have a valid lien against the interest in the well of all working interest owners to secure payment of any expenditure made by the city pursuant to such action of the fire marshal in gaining control of said well. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 2, 7-21-09)  
Sec. 10-1150. - Plugged and abandoned wells. 
(a)  Surface requirements for plugged and abandoned well. Whenever abandonment occurs pursuant to the requirements of the Railroad Commission, the operator abandoning shall be responsible for the restoration of the well site to its original condition as nearly as practicable, in conformity with the regulations of this article. 
(b)  Abandonment shall be approved by the fire marshal after restoration of the drill site has been accomplished in conformity with the following requirements at the discretion of the fire marshal: 
(1)  The derrick and all appurtenant equipment thereto shall be removed from drill site; 
(2)  All tanks, towers, and other surface installations shall be removed from the drill site; 
(3)  All concrete foundations, piping, wood, guy anchors and other foreign materials regardless of depth, except surface casing, shall be removed from the site, unless otherwise directed by the Railroad Commission; 
(4)  All holes and depressions shall be filled with clean, compactable soil; 
(5)  All waste, refuse or waste material shall be removed from the drill site; 
(6)  During abandonment, operator shall comply with all applicable sections in this article; and 
(7)  A five-foot no-build easement around the center of the plugged and abandoned well bore shall be required and recorded in the applicable county deed records. 
(C)  Abandoned well requirement. The operator shall furnish the following to the fire marshal: 
(1)  A copy of the W-3A "Notice of Intention to Plug & Abandon" and "W-3 Plugging Record" forms on the same date these forms are submitted to the commission; and 
(2)  A forty-eight-hour notice of intention to abandon under the provisions of this section and stating the date such work will be commenced. Abandonment may then be commenced on or subsequent to the date so stated. 
All wells shall be abandoned in accordance with the rules of the Commission; however, all well casings and cellars shall be cut and removed to a depth of at least three (3) feet below the surface. A permanent abandonment marker pipe, with the well identity and location permanently inscribed, shall be welded to the casing and shall be at least four (4) inches in diameter with a length of four (4) feet visible above the ground level. 
(d)  Surface reclamation plan requirements. Each operator must submit as part of the gas well permit application a surface reclamation plan that must include information outlined in this subsection, in the degree of detail necessary to demonstrate that full site reclamation can be accomplished. 
The reclamation plan must include: 
(1)  Measures to be taken to restore property to allow use under the city comprehensive plan; 
(2)  The control of surface water drainage and of water accumulation and measures to be taken during the reclamation process to provide for the protection of the quantity and quality of surface and groundwater systems; 
(3)  Cleaning up polluted surface and ground water; 
(4)  Backfilling, soil stabilization, compacting, grading, and appropriate re-vegetation; 
(5)  Soil reconstructions, replacement, and stabilization; 
(6)  Configuration of the reshaped topography; 
(7)  Waste disposal; 
(8)  A plan for re-vegetation of affected lands; 
(9)  Road reclamation; and 
(10)  Other practices necessary to ensure all disturbed areas will be reclaimed. 
(e)  Abandonment requirements prior to new construction. All abandoned or deserted wells or drill sites shall meet the most current abandonment requirements of the commission and this article prior to the issuance of any building permit for development of the property. No structure shall be built over an abandoned well. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 2, 7-21-09)  
Sec. 10-1160. - Oil and gas pipelines technical and permitting regulations. 
(a)  General regulations. 
(1)  As determined in the sole, but reasonable, discretion of the city, pipelines may not interfere with or damage existing utilities, including but not limited to: water, sewer or gas hlines, storm drains, electric lines or the facilities of any public utilities located in public rights-of-way, utility easements or other city-owned property or in private residential areas. 
(2)  The pipeline operator shall be required to comply with all regulations regarding noise in subsection 10-1120(b) of this article. 
(3)  The pipeline operator shall be responsible to grade, level and restore the property affected by pipeline construction to the same surface condition, as nearly practicable, as existed before operations were first commenced within thirty (30) days after completion of the pipeline. 
(4)  The pipeline operator shall construct, repair and/or maintain all pipelines so as to meet or exceed the applicable minimum criteria established by the statutory or regulatory requirements of the state and federal governments for such pipeline. 
(5)  At least thirty (30) calendar days prior to the commencement of any pipeline construction, the pipeline operator shall give written mailed notice to the city, to all residents, tenants and property owners that are located adjacent to the proposed pipeline. The mailing shall include the operator's publication on pipeline safety. 
(6)  At the time the required pipeline records are submitted to the Railroad Commission, the pipeline operator shall provide the city the following information, including GPS information sufficient to locate the pipelines in the future, including the beginning and end points of the pipeline and sufficient points in between the pipeline route and the depth of cover information. This information shall be submitted to the city in a format compatible with the city's own GIS system: 
a.  As-built or record drawings of the pipelines. Accuracy of the record drawings shall meet a survey level of one (1) foot to fifty thousand (50,000) feet. The scale of the record drawings shall be a minimum of one (1) inch to forty (40) feet. The drawings shall also be supplied in a DFF digital file format with the location tied to at least one (1) nearby GPS (global positioning system) city monument. If the new pipeline length exceeds one thousand (1,000) feet within the city, the pipeline shall be tied to at least two (2) GPS city monuments; 
b.  The origin point and the destination of the pipeline; 
c.  The substance to be transported; 
d.  A copy of the substance material safety data sheet (MSDS); 
e.  Engineering plans, drawings and/or maps with summarized specifications showing the horizontal location, covering depths, and location of shutoff valves of the subject pipeline. Drawings shall show the location of other pipelines and utilities that are crossed or paralleled within fifteen (15) feet of the pipeline right-of-way; 
f.  Detailed cross-section drawings for all public rights-of-way and easement crossings on City property as permitted by the city; and 
g.  A list of the names and mailing addresses of all the property owners, residents and tenants adjacent to the pipeline construction. 
(7)  A pipeline operator that transports gas, oil, liquids or hydrocarbons through a pipeline located in the city shall be a member in good standing with the one call system or other approved excavation monitoring system as required by state law. The pipeline operator that transports gas, oil, liquids or hydrocarbons through a pipeline shall contract for service with the selected underground utility coordinating system for a minimum of five (5) years unless there is an agreement to change to an alternate system between the city and the pipeline operator. Said pipeline operator shall maintain such services without interruption for the life of the pipeline permit and as required under this section. 
(8)  At the time of permitting and each year thereafter that the pipeline remains active, each pipeline operator shall provide to the city engineer, the fire marshal and the chief of police the names, mailing addresses and telephone numbers of at least two (2) primary persons, officers or contacts available on a twenty-four (24) hour basis and at least two (2) alternative persons, officers or contacts to be reached in the event that the primary contacts are unavailable who: 
a.  Can initiate appropriate actions to respond to an emergency; 
b.  Have access to information on the location of the closest shutoff valve to any specific point in the city; and 
c.  Can furnish the common name of the material then being carried by the pipeline. 
Any change in the above information must be provided to the city by contacting the fire marshal prior to such change. 
(9)  Each pipeline operator shall file a copy of all initial or follow-up reports provided to the U.S. Department of Transportation or the Railroad Commission of Texas on unsafe pipeline conditions, pipeline emergencies or pipeline incidents within the city concurrently with the city. In addition, such pipeline operator shall file any initial or follow-up reports filed with state and federal environmental regulatory agencies pertaining to pipeline releases within the city concurrently with the city. 
(10)  Every pipeline operator shall be required to file with the city an annual verified report in letter form on or before June 30th of each year to cover a reporting period of the previous June 1st through May 31st. Said written report shall contain a statement that the pipeline has no outstanding safety violations within the City of Keller as determined in an inspection or audit by either the Railroad Commission of Texas and/or the U.S. Department of Transportation with regard to any pipeline operating within the city. Alternatively, if there are any safety violations as determined by the Railroad Commission and/or the U.S. Department of Transportation that have not been corrected, these shall be described to the city with an action plan to correct the safety violations. Said action plan shall include a timeline for corrective action and the individual or firm responsible for each action. 
(b)  City regulated pipelines—Permit required. 
(1)  City regulated pipelines shall adhere to all standards outlined in subsection (a) of this section. Federal and state statutory or regulatory requirements shall apply to pipelines between the well and the point of custody transfer. Prior to the transport of gas, oil, liquids or hydrocarbons, the operator shall provide to the city certification from a professional engineer registered with the State of Texas that the design and installation of the pipelines meet all state and federal requirements. 
(2)  Prior to pipeline construction and the issuance of notice required in subsection (a)(5) of this section, a pipeline operator shall obtain a pipeline permit from the city for all city regulated pipelines. Exceptions to this permitting requirement are those pipelines from the well to the first point of custody transfer and for construction necessary to respond to a pipeline emergency. 
(3)  At the same time the operator submits a gas well drilling permit application, the operator shall require the pipeline operator to submit a proposed pipeline route from the well bore to the transmission line, for all city regulated pipelines. 
(4)  The pipeline operator shall be required to submit an application for a pipeline permit to the city prior to making any offer or initiating any negotiation or action to acquire any easement or other property right to construct, install, maintain, repair, replace, modify, remove or operate a pipeline in private residential areas. 
(5)  The pipeline operator shall backfill all trenches and compact such trenches to ninety-five (95) percent standard proctor density in six-inch lifts and construct the pipeline so as to maintain a minimum depth of ten (10) feet below the finished grade except in public rights-of-way, where minimum cover to the top of the pipe shall be at the discretion of the city based on existing or planned utilities. During the backfill of any pipeline excavations in open cut sections, the pipeline operator shall bury "buried pipeline" warning tape one (1) foot above any such pipeline to warn future excavators of the presence of a buried pipeline. The city engineer may also require that a proposed or existing pipeline be relocated should it conflict with the proposed alignment and depth of a gravity dependent utility. All backfill compacting shall be monitored and tested by a city approved materials testing lab. 
(6)  The pipeline operator shall equip all city regulated pipelines with an automated pressure monitoring system that detects leaks and shuts off any line or any section of line that develops a leak. In lieu of such system, the pipeline operator may have twenty-four-hour pressure monitoring of the pipeline system which provides monitoring of the pipeline within the city limits. 
(7)  Review by the development review committee for all proposed pipelines through private residential areas shall be required prior to the issuance of a permit for the commencement of pipeline construction. 
(8)  A pipeline permit application shall be required as follows: 
a.  Applications for a city regulated pipeline or other activities regulated by this subsection shall be submitted to the city in a form prescribed by the city. 
b.  Plans submitted with each application for a pipeline permit shall be in a format approved by the city showing the dimensions and locations of the pipeline and related items or facilities, as well as all proposed lift stations, pumps or other service structures related to such pipeline and the location, type and size of all existing utilities, drainage, right-of-way and roadway improvements. The plans must additionally show the elevation and location of all known public utilities within fifteen (15) feet of the centerline of the proposed pipeline. Any application that fails to meet these requirements will be returned unfiled to the applicant. All plans shall be designed and stamped by a registered professional engineer in the State of Texas. 
c.  The following information shall be provided in the application: 
(i)  The name, business addresses and telephone numbers of the pipeline operator; 
(ii)  The names, titles and telephone numbers of the following: 
1.  The person signing the application on behalf of the pipeline operator; 
2.  The person designated as the principal contact for the submittal; and 
3.  The person designated as the twenty-four (24) hour emergency contact; 
(iii)  The origin point and the destination of the proposed subject pipeline; 
(iv)  A text description of the general location of the proposed subject pipeline; 
(v)  A description of the substance to be transported through the proposed subject pipeline; 
(vi)  A copy of the substance material safety data sheet (MSDS); 
(vii)  Engineering plans, drawings and/or maps with summarized specifications showing the horizontal location, covering depths and location of shutoff valves of the proposed subject pipeline. To the extent that information can be obtained, drawings shall show the location of other pipelines and utilities that will be crossed or paralleled within fifteen (15) feet of the proposed subject pipeline right-of-way; 
(viii)  A description of the consideration given to matters of public safety and the avoidance, as far as practicable, of existing habitable structures and private residential areas; 
(ix)  Detailed cross section drawings for all public street right-of-way and easement crossings; 
(x)  The proposed method or methods to be used for the installation of the pipeline; 
(xi)  Methods to be used to prevent both internal and external corrosion; 
(xii)  A binder or certificates of all bonds and insurance; and 
(xiii)  A proposed alignment strip map showing name and address of all affected property owners. 
(c)  Development review committee (DRC). 
(1)  After the filing of an administratively complete application, the development review committee shall review all applications for pipelines located in a private residential area. For other pipeline locations, an administrative conference may be conducted to seek resolution of any substantive, non-resolvable technical issues. If deemed necessary by the city, a third-party technical advisor may be employed as set out in section 10-1180. The costs associated with the technical advisor shall be borne by the pipeline operator. 
(2)  If the city council determines that the city should obtain an independent study or analysis of an application to construct a new pipeline, the city shall engage duly qualified independent consultant(s) or contractor(s) to conduct such special studies or analyses as required to fully evaluate and act upon an application for a new pipeline as set forth in section 10-1180. The actual cost for said consultant or contractor, including the cost of any inspections deemed necessary by the city council or otherwise required, shall be paid by the pipeline operator. 
(3)  An application for a planned development zoning district shall be required prior to the approval of a pipeline permit. The applicant shall be in accordance with regulations within section 10-1040 of this article. 
(4)  Exception: An application for a planned development zoning district is not required if the pipeline is located within public domain; however, city council approval is required. 
(d)  Pipeline information reporting requirements. If the pipeline operator has no reporting responsibility to the Railroad Commission or the U.S. Department of Transportation and is otherwise exempt from the safety regulations of either of such agencies, the following documents pertaining to the preceding reporting period of June 1st through May 31st shall be furnished to the city: 
(1)  Copies of internal reports of responses to pipeline emergencies; 
(2)  Current operations and maintenance logs; and 
(3)  Current emergency response plan. 
(e)  Abandoned pipelines. 
(1)  All pipelines shall be maintained in an active condition unless abandoned according to applicable state and federal regulations. The pipeline operator shall notify the city within thirty (30) days of abandonment of any pipeline. 
(2)  Reactivation of abandoned pipelines shall require notification to the city pursuant to the standards and requirements specified in section 10-1160. Reactivation shall require pressure testing for integrity and compliance with Railroad Commission and/or United States Department of Transportation regulations. 
(f)  Emergency response plans and emergency incident reporting. 
(1)  Each pipeline operator shall maintain written procedures to minimize the hazards resulting from an emergency. These procedures shall at a minimum provide for the following: 
a.  Prompt and effective response to emergencies, including but not limited to the following: 
(i)  Leaks or releases that can impact public health safety or welfare; 
(ii)  Fire or explosions at or in the vicinity of a pipeline or pipeline easement; 
(iii)  Natural disaster; 
(iv)  Effective means to notify and communicate required and pertinent information to local fire, police and public officials during an emergency; 
(v)  The availability of personnel, equipment, tools and materials as necessary at the scene of an emergency; 
(vi)  Measures to be taken to reduce public exposure to injury and probability of accidental death or dismemberment; 
(vii)  Emergency shut down and pressure reduction of a pipeline; 
(viii)  The safe restoration of service following an emergency or incident; and 
(ix)  A follow-up incident investigation to determine the cause of the incident and require the implementation of corrective measures. 
(2)  Upon discovery of a pipeline emergency or incident, any affected pipeline operator shall as soon as practical communicate to the city's 911 system the following information: 
a.  A general description of the emergency or incident; 
b.  The location of the emergency or incident; 
c.  The name and telephone number of the person reporting the emergency or incident; 
d.  The name of the pipeline operator; 
e.  Whether or not any hazardous material is involved and identification of the hazardous material so involved; and 
f.  Any other information as requested by the emergency dispatcher or other such official at the time of reporting the emergency or incident. 
(g)  Pipeline repairs and maintenance. 
(1)  All repairs and maintenance of pipelines are to be performed in accordance with U.S. Department of Transportation and Railroad Commission mechanical integrity requirements. 
(2)  If non-emergency repairs necessitate excavation of a pipeline, the pipeline operator shall send notification to occupants of business establishments and residential dwellings located adjacent to the pipeline to be excavated at least five (5) days prior to commencing such repairs. 
(3)  If above-ground non-emergency repairs that are not routine maintenance are required, the pipeline operator shall send notification to occupants of businesses and residential dwellings located within five hundred (500) feet from the centerline of the pipeline section to be repaired at least five (5) days prior to commencing such repairs. 
(4)  The notice required in subsections (g)(2) and (3) of this section shall be sent by U.S. regular mail, postage prepaid mailed at least five (5) days prior to commencing any non-emergency repair; provided, however, that the pipeline operator may use hand delivery notice as an alternative, at the pipeline operator's discretion. 
(5)  Inspection of the interior of all regulated pipelines shall comply with United States Department of Transportation and Railroad Commission rules. 
(h)  Protection and painting of structures. A pipeline operator shall keep protected and painted all pipeline risers and all appurtenances related to pipeline construction and operations which are composed of materials which are generally protected or painted. Such operator shall repaint all such items at sufficiently frequent intervals to maintain same in good condition. It shall be a violation of this article for any pipeline operator to permit any pipeline riser and/or appurtenances related to pipeline construction and operations to be in a state of disrepair or to have chipped, peeling or unpainted portions. 
(i)  No implied grant of use of public rights-of-way, utility easements or other city-owned property. 
Nothing in this subsection grants permission for the use of any street, public rights-of-way, utility easements, or city-owned property. In the event a pipeline operator wishes to undertake any pipeline construction on, over, under, along, or across any public rights-of-way, utility easements or other city-owned property, the pipeline operator shall apply for and execute a written agreement with the city governing the terms and conditions for such use, obtain all required permits and comply with any other applicable provisions of the City Code. 
(j)  Expiration of pipeline permit. If construction of a pipeline has not commenced within one (1) year of the date of issuance of the pipeline permit, or if the pipeline has not been completed and the surface restored within two (2) years, the pipeline permit shall expire; provided, however, that the director of public works may grant an extension of time not to exceed an additional one (1) year if the director of public works determines that weather or other unexpected physical conditions justify such an extension. 
(k)  No assumption of responsibility by city. Nothing in this Subsection shall be construed as an assumption by the city of any responsibility of a pipeline operator of a pipeline not owned by the city. 
(l)  It is the joint and several responsibility of the owner and the pipeline operator of any and all pipeline to maintain the markers in accordance with this article. The location of all new or replacement pipe and pipelines shall be marked by the owner(s) thereof or by the person installing or operating such pipelines as follows: 
(1)  Marker signs shall be placed at all locations where pipe or pipelines cross property boundary lines and at each side of a public street or road right-of-way which the pipe or pipeline crosses; 
(2)  The top of all marker signs shall be a minimum of four (4) feet above ground level, and the support post must be sufficient to support the marker sign and shall be painted yellow or such other color as may be approved by the director of public works or his designee; 
(3)  All marker signs shall be a minimum of twelve (12) inches square and shall be marked as "gas pipe line"; 
(4)  All marker signs shall contain the name of the owner and operator of the pipeline and a twenty-four (24) hour local contact number; 
(5)  Pipelines shall be marked along their entire length with a buried metal wire and metallic flag tape; 
(6)  All signs shall also contain an 811 designation "Call Before You Dig" statement; and 
(7)  The pipeline operator shall annually replace signage that has been lost, damaged or removed. 
(m)  Annually, all pipeline operators will provide affected landowners, public officials and emergency providers with appropriate public awareness information as outlined in API 1162. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 2, 7-21-09; Ord. No. 1484, § 7, 12-15-09)  
Sec. 10-1170. - Salt water pipeline. 
(a)  All references in this section to "pipe" or "pipelines" shall mean "salt water pipelines." 
(b)  No pipeline for the transportation of saltwater shall be constructed, installed, maintained, repaired, replaced, modified, removed or operated within the city without first obtaining a pipeline permit from the city. 
(c)  Salt water pipe shall be installed beneath all city utilities, no seams shall be allowed within city right-of-way and minimum cover to the top of the pipe shall be at the discretion of the city based on existing or planned utilities. The pipeline crossings must pass through a casing of a design and constructed in accordance with the United States Department of Transportation standards set forth in 49 CFR 192.323 (Casing) as same exists on the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article derives. 
(d)  All infrastructure included under this section shall be designed and sealed by a registered professional engineer in the State of Texas. 
(e)  All new or replacement pipe or pipelines shall be installed in such a manner that the pipelines clear the lowest city utility by a minimum of ten (10) feet. In areas where no city utilities are present, pipelines shall be covered and must be not less than forty-eight (48) inches below the existing ground level as verified and approved by the city engineer. Prior to installation, the owner of the pipeline shall submit to the director of public works and the fire marshal the pipeline design criteria, including but not limited to, operating pressures, pipeline gradient and elevation to sea level, location, pipe ASTM grade, pipe manufacturer, pipe wall thickness, pipeline capacity and volume. Prior to and subsequent to installation of each segment of new or replacement pipeline, the pipe and pipeline must receive and pass an on-site inspection of the compliance with design criteria and the process of installation. The design submittal must be signed and sealed by a professional engineer registered in the State of Texas. 
The depth requirements in this subsection shall not apply to piping constructed or installed within the secondary containment perimeter of the tank battery, which piping may be placed at ground level. 
(f)  Pipe location information shall be provided to the city in an electronic format acceptable to the director of public works. 
(g)  It is the joint and several responsibility of the owner and the operator of any and all pipelines to maintain the markers in accordance with this article. The location of all new or replacement pipe and pipelines shall be marked by the owner(s) thereof or by the person installing or operating such pipelines as follows: 
(1)  Marker signs shall be placed at all locations where pipe or pipelines cross property boundary lines and at each side of a public street or road right-of-way which the pipe or pipeline crosses; 
(2)  The top of all marker signs shall be a minimum of four (4) feet above ground level, and the support post must be sufficient to support the marker sign and shall be painted yellow or such other color as may be approved by the director of public works or his designee; 
(3)  All marker signs shall be a minimum of twelve (12) inches square and shall be marked as "S.W. Pipe Line"; 
(4)  All marker signs shall contain the name of the owner and operator of the pipeline and a twenty-four-hour local contact number; 
(5)  Pipelines shall be marked along their entire length with a buried metal wire and metallic flag tape; and 
(6)  The pipeline operator shall annually replace signage that has been lost, damaged or removed. 
(h)  General pipeline design requirements. All infrastructure included under this memorandum shall be designed and sealed by a registered professional engineer in the State of Texas and all pipelines shall: 
(1)  Have a maximum inside diameter of twelve (12) inches; 
(2)  Consist of material approved by the city; and 
(3)  Be monitored by a SCADA system that allows shutdown via automatic valves spaced at each well head, major pipeline junctions, at the influent and effluent of the recycling unit(s), and prior to ultimate disposal. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 2, 7-21-09)  
Sec. 10-1180. - Technical advisor. 
The city may from time to time employ a technical advisor or advisors who are experienced and educated in the gas industry or the law as it pertains to gas matters. The function of such advisor(s) shall be to advise, counsel or represent the city on such matters relating to gas operations within the city as the city may want or require and the effect thereof, both present and future, on the health, welfare, and comfort of the citizens of the city. In the event such technical advisor(s) is employed for the purpose of advising, counseling or representing the city relative to an operator's unique and particular set of circumstances, case or request relating to this article, then the cost for such services of such technical advisor(s) shall be assessed against and paid for by such operator in addition to any fees or charges assessed pursuant to this article. Prior to the employment of a technical advisor, the city shall inform the operator of the intended scope of work and the estimated costs and expenses. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 2, 7-21-09)  
Sec. 10-1190. - Appeals. 
(a)  The city council shall have and exercise the power to hear and determine appeals where it is alleged there is error or abuse of discretion regarding the issuance of a gas well permit or the revocation or suspension of any gas well permit issued hereunder as provided by this article. Any person or entity whose application is denied by the fire marshal (other than for distance requirements set out in this article) or whose gas well permit is suspended or revoked or whose well or equipment is deemed by the fire marshal to be abandoned may, within thirty (30) days of the date of the written decision of the city inspector file an appeal to the city council in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  An appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed in triplicate with the city secretary. The grounds for appeal must be set forth specifically, and the error described, by the appellant. 
(2)  Within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the records, the city secretary shall transmit all papers involved in the proceeding, place the matter on the city council agenda for hearing and give notice by mail of the time, place and purpose thereof to appellant and any other party who has requested in writing to be so notified. No other notice need be given. 
(b)  Appeal fees shall be required for every appeal in the amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 2, 7-21-09)  
Sec. 10-1200. - Temporary modifications. 
(a)  The city manager or his designee may allow temporary modifications to the terms and conditions of this article until such time city council approval may be sought." 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 2, 7-21-09)  
Sec. 10-1210. - Penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to do the following: 
(1)  Engage in any activity not in compliance with the terms and conditions of this article; 
(2)  Fail to comply with any terms or conditions of this article; or 
(3)  Violate any provision or requirement set forth under this article. 
(b)  Any violation of this article shall be punished by a fine of not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per day, subject to applicable state law. Each day a violation occurs constitutes a separate violation 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 2, 8-4-09)  
ARTICLE VIII. - NOISE ORDINANCE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1734, § 2, adopted Feb. 17, 2015, added provisions numbered as §§ 10-1100—10-1140. In order to avoid conflicts in section numbering the editor has renumbered these added provisions as §§ 10-1300—10-1340. 
 
Sec. 10-1300. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article the following terms have the definitions herein ascribed to them: 
(a)  Authorized event. An event is deemed to be authorized if the event received an official permit for the event through the City of Keller Special Event Review Team (SPERT), an authorized sporting event at the City of Keller Sports Park, and events approved by the Keller Independent School District at their campuses within the City of Keller. 
(b)  Noise. A loud or unpleasant sound that someone or something creates. 
(c)  Noise nuisance. Any unreasonably loud, disturbing, unnecessary noise which causes material distress, discomfort or injury to persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity, or any noise of such character, intensity, and continued duration which substantially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of private homes by persons of ordinary sensibilities is hereby declared to be a noise nuisance. 
(d)  Residential district. A district as described in the City of Keller Unified Development Code for residential use. Examples of this district would include, but is not limited to, SF-LD, SF-8.4, SF-10, SF-12, SF-15, SF-20, SF-25, SF-30,2F, and MF. 
(e)  Commercial district. A district as described in the City of Keller Unified Development Code for uses other than residential. Examples of this district would include, but is not limited to, O, NS, R, TC, C, IP, LI, PD, SUP, OTK, N377 and KATY ROAD. 
(Ord. No. 1734, § 2, 2-17-15)  
Sec. 10-1310. - Noise nuisances. 
The following acts, among others, are declared to be per se, violations of this article. The following enumerations shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  Unreasonable noise prohibited. No person shall make or knowingly permit or allow to be made any unreasonably loud, disturbing, unnecessary noise which disturbs the peace and quiet of a neighborhood or which causes material distress, discomfort or injury to persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity. 
(2)  Unreasonable noise prohibited in or near residential areas. No person shall make or allow for any noise of such character, intensity, and continued duration which substantially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of private homes by persons of ordinary sensibilities. No business within a commercial district shall allow for any unreasonable noise of such character, intensity, and continued duration which substantially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of private homes by persons of ordinary sensibilities. 
(3)  Vehicle horns, signaling devices, and similar devices: The sounding of any horn, signaling device, or other similar device, on any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle on any right-of-way or in any public space of the City of Keller, for more than ten (10) consecutive seconds unless the sounding of any horn, signaling device, or other similar device is a danger warning. 
(4)  Nonemergency signaling devices: Sounding or permitting the sounding of any amplified signal from any bell, chime, siren, whistle, or similar device intended primarily for nonemergency purposes from any place for more than ten (10) consecutive seconds in any hourly period. It is an affirmative defense to this subsection that the amplified signal is the reasonable sounding of such devices by houses of religious worship, ice cream trucks, seasonal contribution solicitors, or by the City of Keller for traffic control. 
(5)  Radios, televisions, boom boxes, phonographs, stereos, musical instruments, and similar devices: The use or operation of a radio, television, boom box, stereo, musical instrument, or similar device that produces or reproduces sound in a manner that is plainly audible to any person other than the player(s) or operator(s) of the device, and those who are voluntarily listening to the sound, and which unreasonably disturbs the peace, quiet, and comfort of neighbors and passersby, or is plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet from any person in a commercial, industrial area, or public space. The use or operation of a radio, television, boom box, stereo, musical instrument, or similar device that produces or reproduces sound in a manner that is plainly audible to any person other than the player(s) or operator(s) of the device, and those who are voluntarily listening to the sound, and unreasonably disturbs the peace, quiet, and comfort of neighbors in residential areas, including multi-family or single-family dwellings. 
(6)  Loudspeakers, amplifiers, public address systems, and similar devices: The unreasonably loud, disturbing, and unnecessary use or operation of a loudspeaker, amplifier, public address system, or other device for producing or reproducing sound: 
a.  Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, and 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. on weekends and holidays in the following areas: 
(i)  Within or adjacent to a residential area; 
(ii)  Within public space if the sound is plainly audible across the real property line of the public space from which the sound emanates, and is unreasonably loud and raucous; or 
b.  From moving vehicles for the purpose of advertising any show, sale, display of merchandise, or any other purpose. 
(7)  Yelling, shouting, and similar activities: Yelling, shouting, whistling, or singing in residential areas or in public places, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to unreasonably disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivities. 
(8)  Animals and birds: Unreasonably loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noise emitted by an animal or bird for which a person is responsible. A person is responsible for an animal if the person owns, controls, harbors, or otherwise cares for the animal or bird unless the sounds made by animals or birds in animal shelters, kennels, veterinary hospitals, pet shops, or pet kennels, licensed under and in compliance with licensing and permitting provisions set forth in this code. 
(9)  Lawn mowers, blowers and similar devices: In residential areas, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., the operation of any noise, disturbing, and unnecessary: 
a.  Grating, grinding, or rattling noise caused by the use of any motor vehicle that is out of repair or poorly or improperly loaded; 
b.  The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any stationary steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, or motor boat engine, except through a muffler or other device that will effectively and efficiently prevent loud and disturbing noises or vibrations; or 
c.  The discharge into the open air of the exhaust from any motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device that will effectively and efficiently prevent loud and disturbing noises or vibrations. 
(10)  Vibration: The use or cause of the use of any device that creates any ground vibration which is perceptible without instruments at any point beyond the property boundary of the source of the vibration. 
(11)  Commercial establishments adjacent to residential property: Businesses in a Commercial District shall only be allowed to have an outdoor band, music or any type of amplified sound according to the following schedule: 
Sunday: Between 10:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. 
Monday: Between 10:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. 
Tuesday: Between 10:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. 
Wednesday: Between 10:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. 
Thursday: Between 10:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. the following Friday morning 
Friday: Between 10:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. the following Saturday morning 
Saturday: Between 10:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. the following Sunday morning 
(12)  Motor vehicle idling: The operation of any engine of any motor vehicle with a manufacturer's gross weight specification in excess of ten thousand (10,000) pounds within a residential area or three hundred (300) feet of a residential structure for a period in excess of fifteen (15) minutes unless the vehicle is located in an enclosed structure. 
(Ord. No. 1734, § 2, 2-17-15)  
Sec. 10-1320. - Commercial district noise curfew: 
The following curfew is in addition to all other requirements of this article and does not replace or provide a defense for violating any other provision of this article. 
Commercial district entities utilizing an outdoor band, music or any type of amplified sound will not be allowed to operate such equipment before 10:00 a.m., or after 11:00 p.m., Sunday, Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday and before 10:00 a.m., or after 2:00 a.m. on Thursday, Friday and Saturday. 
(Ord. No. 1734, § 2, 2-17-15)  
Sec. 10-1330. - Affirmative defenses. 
It shall be an affirmative defense that the noise was as a result of the following activities: 
(1)  A person at an authorized event; 
(2)  A person operating a bell for a religious activity; 
(3)  A person operating an emergency vehicle; 
(4)  A person operating an audible warning device on a vehicle or train as required by state law; 
(5)  A siren or other warning device emitting a noise for the purposes of warning the population of dangerous weather or other events. A noise from such a warning device is exempt regardless of whether the sound is made for the purposes of warning or testing; 
(6)  A person operating equipment or making deliveries for site development or site preparation between 6:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday, and 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Saturday and Sunday or as such deliveries may be allowed in a Planned Development District or by other Keller ordinance; 
(7)  A public performance, gathering, or parade for which a permit has been obtained from the City of Keller, so long as the event is within the requirements of the permit; or 
(8)  Noise made to signal for emergency help. 
(Ord. No. 1734, § 2, 2-17-15)  
Sec. 10-1340. - Offenses. 
(1)  A person commits an offense if the person creates a noise nuisance, as defined in this article, or uses sound generating equipment in violation of a provision of this article. 
(2)  Notice. 
a.  Generally. Prior to issuance of a court summons or ticket, a violator will be given notice to stop the noise or the source of the noise. 
b.  No waiting period. If the violation does not cease after notice, the violator may receive a court summons or ticket on the same date as the original notice. 
c.  Notice good for a year. Once a notice is received, the violator will not be entitled to another warning notice for a noise violation at any time in the next year. 
d.  Notice requirement not applicable to other offenses occurring contemporaneously. The requirement for notice does not apply to any other violation found while investigating a noise complaint. 
e.  Notice requirement not applicable to vehicles. Notice is not required for noise violations emanating from vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 1734, § 2, 2-17-15)  
Chapter 11 - MOBILE HOMES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Flood hazard prevention, § 4-300 et seq.; storm drainage plans, § 16-900. 
 
Sec. 11-100. - Definitions. 
Trailer, etc. The terms "trailer," "trailer house," and "trailer coach," and "mobile home" shall be interchangeable herein, and mean any vehicle or portable structure having no foundation other than wheels, jacks, blocks or skirtings, and so designed or constructed as to permit human occupancy for dwelling or sleeping purposes. 
Trailer park. A "trailer park" shall be any lot, tract or plot of ground upon which two (2) or more trailerhouses or mobile homes are located. 
Trailer space. A "trailer space" shall be a lot or plot of ground within a trailer park designed for the accommodation of one (1) trailer.  
Sec. 11-110. - Licenses. 
(a)  License required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to maintain or operate a trailer park within the limits of the city without having first obtained a license therefor. 
(b)  License fees. The license fee for each trailer park shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each calendar year or part thereof. 
(c)  Applications, investigations and issuance. A written application for each trailer park license shall be filed with the city council, and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The location and legal description of the trailer park; 
(3)  Detailed plans and specifications of the trailer park, showing the size and number of trailer spaces, the location of utilities and sanitary facilities, and all other pertinent data; 
(4)  Such further information as the city council may, by resolution or otherwise, require. 
If the applicant is found to be of good moral character, and the trailer park be in full compliance with this chapter and all other applicable ordinances, laws and regulations, the city council may approve the application and issue the license. Such approval and issuance may be conditioned or contingent upon the performance or completion of such requirements as the city council may find necessary. 
In acting upon applications hereunder, the city council may make such investigation and hold such hearings as it may deem advisable. 
(b)  Revocation. After notice and hearing, the city council may, for good cause, revoke or modify any license issued hereunder.  
Sec. 11-120. - Trailers outside licensed parks; permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to locate, maintain or occupy any trailer house or mobile home in any place in the city other than a duly licensed trailer park, unless such person, firm or corporation shall have first secured a permit therefor from the city council. The city council may grant such permits for such duration and upon such conditions as it may deem proper in the circumstances, and shall set a fee for each permit which shall commensurate with the fee hereinbefore prescribed for trailer park licenses. No permit shall be issued until the fee therefor shall be paid.  
Sec. 11-130. - Operation of trailer parks. 
(a)  Management. Each trailer park shall be under the direct supervision and control of the licensee or his agent. There shall be at all times some person upon the premises who shall be in the charge of the operation of the park, and who shall maintain the park and its facilities in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition. The licensee shall furnish to the city council the name of each person who shall be entrusted with the management or care of the park. 
(b)  Register. Each licensee of a trailer park shall keep available for the inspection of the proper officials a register of the owners and occupants of all trailers located within the park which register shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of each occupant; 
(2)  The make, model, year and description of each trailer and of each automobile used by the occupants, together with the license number and registration of each; and 
(3)  The date of arrival and departure of each trailer. 
Such register shall be kept current at all times, and no record therefrom shall be destroyed for at least three (3) years after the departure of an occupant or trailer.  
Sec. 11-140. - Trailer spaces, facilities and services. 
(a)  Trailer spaces. Individual trailer spaces in trailer parks shall be so laid out and of such size that no trailer located thereupon shall be closer than twenty (20) feet to any other trailer or structure in the park. Each trailer space shall be designated by stakes or markers. The licensee of each trailer park shall lay out and maintain an improved street or streets which shall provide direct access to each trailer space within the park. 
(b)  Water supply. An adequate supply of pure water for drinking and domestic purposes shall be supplied to meet the requirements of the park. The water supply shall be obtained from faucets only, and no common drinking cups shall be permitted. Each trailer space shall be provided with a cold water tap at least four (4) inches above the ground. 
(c)  Sanitation. Each person shall be provided with adequate toilets, baths or showers, slop sinks and other sanitation facilities. Each such facility, and each individual trailer space shall be connected to an adequate septic tank or sewer system which shall comply with all state and local health and sanitation regulations. 
(d)  Garbage. Tightly covered containers shall be provided in quantities adequate to permit disposal of all garbage and rubbish. Such containers shall be kept in sanitary condition at all times, and shall not be allowed to overflow. 
(e)  Fire protection. Each park shall be equipped at all times with at least one (1) fire extinguisher in good working order and recharged annually for each ten (10) trailer spaces, and located not more than two hundred (200) feet from any trailer space which it serves. No open fires shall be permitted at any place which would endanger life or property. No fire shall be left unattended. 
(f)  Fuel. Bottled gas and fuel oil may be used for cooking and heating purposes only upon compliance with all applicable state and local regulations. No gas cylinder shall be located within, or within five (5) feet of the door of, any trailer house.  
Sec. 11-150. - Service and inspection fee. 
(a)  Payment required. No trailer house or mobile home shall be located or occupied in the City of Keller unless the owner or occupant thereof shall first pay a service and inspection fee of two dollars ($2.00) per year. No fee shall be required of transient trailers which do not remain in the city for more than three (3) days. 
(b)  Collection. For trailers located in licensed trailer parks, the fees herein assessed shall be collected by the licensee of the park, who shall deliver such fees so collected to the city council. 
(c)  For individual trailers located by permit outside of a licensed trailer park, the fee shall be paid directly to the city council.  
Sec. 11-160. - Effective date. 
This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and publication as provided by law.  
Chapter 12 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Public park and open space dedication, § 16-400 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 12-100. - Unlawful to enter park between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, remain or be in or upon any park or playground in the City of Keller between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Violation constitutes trespass. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 1, 2-3-87; Ord. No. 635, § 1, 11-6-90)  
Sec. 12-110. - Permit. 
Any person, group or corporation may remain in a park or playground area after closing by obtaining a permit to do so from the City of Keller parks and recreation coordinator, said permit to be valid for a specific date only. The pavilions in Bear Creek Park and Johnson Road Park may be reserved by permit by payment of the applicable fee through the parks and recreation coordinator. 
(Ord. No. 635, § 2, 11-6-90)  
Sec. 12-120. - Hours of operation. 
Public parks within the city shall be closed between 10:00 p.m. each day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day. The city manager is authorized to cause the erection of such physical barriers as shall be necessary to prevent entry, and all city personnel are authorized to enforce the state criminal trespass laws against those who violate this section. Special permission may be granted by the parks and recreation department coordinator for special events which last past 10:00 p.m., in which case any park containing permitted activities shall remain open until the activities shall cease, at which time the park shall be closed. No person other than law enforcement personnel or city or county employees having responsibility for care and maintenance of the park shall remain in the park at a time when it is closed. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 2, 2-3-87; Ord. No. 635, § 3, 11-6-90)  
Sec. 12-130. - Vehicles remaining in park after close. 
Any vehicles remaining in the park after the same is closed shall be deemed abandoned and shall be impounded at the cost of the owner thereof. Owners of vehicles may obtain the release of such vehicles only after paying towing and storage charges. 
Cross reference— Wreckers, § 10-500 et seq.  
Sec. 12-140. - Motorcycles and other motor vehicles prohibited in parks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motorcycle, a motor vehicle, or any other motorized vehicle, including a motorbike, on any public park property except upon paved or graveled roadways or parking areas within the boundaries of a public park. This section shall not be deemed to prevent the operation of vehicles in the park by city employees or agents for the purpose of maintenance and upkeep of the park. 
(Ord. No. 635, § 4, 11-6-90)  
Sec. 12-150. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon final conviction thereof, be fined in an amount not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each and every day or occurrence any such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate violation hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 829, § 2, 7-16-96)  
Sec. 12-160. - Youth programs standards of care. 
The city council of the City of Keller hereby adopted the City of Keller Youth Programs Standards of Care for providing basic child care regulations for day camp activities operated by the Parks and Recreation Department, as well as other departments. As required by V.T.C.A. Human Resources Code § 42.041(b)(14), the standards adopted by this section include staffing ratios, minimum staff qualifications; minimum facility, health, and safety standards; and mechanisms for monitoring and enforcing the adopted local standards. A substantial copy of the City of Keller Youth Programs Standards of Care is attached hereto and incorporated herein for all intents and purposes and shall be available on the city's website under the parks and recreation subhead. 
( Ord. No. 1919 , § 2, 12-18-18)  
ARTICLE II. - REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 12-200. - Speed limits set forth. 
All streets, trails and drives within the limits of the city park of Keller, Texas, are hereby designated with speed limits of fifteen (15) miles per hour. 
Cross reference— Speed limits generally, § 18-200 et seq.  
Sec. 12-210. - Speed restricted. 
No person shall drive or operate any motor vehicle within the limits of the city park of Keller, Texas, at a greater rate of speed than fifteen (15) miles per hour.  
Sec. 12-220. - Posting of speed limits. 
The chief of police is hereby directed to erect appropriate signs to warn the operators of motor vehicles within the city park of speed limits as set by this article.  
Sec. 12-230. - Animals prohibited at Keller Sports Park league playing fields and spectator areas. 
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, possessing or keeping an animal or animals, whether vaccinated or unvaccinated, licensed or unlicensed, to allow such animal or animals to be within the sidelines and/or fences of the league sports playing fields or spectator areas of said fields. Spectator areas are defined as the perimeter of the concession stands located at the baseball and softball fields measuring out forty-five (45) feet and the perimeter of the soccer and football field sidelines measuring out twenty (20) feet. 
(Ord. No. 1306, § 2, 1-17-06)  
Sec. 12-240. - Water activities in city parks or other public property and drainageways. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to utilize or enter any public creek, pond, lake, fountain, or other body of water in any city park or on other public property, including drainageways, for wading, swimming, bathing, or ice skating, unless such facility is specifically authorized and permitted therefor by the city. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any type of boat or personal water craft (including but not limited to jet ski or waverunner), surfboard, sailboard, water skis, flotation devices, scuba gear and equipment, or any other water-recreation device and/or equipment on any creek, pond, lake, fountain, or other body of water in any city park or on other public property, including drainageways. 
(Ord. No. 829, § 1, 7-16-96)  
Sec. 12-250. - Glass containers prohibited in park. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to bring or cause to be brought into any city park or possess any glass beverage containers in or upon any city park. 
(Ord. No. 635, § 5, 11-6-90) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 635, § 5, adopted Nov. 6, 1990, amended § 12-250 of the Code to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, § 12-250 pertained to the prohibition against fishing in the city park and derived unamended from the 1983 Code.  
Sec. 12-260. - Discharge of firearms. 
The discharge of any firearm or weapon within the limits of the city park by any person is expressly prohibited. 
Cross reference— Discharge of firearms generally, § 10-100 et seq.  
Sec. 12-270. - Littering. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or cause to be distributed litter, paper, waste materials, empty cans, garbage or other rubbish within the boundaries of the city park.  
Sec. 12-280. - Posting of signs regarding park restrictions. 
The chief of police is directed to erect appropriate signs within the city park that would advise as to the prohibition against the discharging of firearms, no glass containers and the prohibition against litter or distributing waste materials, and against swimming at any time. 
(Ord. No. 635, § 6, 11-6-90)  
Sec. 12-290. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1188, § 2, adopted April 20, 2004, repealed former section 12-290 in its entirety which pertained to skating and skateboarding in concession stand/patio areas and derived from Ord. No. 973, § 2, adopted Aug. 3, 1999.  
ARTICLE III. - BOARD OF PARKS AND RECREATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 409, § 1, adopted March 19, 1985, amended the Code by adding a new Chapter 19A. For purposes of classification and to keep related material together, the editor has redesignated these provisions as Article III of Ch. 12, §§ 12-300—12-340. 
 
Sec. 12-300. - Creation; composition; appointment of members; appointment of chairperson and vice-chairperson. 
There is hereby established the parks and recreation board for the City of Keller, Texas composed of seven (7) members. The city council may, but is not required to, appoint two (2) alternates for the regular members. Alternates may serve in the event of an absence by a commission member. Alternates shall be designated as first alternate and second alternate, and shall serve according to that order. Alternates may fill the remainder of a term vacated by a regular member. Members of the parks and recreation board shall be residents and qualified voters of the City of Keller. All members shall be appointed by the city council by a majority vote. Each member of the board shall serve for a period of two (2) years with the term of places 5, 6, 7, and alternate member 1 ending on June 30th of even-numbered years and the term of places 1, 2, 3, 4, and alternate member 2 ending on June 30th of odd-numbered years or until their successors are fully qualified and duly appointed. Members and alternates may be removed by a majority vote of the city council, with or without cause. At the time annual appointments of the members are made by the city council, the city council may appoint the chairperson and vice-chairperson for the parks and recreation board. Any member or alternate of the parks and recreation board remaining absent for three (3) consecutive regular meetings of the board will have their appointment declared vacated by a majority vote of the city council at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council. Any member of the board remaining absent for four (4) consecutive regular meetings or a total of seven (7) regular meetings during their term on the board shall be deemed to have vacated their appointment. 
(Ord. No. 409, § 1, 3-19-85; Ord. No. 496, § 3, 2-3-87; Ord. No. 576, § 9, 4-4-89; Ord. No. 637, § 1, 11-20-90; Ord. No. 661, § 1, 11-5-91; Ord. No. 1178, § 10, 1-20-04; Ord. No. 1186, § 19, 4-6-04; Ord. No. 1701, § 3, 6-17-14; Ord. No. 1797. § 2, 7-5-16 ; Ord. No. 1879, § 7, 3-20-18 )  
Sec. 12-310. - Meetings; quorum; agenda. 
Regular and special board meetings shall be called by the city staff serving the board; however, the board shall meet not less than four (4) times per calendar year beginning January 1st of each year. In addition, the board may call a special meeting upon written request approved by the quorum of said board that shall include the chairperson, during a regular or special meeting of the board. A quorum will be established by the presence of at least four (4) members, including the chairperson. In the absence of the chairperson and/or vice-chairperson, the members constituting a quorum shall select from the members present, a chairperson to conduct the meeting. A board member may request, in writing, at least seven (7) working days in advance of a scheduled board meeting that an item be placed on the agenda. All meetings are to be conducted in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act. 
(Ord. No. 409, § 1, 3-19-85; Ord. No. 1186, § 20, 4-6-04)  
Sec. 12-320. - Election of officers; adoption of procedural rules. 
There is hereby established the parks and recreation board for the City of Keller, Texas composed of seven (7) members. The city council may, but is not required to, appoint two (2) alternates for the regular members. Alternates may serve in the event of an absence by a commission member. Alternates shall be designated as first alternate and second alternate, and shall serve according to that order. Alternates may fill the remainder of a term vacated by a regular member. Members of the parks and recreation board shall be residents and qualified voters of the City of Keller. All members shall be appointed by the city council by a majority vote. Each member of the board shall serve for a period of two (2) years with the term of places 5, 6, 7, and alternate member 1 ending on November 30th of even-numbered years and the term of places 1, 2, 3, 4, and alternate member 2 ending on November 30th of odd-numbered years or until their successors are fully qualified and duly appointed. Members and alternates may be removed by a majority vote of the city council, with or without cause. At the time annual appointments of the members are made by the city council, the city council may appoint the chairperson and vice-chairperson for the parks and recreation board. Any member or alternate of the parks and recreation board remaining absent for three (3) consecutive regular meetings of the board will have their appointment declared vacated by a majority vote of the city council at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council. Any member of the board remaining absent for four (4) consecutive regular meetings or a total of seven (7) regular meetings during their term on the board shall be deemed to have vacated their appointment. 
(Ord. No. 409, § 1, 3-19-85; Ord. No. 576, § 10, 4-4-89; Ord. No. 1178, § 11, 1-20-04; Ord. No. 1186, § 21, 4-6-04; Ord. No. 1797. § 3, 7-5-16 ; Ord. No. 1879, § 7, 3-20-18 )  
Sec. 12-330. - Duties and responsibilities. 
The board of parks and recreation shall have the duties and responsibilities as follows: 
(1)  To serve at the pleasure of the city council and shall have no advisory or recommending authority over any operating department of the city. 
(2)  Once a recommendation by the board has been forwarded to the city council, the duties of the board regarding said recommendation are considered complete unless otherwise directed by the city council. 
(3)  The board may make inquires of the city staff regarding city ordinances, master plans, or matters pertaining to specific board duties and assignments given by the city council. 
(4)  Encourage and facilitate the establishment and maintenance of parks, playgrounds, athletic fields, other recreation, and aquatic facilities. 
(5)  Periodically review the comprehensive park plan to determine the adequacy of both short-range and long-range park and development needs of the citizens. 
(6)  Cooperate with all agencies, groups, and civic clubs concerning recreational needs. 
(7)  Submit periodic reports, including any special reports, as requested by the city council. 
(8)  Study and recommend to the city council ways and means of financing parks and recreation facilities, including the potential for state and federal grant funding. 
(9)  Receive public comment, concerns, and recommendations relating to the city's parks and recreation programs. 
(Ord. No. 409, § 1, 3-19-85; Ord. No. 637, § 2, 11-20-90; Ord. No. 1186, § 22, 4-6-04)  
Sec. 12-340. - Vacancies. 
Any member of the Keller parks and recreation board remaining absent for three (3) consecutive regular meetings of the board may have their office declared vacated by a majority vote of the city council. Any member of the board remaining absent for six (6) consecutive regular meetings of the board shall be deemed to have vacated their office. Such vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms by appointment by majority vote of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 4, 2-3-87; Ord. No. 576, § 11, 4-4-89; Ord. No. 637, § 3, 11-20-90; Ord. No. 698, § 5, 4-6-93; Ord. No. 802, § 4, 10-17-95)  
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC TREES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 725, §§ 1—8, adopted December 21, 1993, did not specifically amend the Code; hence inclusion herein as Art. IV, §§ 12-400—12-470, was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Tree preservation, §§ 10-800 et seq. 
 
Sec. 12-400. - Definitions. 
Public property is herein defined as all parks having individual names, esplanades, traffic islands, municipal right-of-way and miscellaneous property owned by the City of Keller. 
Public trees is defined as all trees and shrubs having fifty (50) percent or more of their diameter, measured at existing grade, resting on public property. 
(Ord. No. 725, § 1, 12-21-93)  
Sec. 12-410. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— The editor has treated the provisions of Ord. No. 935, § 1, adopted Dec. 1, 1998, as superseding former section 12-410 which pertained to the duty of the parks and recreation board to advise the city on trees and shrubs on public property. Former section 12-410 derived from Ord. No. 725, § 2, adopted Dec. 21, 1993. 
(Ord. No. 725, § 2, 12-21-93)  
Sec. 12-420. - Public tree care. 
The city shall have the right to maintain trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all public property, as may be necessary to insure safety when servicing city utilities or to preserve the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. The city may remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is located on public property or municipal utility easement, which by reasons of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest, or is obstructing any intersection or line-of-site which could threaten traffic safety or interferes with emergency and service vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 725, § 3, 12-21-93)  
Sec. 12-430. - Abuse or mutilation of public trees. 
Unless specifically authorized by the city or its authorized agents, no person shall intentionally damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree; attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters or other contrivance to any tree; allow any gaseous, liquid, or solid substance which is harmful to trees to come in contact with them; or set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or heat thereof will injure any portion of any tree. 
(Ord. No. 725, § 4, 12-21-93)  
Sec. 12-440. - Construction materials on public property. 
No person shall deposit, place, store or maintain upon any public place of the municipality, any stone, brick, sand, concrete or other materials which may impede the free passage of water, air and fertilizer to the roots of any tree growing therein, except by written permit of the city or its authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 725, § 5, 12-21-93)  
Sec. 12-450. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— The editor has treated the provisions of Ord. No. 935, § 1, adopted Dec. 1, 1998, as superseding former section 12-450 which pertained to a list of recommended tree species for planting on public property and derived from Ord. No. 725, § 6, adopted Dec. 21, 1993. Appendix A of Ord. No. 935 provided a new list of recommended trees for planting on public property.  
Sec. 12-460. - Utilities. 
No public trees other than those species listed as small shade trees in section 12-450 may be planted under or within ten (10) lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or within five (5) lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility. 
(Ord. No. 725, § 7, 12-21-93)  
Sec. 12-470. - Interference with the city. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the city or its authorized agents, while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of any public tree as authorized in this article. 
(Ord. No. 725, § 8, 12-21-93)  
Chapter 13 - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1408, § 2, adopted 3-18-08, amended former Art. I, Divs. 1—5, in its entirety which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 732, § 1, 2-15-94; Ord. No. 851, § 1, 3-18-07. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 13-100. - Refusing entrance to private residence; posting notice. 
(a)  A person desiring that no merchant, salesman, or solicitor or other person engaged in religious or publication solicitation at his residence shall exhibit, in a conspicuous place upon or near the main entrance to the residence, a weatherproof card not less than three (3) inches by four (4) inches in size containing the words "No Solicitors". The letters shall be not less than two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of an inch in height. 
(b)  Every itinerant merchant, salesman, solicitor, or person engaging in charitable or publication solicitation, upon going onto any premises upon which a residence is located, shall first examine the residence to determine if any notice prohibiting soliciting is exhibited upon or near the main entrance to the residence. If a notice prohibiting soliciting is exhibited, the merchant, salesman, solicitor or person who engages in charitable, religious, publication or sales solicitation shall immediately depart from the premises without disturbing the occupant, unless the visit is the result of a request made by the occupant. 
(c)  It is unlawful for a person to go upon any residential premises and ring the doorbell, rap or knock upon the door or create any sound that attracts the attention of the occupant of the residence if a card as described in subsection (a) above is exhibited in a conspicuous place upon or near the main entrance to the residence, unless the visit is the result of a request made by the occupant. 
(d)  It is unlawful for a person, other than the occupant of the residence, to remove, deface or render illegible a card placed by the occupant pursuant to subsection (a) above. 
(e)  Any merchant, solicitor or person engaging in charitable, religious or publication solicitation who has gained entrance to a residence or audience with the occupant, whether invited or not, shall immediately depart from the premises without disturbing the occupant further when requested to leave by the occupant. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 2, 3-18-08)  
Sec. 13-105. - Soliciting in roadways prohibited. 
Except as otherwise specifically permitted by state law, no person shall stand or walk on any roadway (as defined by the traffic laws of the State of Texas) for the purpose of soliciting funds or for advertising or selling merchandise or service. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 2, 3-18-08)  
Sec. 13-106. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  A person who acting as a merchant or a solicitor or who is engaging in charitable, religious or publication solicitation may not go in or upon the premises of a private residence prior to 9:00 a.m. or after dusk of any day Monday through Saturday, or any time on Sunday or any other federally designated holiday. 
(b)  A person who is acting as a merchant or a solicitor or who is engaging in charitable, religious or publication solicitation may not go in or upon the premises of a private residence on any day where the Department of Homeland Security has issued a formal alert regarding a specific or credible terrorist threat resulting in an imminent or elevated threat level, the chief of police may suspend any commercial home solicitation or commercial home distribution activities until such time that the threat level is rescinded. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to a visit to the premises as a result of a request or invitation made by the occupant, invitation of the owner of the property, or a person residing on the premises. 
(d)  In this section, dusk means thirty (30) minutes after sunset. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 2, 3-18-08; Ord. No. 1714, § 2, 10-21-14)  
DIVISION 2. - CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS 
 
Sec. 13-110. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Charitable purpose means the use of money or property for the benefit of: 
(1)  Charity or philanthropy, poor, impoverished, destitute, underprivileged, needy refugee, diseased, injured, crippled, disabled or handicapped persons, or persons in need of rehabilitation; 
(2)  The teaching of patriotism or the relief or assistance of veterans or veterans' organizations; or 
(3)  Existing educational institutions, the establishment or endowment of educational institutions or in aid of the education of any person or group of persons. 
Charitable solicitation means conduct whereby a person, organization, society, corporation or its agent, member or representative: 
(1)  Solicits property, financial aid, gifts in money or any article representing monetary value; 
(2)  Sells or offers to sell a product, article, tag, service publication, ticket, advertisement or subscription; or 
(3)  Holds, promotes or participates in entertainment, sports events, benefit dances, fairs, bazaars, or other type of organized social entertainment. 
Door-to-door means private residences and businesses of persons who are both unknown to the person soliciting and not members of the church, religious society or other religious sect, group or order on whose behalf the solicitation is performed on the plea or representation, whether express or implied, that the proceeds from the solicitation, sale or entertainment are for a charitable purpose. 
Public place means any property open or devoted to public use. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 2, 3-18-08)  
Sec. 13-111. - Compliance with article. 
No person may solicit contributions for a charitable purpose until the provisions of this article are fully compiled with and until a permit for the purpose has been issued by the city authorizing the solicitation in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 2, 3-18-08)  
Sec. 13-112. - Procedures, requirements. 
(a)  When contributions to a person or organization are not wholly tax-deductible, the person or organization shall prominently state, in all materials used in the solicitation and in all verbal solicitations, the percentage which is not tax-deductible. 
(b)  All applicants that receive charitable solicitation permits shall receive from the city, photo identification badges for their solicitors to be worn at all times. All solicitors must have a photo identification badge for the specific solicitor. 
(c)  The holder of a charitable solicitation permit is responsible for the overt acts of his authorized representatives in connection with the solicitation. 
(d)  No person shall use or disburse funds collected pursuant to a charitable solicitation permit for a purpose other than the charitable purpose described in the application and the actual and necessary expenses incident to the solicitation, collection and disbursement of the funds. 
(e)  No person may solicit or obtain gifts in money or merchandise, directly or indirectly, by the misrepresentation of names, occupation, affiliation, physical disability, financial condition, social condition or residence. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 2, 3-18-08)  
Sec. 13-113. - Prohibited conduct. 
A person engaged in charitable solicitation either door-to-door or in a public place shall not: 
(1)  Obstruct or impede the passage of a pedestrian or vehicle; 
(2)  Make physical contact with the person being solicited unless that person's permission is obtained; 
(3)  Misrepresent the charitable purpose of the solicitation; or 
(4)  Misrepresent the charitable affiliation of those engaged in the solicitation. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 2, 3-18-08)  
Sec. 13-114. - Required; exemptions; defenses. 
(a)  No person or organization may conduct a charitable solicitation by handbills, advertisements, house-to-house canvass or by any other method in the city without the person, organization, society, or corporation responsible for conducting the solicitation first obtaining a permit in compliance with the terms of this article. 
(b)  If a person or organization conducts or manages a charitable solicitation in the name of or on behalf of another person or organization, each entity shall obtain a charitable solicitation permit. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under the article that: 
(1)  An organization solicits funds or goods only from its own membership; 
(2)  A person or organization solicits funds only by use of public broadcasting media; 
(3)  A person or organization solicits funds only from foundations; 
(4)  The organization, person, society or corporation holds a religious solicitation permit under this chapter. 
(d)  This article shall not apply to persons under eighteen (18) years of age if engaged in fundraising activities for a nonprofit organization using all profits for young people's activities or donating all profits to charities other than a sponsoring organization. This article shall neither apply to persons under fifteen (15) years of age engaged in fundraising activities for a nonprofit organization which is using all profits for young people's activities or which will donate all profits to charities other than the sponsoring organization when said young persons are accompanied by an adult; nor shall article apply to the organization for which such young persons are soliciting. 
(e)  The following shall be exempt from the licensing requirements of this article: 
(1)  Religious organizations exclusively for the distribution of literature and other items for the purpose of proselytizing, provided that no fees are charged and no donations are solicited. 
(2)  Anonymous political speech. 
(3)  Sales made under authority and by order of law, nor to persons, or their authorized representatives, who have previously established with the owners or occupants of such private residences or property a regular business, trade, service or other contractual relationship. 
(4)  Any operation which is exempted by state or federal statute from this chapter. 
Any person claiming to be legally exempt from the provisions of this chapter, including the payment of the license or investigation fee shall make such a claim in writing to the city manager, or his designee, citing the applicable statute or authority, and providing proof of its applicability. 
(f)  A solicitation is conducted within the city when it is communicated to a person then located within the city, whether or not the person making the solicitation receives a contribution or makes a sale. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 2, 3-18-08)  
Sec. 13-115. - Application. 
(a)  A person applying for a permit to conduct charitable solicitation in the city shall file an application in writing with the designated city official so designated by the city manager in writing not less than ten (10) days before the first month in which the proposed charitable solicitation activities are planned. 
(b)  The application must contain the following information: 
(1)  The full name of the person or organization applying for a permit to solicit and the address of the headquarters in the city; if the organization is a chapter or other affiliate of an organization having its principal office outside the city, the name and address of the parent organization, together with two (2) full-face, color photographs of the applicant two (2) inches square; 
(2)  The names and addresses of all officers, directors or trustees of the organization and the name and city of residence of all officers, directors or trustees of the parent organization, if any; 
(3)  The name of the person or persons by whom the receipts of the solicitation will be disbursed; if the receipts are transmitted to a parent organization for further disbursement, detailed information on the methods of handling and disbursement of all funds and a detailed and complete financial statement of the parent organization for the last preceding fiscal year; 
(4)  The name and address of the local person or persons who will be in charge of conducting the charitable solicitation; 
(5)  Whether or not applicant, agent or employee has ever been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, and if the applicant has been so convicted, state the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed thereof; 
(6)  An authorization to conduct a criminal background check on the applicant; 
(7)  The license and investigation fees as provided in this chapter; 
(8)  A description of the method or methods to be used in conducting the charitable solicitations; 
(9)  The period within which the charitable solicitation will be conducted, including the proposed dates for the beginning and ending of the solicitation; 
(10)  A full statement of the character and extent of the charitable work done by the applicant within the city during the preceding year and a statement of the specific purpose for which funds are to be solicited, together with a detailed account of their intended use; 
(11)  If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of its charter or articles of incorporation from its state of incorporation and, if the applicant is a foreign corporation, a copy of its certificate to do business in this state; 
(12)  If the applicant is a charitable corporation or other nonprofit organization, proof of the applicant's current status as a charitable association or other organization to which contributions are tax-deductible for federal income tax purposes; 
(13)  A statement of whether contributions to the person or organization are tax-deductible and what percentage of the contributions are not tax-deductible; 
(14)  Other information which may be required in order to determine fully the type and character of the proposed solicitation; and 
(15)  The names and addresses of all the solicitors. 
Failure to provide a complete and thorough application or the falsification of any part of the application shall be grounds for the denial or revocation of a license. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 2, 3-18-08)  
Sec. 13-116. - Duration, transferability, fee. 
(a)  Each charitable solicitation permit shall expire six (6) months from issuance. The license fee for solicitors, agents and employees of the solicitor and replacement licenses under this chapter are set out in the city's fee schedule [Appendix C}. In addition to the license fee, each applicant must pay the investigation fee as listed in subsection 13-116(c). 
(b)  A charitable solicitation permit is nontransferable. 
(c)  Investigation fee. 
(1)  In addition to the license fee, each applicant shall pay a fee to cover the cost of conducting a criminal background check on the applicant, in an amount to be determined by the city manager, or his designee. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of the chief of police to investigate each applicant for a license under this chapter and make a report thereof to the city manager before issuance of such a license. The chief of police's report shall include a recommendation as to the propriety of issuing a solicitor permit to the applicant based on a review of the applicant's background. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 2, 3-18-08)  
Sec. 13-117. - Issuance. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager, or his designee to issue or refuse to issue a license under this chapter not later than ten (10) days from the time the application therefore is received by him. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 2, 3-18-08)  
Sec. 13-118. - Revocation. 
(a)  A charitable solicitation permit may be revoked for any one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  The making of a false statement as to a material matter in an application or hearing concerning an application; 
(2)  The making of a false statement or misrepresentation to a member of the public with regard to the solicitation activity; 
(3)  Violation of any of the terms or conditions of the charitable solicitation permit; 
(4)  Violation of a provision of this article; 
(5)  The representation by a permittee that the charitable solicitation permit is an endorsement or recommendation of the cause for which the solicitation is being conducted; and 
(6)  Peddle or solicit at any residence or building which has posted a no peddling or solicitor sign. 
(b)  The city shall send written notice of a revocation to the permittee by certified mail, return receipt requested, setting forth the reasons for the revocation. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 2, 3-18-08)  
DIVISION 3. - RELIGIOUS SOLICITATION 
 
Sec. 13-120. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Door-to-door means private residences and businesses of persons who are both unknown to the person soliciting and not members of the church, religious society or other religious sect, group or order on whose behalf the solicitation is performed. 
Public place means any property open or devoted to public use. 
Religious purpose means the use of money or property for the support of a church, religious society or other religious sect, group or order. 
Religious solicitation means conduct whereby a person, organization, society, corporation or its agent, member or representative: 
(1)  Solicits property, financial aid, gifts in money or any article representing monetary value; or 
(2)  Sells or offers to sell a product, article, tag, service or printed material; 
on the plea or representation, whether express or implied, that the proceeds from the solicitation or sale are for a religious purpose. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 2, 3-18-08)  
Sec. 13-121. - Registration; identification badge. 
(a)  A person who engaged in religious solicitation door-to-door or in a public place shall first register with the designated city official as so designated by the city manager in writing, giving the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of registrant; together with two (2) full-face, color photographs of the applicant, two (2) inches square; 
(2)  Name and address of organization; 
(3)  Duration and locations of proposed solicitation; 
(4)  Name and address of each participant/solicitor; 
(5)  Whether or not applicant, agent or employee has ever been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, and if the applicant has been so convicted, state the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed thereof; 
(6)  An authorization to conduct a criminal background check on the applicant; and 
(7)  The license and investigation fees as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  Registration expires six (6) months from issuance. If a change occurs in any of the information submitted with the registration, the person or organization shall notify the city of the change. 
(c)  A person/solicitor shall wear at all times the photo identification badge issued for that specific person/solicitor while engaged in religious solicitation in a public place. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 2, 3-18-08)  
Sec. 13-122. - Prohibited conduct. 
A person engaged in religious solicitation door-to-door or in a public place shall not: 
(1)  Obstruct or impede the passage of a pedestrian or vehicle; 
(2)  Make physical contact with the person being solicited unless that person's permission is obtained; 
(3)  Misrepresent the religious purpose of the solicitation; 
(4)  Misrepresent the religious affiliation of those engaged in the solicitation; 
(5)  Peddle or solicit at any residence or building, which has posted a no peddling or solicitor sign.  
DIVISION 4. - ITINERANT MERCHANTS 
 
Sec. 13-130. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article: 
Door-to-door means private residences and businesses of persons who are both unknown to the person soliciting and not members of the church, religious society or other religious sect, group or order on whose behalf the solicitation is performed. 
An itinerant merchant is any person who sells or takes orders from door to door or from place to place in the city or who sells out of a vehicle parked on premises where there is no related business building. 
Place to place means any property open or devoted to public use. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 2, 3-18-08)  
Sec. 13-131. - Sale of edible merchandise. 
Every person who is licensed as an itinerant merchant to peddle edible merchandise as required by this chapter shall keep all articles for sale to the public in a clean and sanitary condition, as well as the wagons, vehicles or other conveyances used in the transportation of such merchandise. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 2, 3-18-08)  
Sec. 13-132. - Quality, accurate measures. 
It shall be unlawful for any itinerant merchant to sell or offer to sell any unsound or unwholesome merchandise or to give a false weight or measure to such article sold or offered for sale. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 2, 3-18-08)  
Sec. 13-133. - Required. 
Every itinerant merchant as identified in this article shall be required to obtain a permit prior to engaging in the business of an itinerant merchant. An applicant for such permit shall file an application in writing with the designated city office, as so designated in writing by the city manager, not less than ten (10) days before the first month in which he proposes to engage in business as an itinerant merchant. The application must contain the following information: 
(1)  The full name of the person applying for a permit, his address and telephone number, if any, and, if the itinerant merchant is selling on behalf of an organization, the name and address of the parent organization, together with two (2) full-face, color photographs of the applicant two (2) inches square; 
(2)  The addresses of the itinerant merchant during the previous five (5) years with the name of at least one (1) reference in each community; 
(3)  The fingerprints of the itinerant merchant; 
(4)  A copy of a limited sales tax permit issued by the state or proof that the goods sold are not subject to such sales tax; 
(5)  A statement of the type of goods or wares to be sold; 
(6)  A copy of a current health certificate if merchandise of edible quality is to be sold; provided, however, this shall not apply to the sale of candy, nuts or other edibles prepared and packaged by a nationally recognized manufacturer or a Texas manufacturer meeting standards imposed by state and local health codes, if such packages are unbroken; 
(7)  Names and addresses of all solicitors; 
(8)  Whether or not applicant, agent, or employee has ever been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, and if the applicant has been so convicted, state the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed thereof; 
(9)  An authorization to conduct a criminal background check on the applicant, agent or employee; and 
(10)  The license and investigation fees as provided in this chapter. 
Failure to provide a complete and thorough application or the falsification of any part of the application shall be grounds for the denial or revocation of a license. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 2, 3-18-08) 
   
Sec. 13-134. - Photo identification badge. 
All persons engaged in any activity so defined under this article shall at all times wear the photo identification badge specifically issued for such person/solicitor. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 2, 3-18-08)  
Sec. 13-135. - Expiration; fee. 
Each itinerant merchant permit shall expire six (6) months from issuance. The license fee for a solicitor under this chapter and the itinerant merchant's employees and agents and license replacment fee shall be as set out in the city's fee schedule [Appendix C]. In addition to the license fee, each applicant must pay the investigation fee as listed in section 13-136. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 2, 3-18-08)  
Sec. 13-136. - Investigation of applicant. 
(a)  In addition to the license fee, each applicant, agent or employee shall pay a fee to cover the cost of conducting a criminal background check on the applicant, in an amount to be determined by the city manager, or his designee. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the chief of police to investigate each applicant for a license under this chapter and make a report thereof to the city manager before issuance of such a license. The chief of police's report shall include a recommendation as to the propriety of issuing a solicitor permit to the applicant based on a review of the applicant's background. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 2, 3-18-08)  
Sec. 13-137. - Issuance. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager or his designee to issue or refuse to issue a license under this chapter not later than ten (10) days from the time the application therefore is received by him. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 2, 3-18-08)  
DIVISION 5. - PUBLICATION SALES AND SOLICITATION 
 
Sec. 13-140. - Definition. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, publication solicitation means conduct whereby a person sells or takes orders for sales of newspapers, magazines, or other publication (including audio and visual recordings). 
(b)  Place-to-place means any property open or devoted to public use. 
(c)  Door-to-door means private residences and businesses of persons who are both unknown to the person soliciting and not members of the church, religious society or other religious sect, group or order on whose behalf the solicitation is performed. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 2, 3-18-08)  
Sec. 13-141. - Registration; identification badge. 
(a)  A person who engages in publication solicitation and who goes personally from door to door or in a public place shall first register with the designated city official, as so designated in writing by the city manager, giving the following information: 
(1)  Name of registrant and residence address; 
(2)  Name and address of organization (if any) employing registrant; 
(3)  Names or description of publications to be sold or for which solicitation is to be made; 
(4)  Date solicitations or sales are to commence and cease; 
(5)  Name and address of all persons engaged in the solicitation, together with two (2) full-face, color photographs of the applicant, two (2) inches square; 
(6)  Whether or not applicant, agent or employee has ever been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, and if the applicant has been so convicted, state the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed thereof; 
(7)  An authorization to conduct a criminal background check on the applicant, agent or employee; and 
(8)  The license and investigation fees as provided in this chapter. 
Failure to provide a complete and thorough application or the falsification of any part of the application shall be grounds for the denial or revocation of a license. 
(b)  Registration expires six (6) months from issuance. If a change occurs in any of the information submitted with the registration, the person or organization shall notify the city of the change. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 2, 3-18-08)  
Sec. 13-142. - Photo identification badge. 
All persons engaged in any activity so defined under this article shall at all times wear the photo identification badge specifically issued for such person/solicitor. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 2, 3-18-08)  
Sec. 13-143. - Prohibited conduct; penalty; suspension, cancellation of registration. 
(a)  A person engaged in publication solicitation shall not: 
(1)  Go from door-to-door or place-to-place without first registering as herein required. 
(2)  Refuse to display the registration badge provided to him. 
(3)  Misrepresent to the designated city official, or any person solicited for a sale or order, the purpose of the solicitation, the identity of the organization doing the solicitation, the identity of the person doing the solicitation, the price of a publication, its source, or the beneficiary of profits derived from solicitation. 
(4)  Obstruct or impede the passage of a pedestrian or vehicle. 
(5)  Make physical contact with the person being solicited without the permission of such person. 
(6)  Continue efforts to peddle to or solicit from an individual once that individual informs the peddler or solicitor that he does not wish to give anything to or to buy anything from that peddler or solicitor. 
(7)  Peddle or solicit at any residence or building, which has posted a no peddling or solicitor sign. 
(8)  Act in any manner which is contrary to local, state, or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 2, 3-18-08)  
ARTICLE II. - PAWNBROKERS, SECONDHAND DEALERS, JUNK DEALERS 
 
Sec. 13-200. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Junk dealer. The term "junk dealer" is used in the ordinary and usual accepted meaning and shall also mean and include any person engaged in any of the following: Collecting, handling, buying and selling of scrap iron, scrap tin, scrap brass, scrap copper, scrap lead, scrap zinc, and all other scrap metals and alloys; secondhand mechanical and garden tools and utensils, used or secondhand plumbing fixtures, appliances, fittings, pipes and supplies; used or secondhand electrical fixtures, fittings, appliances and supplies; used or secondhand gas fixtures, fittings, appliances and supplies; used or secondhand water heaters, fixtures, fittings, pipes and supplies; used or secondhand doors, window sash or glass, mantels or parts thereof; used or secondhand automobiles purchased for the purpose of being dismantled; all automobile parts and accessories, and used or secondhand tires and tubes. 
Pawnbroker. The term "pawnbroker" is used in its ordinary and usual trade acceptance meaning and shall include any person who loans money secured by any personal property (as distinguished from real property which is left as security with the person making the loan, and/or the sale handling or purchase of any such secondhand or used personal property. 
Secondhand dealer. The term "secondhand dealer" is used in its ordinary and usual trade acceptance meaning and shall also mean and include any person engaged in any of the following: Collecting, handling, buying, trading, selling or engaging in the sale or trafficking of any of the following: Used or secondhand wearing apparel, consisting of hats, shoes, overcoats, raincoats and any and all kinds of clothing; used or secondhand watches, jewelry, diamonds, luggage, musical instruments, shotguns, rifles, revolvers and all other kinds of firearms; and any and all kinds of used goods, wares and merchandise or other personal property which are handled by pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers in the usual course of trade. 
(Ord. No. 602, § 1, 10-3-89)  
Sec. 13-210. - When no license required. 
No license is required nor is any provision of this article applicable to any person, firm or business engaged in the temporary sales of personal property occurring on private, residentially zoned property, sold by the property's owner as in a "garage" or "estate" sale, or engaged in accepting personal property belonging to another for sale where remuneration or fee for such sale is paid only upon the final sale of such item. 
(Ord. No. 602, § 1, 10-3-89)  
Sec. 13-220. - Hours of business. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any business of a secondhand dealer, junk dealer or pawnbroker between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:30 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 602, § 1, 10-3-89)  
Sec. 13-230. - License requirement. 
No junk dealer, secondhand dealer or pawnbroker shall transact or engage in business within the city unless or until he shall have obtained an annual license therefor, which may be procured by complying with the following provisions: 
(1)  An applicant for a license shall make a request therefor in writing addressed to the permit department, which shall contain the name, residence and street address and such other reasonable information as will identify such applicant, together with the classification of such applicant in case of a firm or corporation, in which event the application shall show the individual members of the partnership and/or officers of the corporation. 
(2)  The license hereby applied for shall be subject to all the provisions and regulations of this Code and other ordinances of the city related to junk, junk dealers, secondhand dealers and pawnbrokers. 
(3)  The application must be accompanied by a certified copy of a pawnbroker license issued by the consumer credit commissioner pursuant to article 5069-51.03 of Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes Annotated, along with a certified copy of the bond accompanying such state pawnshop license and a receipt showing payment of the necessary fees under article 5069-51.04 of Vernon's Texas Statutes Annotated. 
(4)  The annual license fees under this section shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00), paid in advance for such application. Such application shall be signed and sworn to by the person applying therefor before such officers authorized by law to administer oaths. 
(5)  Each application shall be presented to the city permit department which shall issue a license to the applicant upon its compliance with the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 602, § 1, 10-3-89)  
Sec. 13-240. - License regulations. 
Every junk dealer, secondhand dealer and pawnbroker, while engaged in the prosecution of such business, shall have posted and available for inspection at all times his license to engage in such business. No junk dealer, secondhand dealer or pawnbroker shall assign or knowingly permit his license to be used by another, and no person shall use the license of any such dealer except his own in the operation of his business or the business enumerated by this article. Conviction for violation of any of the provisions of this article shall immediately result in the cancellation of the license. 
(Ord. No. 602, § 1, 10-3-89)  
Sec. 13-250. - Records to be kept. 
(a)  All junk dealers, secondhand dealers and pawnbrokers as defined in this article, doing business or offering to do business in the City of Keller, shall at all times keep on hand records, which shall be legibly written by the dealer at the time of any transaction in an accurate description in the English language of the article purchased or deposited with the junk dealer, secondhand dealer or pawnbroker, including any serial number or other identification present, including manufacturer's brand; the amount of money paid for same or loan thereon; the date and time of the purchase or deposit; the name, age, sex, signature, residence and race of the person selling or depositing such article; how the article was obtained by the seller or depositor as recorded by the seller or depositor, together with the name of the state issuing the license and the number of the license of the automobile in which such article was delivered to such dealer. 
(b)  All records shall be kept on a preprinted form of a multicopied variety measuring approximately four (4) inches by six (6) inches. The top or original copy shall be retained for pickup and usage by members of the City of Keller Police Department or their assigns upon request during normal business hours. 
(c)  A junk dealer, secondhand dealer or pawnbroker shall obtain from each seller or depositor of any property and insert in a registration book or upon the record form the number of the current Texas driver's license of such person and the date it expires. If for any reason the seller does not possess a current Texas driver's license, other identification, including a Texas identification card, U.S. passport, military identification and department of corrections identification, shall be substituted. The reason for not possessing a driver's license or other identification shall be set forth in the registration book, together with the seller's or depositor's thumb print plainly and clearly in ink opposite his name in the records of the dealer or pawnbroker. 
(d)  The taking of a thumb print shall not be applicable to transactions in which a licensee shall purchase articles from a person having a valid license or permit to transact and engage in a lawful business or occupation, whether such license or permit is issued by the city, the state or the United States of America (including a limited sales tax permit from the State of Texas), and in such transaction, identification of the seller of the junk or merchandise shall be deemed sufficient if the licensee shall make a notation of the city and number of such license or permit.  
Sec. 13-260. - Identification of merchandise. 
Each lot, sack, barrel, box or other container of junk or other merchandise purchased or deposited with a licensee under this article shall be kept intact and have written or stamped in a conspicuous place, either on the container thereof or if no container on one (1) of the articles, the serial number of the report made as set forth herein; such number shall at all times be kept plain and legible. Such number shall be affixed on every secondhand article, by means of a tag on which is legibly printed the corresponding serial number of the report of sale and purchase required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 602, § 1, 10-3-89)  
Sec. 13-270. - Articles to be held before resale. 
Each lot of junk and each secondhand article shall be retained in its original form, shape and condition for a period of twenty (20) days after such purchase or deposit, during which time no part of such junk or other merchandise shall be sold or permitted to be redeemed or removed from the place of business of such dealer except by the person making such purchase or deposit. 
(Ord. No. 602, § 1, 10-3-89; Ord. No. 1615, § 2, 8-7-12)  
Sec. 13-280. - Purchases lacking brand or serial number prohibited. 
No junk or secondhand dealer or pawnbroker shall purchase or receive for deposit or have in his possession any article of junk or secondhand article, except small metal articles bought in bulk with other scrap metal, from which the manufacturer's serial number or brand have been removed or obliterated. 
(Ord. No. 602, § 1, 10-3-89)  
Sec. 13-290. - Inspection of purchased items. 
Each article purchased by or deposited with any junk dealer, secondhand dealer or pawnbroker shall at all reasonable times be open to inspection by any member of the police force of the City of Keller or its assigns or designee. 
(Ord. No. 602, § 1, 10-3-89)  
Sec. 13-300. - No purchases from minors. 
No junk dealer, secondhand dealer or pawnbroker shall purchase or receive in pledge or on deposit for any purpose any article from any minor which may be owned, claimed by or in possession of or control of any minor. 
(Ord. No. 602, § 1, 10-3-89)  
Sec. 13-310. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon final conviction thereof, be fined in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each and every day any such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate violation hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 602, § 2, 10-3-89)  
Chapter 15 - POLICE RESERVE FORCE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Cross reference—Administration, Ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 15-100. - Creation. 
There is hereby established a police reserve force for the City of Keller, Texas.  
Sec. 15-110. - Membership. 
Members of the police reserve force shall be appointed and/or relieved at the discretion of the chief of police and shall serve as police officers during the actual discharge of official duties.  
Sec. 15-120. - Size of reserve force. 
The police reserve force shall not exceed in number more than one and one-half (1½) times the total number of regular police officers authorized.  
Sec. 15-130. - Duties of members. 
Members of the police reserve force shall serve at the complete discretion of the chief of police and may be called into active service at any time the chief of police considers it necessary to have additional police officers to preserve the peace and enforce the law.  
Sec. 15-140. - Benefits to members. 
Members of the police reserve force will serve without compensation. Uniforms and uniform compensation will be provided to the reserve police force officers by the city. The uniform compensation shall be based solely upon time served by a member of the police reserve while in training for and in performance of official duties. The city will provide hospital and medical assistance to the members of the police reserve force who sustain injury in the course of performing official duties, in the same manner as provided by the City of Keller for its full-time police officers; and reserve officers shall be eligible for death benefits as set out by State Law for police line-of-duty deaths; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize or permit a member of the police reserve force to become eligible for participation in any pension fund created, pursuant to state statutes, to which regular officers may become a member by payroll deductions or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 1083, § 2, 12-18-01)  
Sec. 15-150. - Supplementary function. 
Reserve police force officers shall act only in a supplementary capacity to the regular police force and shall in no case assume the full-time duties of a regular officer. 
(Ord. No. 1083, § 3, 12-18-01)  
Sec. 15-160. - Qualifications. 
Reserve police force officers must comply with the minimum training standards established by the Texas Commission of Law Enforcement Standards and Education and a successful completion of the T.C.L.O.S.E. examination. Reserve officers must successfully meet the same entry-level requirements as a regular police force officer. 
(Ord. No. 1083, § 4, 12-18-01)  
Sec. 15-170. - Carrying of weapons. 
No person appointed to the police reserve force may carry a weapon or otherwise act as a police reserve officer until he has been approved by the chief of police. After approval, he may carry a weapon only when authorized by the chief of police, and when discharging official duties as a duly constituted police officer. 
(Ord. No. 1083, § 5, 12-18-01)  
Sec. 15-180. - Display of rank. 
Reserve police force officers will not wear any outward display of rank on their uniforms.  
Chapter 15.5 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Impact fees, Ch. 8.5; parks and recreation, Ch. 14, Subdivisions, Ch. 16; Traffic, Ch. 18; zoning, App. A. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 15.5-1—15.5-290. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
 
Sec. 15.5-300. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Assist in the management of facilities placed in, on or over the public rights-of-way in order to minimize the congestion, inconvenience, visual impact and other adverse effects, and the costs to the citizens resulting from the placement of facilities within the public rights-of-way; 
(2)  Govern the use and occupancy of the public rights-of-way; 
(3)  Assist the city in its efforts to protect the public health, safety and welfare; 
(4)  Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public rights-of-way held in public trust by the city; 
(5)  To preserve the physical integrity of the streets and highways; 
(6)  To control the orderly flow of vehicles and pedestrians; 
(7)  Keep track of the different entities using the rights-of-way to prevent interference between them; 
(8)  Assist on scheduling common trenching and street cuts; and 
(9)  Protect the safety, security, appearance, and condition of the public rights-of-way; 
(b)  This article may be referred to as the "Construction in the Public Rights-of-Way Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 983, § 1, 9-21-99)  
Sec. 15.5-310. - Authority; scope. 
This article applies to all persons that place facilities in, on or over public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 983, § 2, 9-21-99)  
Sec. 15.5-320. - Definitions. 
In this article: 
Affiliate means a person who controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with a provider. 
Certificated telecommunications provider means the same as in Local Government Code Section 283.002(2) (any entity that has been granted a certificate from the Texas Public Utility Commission under Chapter 54 of Tex. Utility Code authorizing that entity to provide local exchange telephone service). 
City means The City Of Keller, Texas. As used throughout, the term city also includes the designated agent of the city. 
City manager means the city manager of the city or the city manager's designee. 
Direction of the city means all ordinances, laws, rules, resolutions, and regulations of the city that are not inconsistent with this article and that are now in force or may hereafter be passed and adopted. 
Facilities means any and all of the wires, cables, fibers, duct spaces, manholes, poles, conduits, underground and overhead passageways and other equipment, structures, plant and appurtenances and all associated physical equipment placed in, on or under the public rights-of-way. 
Person means a natural person (an individual), corporation, company, association, partnership, firm, limited liability company, joint venture, joint stock company or association, and other such entity. 
Public rights-of-way means the same as in the Texas Local Government Code, § 283.002(6), (the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway, or utility easement in which the municipality has an interest. The term does not include the airwaves above a public right-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications.) 
(Ord. No. 983, § 3, 9-21-99)  
Sec. 15.5-330. - Municipal authorization required. 
(a)  Any person seeking to place facilities on, in or over the public rights-of-way, shall first file an application for a building permit with the city and shall abide by the terms and provisions of this article pertaining to use of the public rights-of-way. 
(b)  Any person, except a certificated telecommunications provider, prior to placing, reconstructing, or altering facilities in, on or over the public rights-of-way, must obtain separate municipal authorization from the city. 
(c)  Any person with a current, unexpired consent, franchise, agreement or other authorization from the city to use the public rights-of-way that is in effect at the time this article takes effect shall continue to operate under and comply with that grant until the grant expires or until it is terminated by mutual agreement of the city and the person, or terminated as otherwise provided for in law. 
(Ord. No. 983, § 4, 9-21-99)  
Sec. 15.5-340. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  The city manager shall administer and enforce compliance with this article. 
(b)  A person shall report information related to the use of the public rights-of-way that the city manager requires in the form and manner reasonably prescribed by the city manager. 
(c)  The city manager shall report to the city council upon the determination that a person has failed to comply with this article. 
(Ord. No. 983, § 5, 9-21-99)  
Sec. 15.5-350. - Construction obligations. 
A person is subject to reasonable police power regulation of the city to manage its public rights-of-way in connection with the construction, expansion, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of facilities in the public rights-of-way, pursuant to the city's rights as a custodian of public property, based upon the city's historic rights under state and federal laws. Such regulations include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  At the city's request, a person shall furnish the city accurate and complete information relating to the construction, reconstruction, removal, maintenance, operation and repair of facilities performed by the person in the public rights-of-way. 
(2)  A person may be required to place certain facilities within the public rights-of-way underground according to applicable city requirements absent a compelling demonstration by the person that, in any specific instance, this requirement is not reasonable or feasible nor is it equally applicable to other similar users of the public rights-of-way. 
(3)  A person shall perform operations, excavations and other construction in the public rights-of-way in accordance with all applicable city requirements, including the obligation to use trenchless technology whenever commercially economical and practical and consistent with obligations on other similar users of the public right-of-way. The city shall waive the requirement of trenchless technology if it determines that the field conditions warrant the waiver, based upon information provided to the city by the person. All excavations and other construction in the public rights-of-way shall be conducted so as to minimize interference with the use of public and private property. A person shall follow all reasonable construction directions given by the city in order to minimize any such interference. 
(4)  A person must obtain a permit, as reasonably required by applicable city codes, prior to any excavation, construction, installation, expansion, repair, removal, relocation or maintenance of the person's facilities. Once a permit is issued, person shall give to the city a minimum of forty-eight (48) hours notice (which could be at the time of the issuance of the permit) prior to undertaking any of the above listed activities on its network in, on or under the public rights-of-way. The failure of the person to request and obtain a permit from the city prior to performing any of the above listed activities in, on or over any public right-of-way, except in an emergency as provided for in subsection (11) below, will subject the person to a stop-work order from the city and enforcement action pursuant to the city's Code of Ordinances. If the person fails to act upon any permit within ninety (90) calendar days of issuance, the permit shall become invalid, and the person will be required to obtain another permit. 
(5)  When a person completes construction, expansion, reconstruction, removal, excavation or other work, the person shall promptly restore the rights-of-way in accordance with applicable city requirements. A person shall replace and properly relay and repair the surface, base, irrigation system and landscape treatment of any public rights-of-way that may be excavated or damaged by reason of the erection, construction, maintenance, or repair of the person's facilities within thirty (30) calendar days after completion of the work in accordance with existing standards of the city in effect at the time of the work. 
(6)  Upon failure of a person to perform any such repair or replacement work, and five (5) days after written notice has been given by the city to the person, the city may repair such portion of the public rights-of-way as may have been disturbed by the person, its contractors or agents. Upon receipt of a invoice from the city, the person will reimburse the city for the costs so incurred within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the city invoice. 
(7)  Should the city reasonably determine, within two (2) years from the date of the completion of the repair work, that the surface, base, irrigation system or landscape treatment requires additional restoration work to meet existing standards of the city, a person shall perform such additional restoration work to the satisfaction of the city, subject to all city remedies as provided herein. 
(8)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the city determines that the failure of a person to properly repair or restore the public rights-of-way constitutes a safety hazard to the public, the city may undertake emergency repairs and restoration efforts. A person shall promptly reimburse the city for all costs incurred by the city within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the city invoice. 
(9)  A person shall furnish the city with construction plans and maps showing the location and proposed routing of new construction or reconstruction at least fifteen (15) days before beginning construction or reconstruction that involves an alteration to the surface or subsurface of the public rights-of-way. A person may not begin construction until the location of new facilities and proposed routing of the new construction or reconstruction and all required plans and drawings have been approved in writing by the city, which approval will not be unreasonably withheld, taking due consideration of the surrounding area and alternative locations for the facilities and routing. 
(10)  If the city manager declares an emergency with regard to the health and safety of the citizens and requests by written notice the removal or abatement of facilities, a person shall remove or abate the person's facilities by the deadline provided in the city manager's request. The person and the city shall cooperate to the extent possible to assure continuity of service. If the person, after notice, fails or refuses to act, the city may remove or abate the facility, at the sole cost and expense of the person, without paying compensation to the person and without the city incurring liability for damages. 
(11)  Except in the case of customer service interruptions and imminent harm to property or person, a person may not excavate the pavement of a street or public rights-of-way without first complying with city requirements. The city manager or designee shall be notified immediately regarding work performed under such emergency conditions, and the person shall comply with the requirements of city standards for the restoration of the public rights-of-way. 
(12)  Within sixty (60) days of completion of each new permitted section of a person's facilities, the person shall supply the city with a complete set of "as built" drawings for the segment in a format used in the ordinary course of the person's business and as reasonably prescribed by the city, and as allowed by law. 
(13)  The city may require reasonable bonding requirements of a person, as are required of other entities that place facilities in the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 983, § 6, 9-21-99)  
Sec. 15.5-360. - Conditions of public rights-of-way occupancy. 
(a)  In the exercise of governmental functions, the city has first priority over all other uses of the public rights-of-way. The city reserves the right to lay sewer, gas, water, and other pipe lines or cables and conduits, and to do underground and overhead work, and attachments, restructuring or changes in aerial facilities in, across, along, over or under a public street, alley or public rights-of-way occupied by a person, and to change the curb, sidewalks or the grade of streets. 
(b)  The city shall assign the location in or over the public rights-of-way among competing users of the public rights-of-way with due consideration to the public health and safety considerations of each user type, and to the extent the city can demonstrate that there is limited space available for additional users, may limit new users, as allowed under state or federal law. 
(c)  If the city authorizes abutting landowners to occupy space under the surface of any public street, alley, or public rights-of-way, the grant to an abutting landowner shall be subject to the rights of the previously authorized user of the public rights-of-way. If the city closes or abandons a public rights-of-way that contains a portion of a person's facilities, the city shall close or abandon such public right-of-way subject to the rights of the person. 
(d)  If the city gives written notice, a person shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of person's facilities that are in the public rights-of-way within one hundred twenty (120) days, except in circumstances that require additional time as reasonably determined by the city based upon information provided by the person. For projects expected to take longer than one hundred twenty (120) days to remove, change or relocate, the city will confer with person before determining the alterations to be required and the timing thereof. The city shall give notice whenever the city has determined that removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for the construction, operation, repair, maintenance or installation of a city or other governmental public improvement in the public rights-of-way. This section shall not be construed to prevent a person's recovery of the cost of relocation or removal from private third parties who initiate the request for relocation or removal, nor shall it be required if improvements are solely for beautification purposes without prior joint deliberation and agreement with person. 
If the person fails to relocate facilities in the time allowed by the city in this section, the person may be subject to liability to the city for such delay and as set forth in the city codes or ordinance, now or hereafter enacted. 
Notwithstanding anything in this subsection (d), the city manager and a person may agree in writing to different time frames than those provided above if circumstances reasonably warrant such a change. 
(e)  During the term of its municipal consent, a person may trim trees in or over the rights-of-way for the safe and reliable operation, use and maintenance of its facilities. All tree trimming shall be performed in accordance with standards promulgated by the city. Should the person, its contractor or agent, fail to remove such trimmings within twenty-four (24) hours, the city may remove the trimmings or have them removed, and upon receipt of a bill from the city, the person shall promptly reimburse the city for all costs incurred within thirty (30) working days. 
(f)  Persons shall temporarily remove, raise or lower its aerial facilities to permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures, if the city gives written notice of no less than forty-eight (48) hours. The expense of these temporary rearrangements shall be paid by the party or parties requesting and benefiting from the temporary rearrangements. Person may require prepayment or prior posting of a bond from the party requesting temporary move. 
(Ord. No. 983, § 7, 9-21-99)  
Sec. 15.5-370. - Insurance requirements. 
(a)  A person shall obtain and maintain insurance in the amounts reasonably prescribed by the city with an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Texas acceptable to the city throughout the term of a municipal consent conveyed under this article. A person shall furnish the city with proof of insurance at the time of the request for building permits. The city reserves the right to review the insurance requirements and to reasonably adjust insurance coverage and limits when the city manager determines that changes in statutory law, court decisions, or the claims history of the industry or the person require adjustment of the coverage. For purposes of this section, the city will accept certificates of self-insurance issued by the State of Texas or letters written by the person in those instances where the state does not issue such letters, which provide the same coverage as required herein. However, for the city to accept such letters the person must demonstrate by written information that it has adequate financial resources to be a self-insured entity as reasonably determined by the city, based on financial information requested by and furnished to the city. The city's current insurance requirements are described in Exhibit A attached hereto. 
(b)  Person shall furnish, at no cost to the city, copies of certificates of insurance evidencing the coverage required by this section to the city. The city may request the deletion, revision or modification of particular policy terms, conditions, limitations or exclusions, unless the policy provisions are established by a law or regulation binding the city, the person, or the underwriter. If the city requests a deletion, revision or modification, a person shall exercise reasonable efforts to pay for and to accomplish the change. 
(c)  An insurance certificate shall contain the following required provisions: 
(1)  Name the city of and its officers, employees, board members and elected representatives as additional insureds for all applicable coverage; 
(2)  Provide for thirty (30) days notice to the city for cancellation, non-renewal, or material change; and 
(3)  Provide that notice of claims shall be provided to the city manager by certified mail. 
(d)  Person shall file and maintain proof of insurance with the city manager. An insurance certificate obtained in compliance with this section is subject to city approval. The city may require the certificate to be changed to reflect changing liability limits. A person shall immediately advise the city attorney of actual or potential litigation that may develop may affect an existing carrier's obligation to defend and indemnify. 
(e)  An insurer has no right of recovery against the city. The required insurance policies shall protect the person and the city. The insurance shall be primary coverage for losses covered by the policies. 
(f)  The policy clause "other insurance" shall not apply to the city if the city is an insured under the policy. 
(g)  The person shall pay premiums and assessments. A company which issues an insurance policy has no recourse against the city for payment of a premium or assessment. Insurance policies obtained by a person must provide that the issuing company waives all right of recovery by way of subrogation against the city in connection with damage covered by the policy. 
(Ord. No. 983, § 8, 9-21-99)  
Sec. 15.5-380. - Indemnity. 
(a)  Except as to certificated telecommunications utilities, each person placing facilities in the public rights-of-way shall agree to promptly defend, indemnify and hold the city harmless from and against all damages, costs, losses or expenses (i) for the repair, replacement, or restoration of city's property, equipment, materials, structures and facilities which are damaged, destroyed or found to be defective as a result of the person's acts or omissions, (ii) from and against any and all claims, demands, suits, causes of action, and judgments for (a) damage to or loss of the property of any person (including, but not limited to the person, its agents, officers, employees and subcontractors, city's agents, officers and employees, and third parties); and/or (b) death, bodily injury, illness, disease, loss of services, or loss of income or wages to any person (including, but not limited to the agents, officers and employees of the person, person's subcontractors and city, and third parties), arising out of, incident to, concerning or resulting from the negligent or willful act or omissions of the person, its agents, employees, and/or subcontractors, in the performance of activities pursuant to this article. 
(b)  This indemnity provision shall not apply to any liability resulting from the negligence of the city, its officers, employees, agents, contractors, or subcontractors. 
(c)  The provisions of this indemnity is solely for the benefit of the city and is not intended to create or grant any rights, contractual or otherwise, to any other person or entity. 
(Ord. No. 983, § 9, 9-21-99)  
Sec. 15.5-390. - Governing law. 
This article shall be construed in accordance with the City Code(s) in effect on the date of passage of this article to the extent that such code s) are not in conflict with or in violation of the Constitution and laws of the United States or the State of Texas, subject to the city's ongoing authority to adopt reasonable regulations to manage its public rights-of-way, pursuant to sections 15.5-350 and 15.5-360 or as otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 983, § 11, 9-21-99)  
Sec. 15.5-400. - Unauthorized use of public rights-of-way. 
The city may institute all appropriate legal action to prohibit any person from knowingly using the public rights-of-way unless the person has complied with the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 983, § 12, 9-21-99)  
Secs. 15.5-410—15.5-490. - Reserved  
ARTICLE III. - USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAYS BY PROVIDERS OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 15.5-500. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this division is to: 
(1)  Assist in the management of the public rights-of-way in order to minimize the congestion, inconvenience, visual impact and other adverse effects, and the costs to the citizens resulting from the placement of telecommunications facilities within the public rights-of-way; 
(2)  Govern the provider's use and occupancy of the public rights-of-way; 
(3)  Compensate city for the private, commercial use and occupancy of the public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers in a non-discriminatory and competitively neutral manner; 
(4)  Assist the city in its efforts to protect the public health, safety and welfare; 
(5)  Facilitate competition among telecommunications service providers and encourage the universal availability of advanced telecommunications services to all residents and businesses of the city; 
(6)  Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public rights-of-way held in public trust by the city; 
(b)  This division may be referred to as the "Telecommunications Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 933, § 1, 11-17-98)  
Sec. 15.5-510. - Granting clause. 
Subject to the restrictions set forth herein, the city may consent to the non-exclusive right and privilege to use the public rights-of-way in the city by a provider for the operation of access lines in a telecommunications system, consisting of both telecommunications facilities and transmission media. The terms of this division shall apply throughout the city and to all operations of the provider within the city public rights-of-way, and in the public rights-of-way in any newly annexed areas in accordance with section 15.5-710 herein. 
(Ord. No. 933, § 2, 11-17-98)  
Sec. 15.5-520. - Authority; scope. 
(a)  This division applies to all Telecommunications Service Providers under Title 47, Chapter 5, Subchapter II of the United States Code (47 U.S.C. § 201 et seq.) ("Title 47") that place transmission media in, on or over public rights-of-way, excluding services provided solely by means of a wireless transmission. No municipal consent granted under this division authorizes the provision of any services not covered by Title 47. Cable service and open video systems as defined in Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934 (Title 47, Chapter 5, Subchapter V-A of the United States Code (47 U.S.C. § 521, et seq.)) and any other content service are expressly excluded. 
(b)  The right of a person to apply for or to use city utility infrastructure shall be governed by other provisions of the city code. The granting of a municipal consent under this chapter does not grant attachment rights or authorize the use of city utility infrastructure. 
(Ord. No. 933, § 3, 11-17-98)  
Sec. 15.5-530. - Definitions. 
In this division: 
Access line means a unit of measurement representing: 
(1)  Each switched transmission path of the transmission media within the public rights-of-way extended to the end-user customer's network interface within the city that allows delivery of telecommunications service; 
(2)  Each separate transmission path of the transmission media within the city's public rights-of-way that terminates at an end user customer's network interface of each loop provided as an unbundled network element to a person pursuant to an agreement under Section 252 of the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 (47 U.S.C. § 252); or 
(3)  Each termination point of a non-switched telephone or other circuit consisting of transmission media connecting specific locations identified by, and provided to, the end-user for the delivery of non-switched telecommunications service within the city. 
Access line fee means the amount in section 15.5-600 to be applied to each access line on a monthly basis for the calculation of the total amount to be paid to the city by the provider and/or any person using the facilities of provider for the creation of telecommunications service. 
Affiliate means a person who controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with a provider. Affiliate does not include a person who serves end use customers by means of a wireless transmission. There is a rebuttable presumption of control if a provider owns twenty-five (25) percent or more of the affiliate's stock or assets. 
Certificated telecommunications utility means any entity that has been granted or applied for a certificate under Chapter 54 of Tex. Utility Code or other successor authorizing certificate to provide local exchange telephone service. 
City means The City of Keller, Texas. As used throughout, the term city also includes the designated agent of the city. 
City manager means the city manager of the city or the city manager's designee. 
Direction of the city means all ordinances, laws, rules, resolutions, and regulations of the city that are not inconsistent with this division and that are now in force or may hereafter be passed and adopted. 
Facilities means any and all of the provider's duct spaces, manholes, poles, conduits, underground and overhead passageways and other equipment, structures, plant and appurtenances and all associated transmission media. 
Municipal consent means the individual grant to use the public rights-of-way issued by the city and accepted by the individual providers under this chapter governing the provider's use of the public rights-of-way and the payment of compensation. 
Person means a natural person (an individual), corporation, company, association, partnership, firm, limited liability company, joint venture, joint stock company or association, and other such entity. 
Provider means a person that delivers telecommunications service within the city to person(s) by way of a network, including any certificated telecommunications utility and that places facilities in, on or over the public rights-of-way. A provider does not include persons who are authorized by the city to occupy the public rights-of-way in specifically approved routes within the city, unless they also have a municipal consent under this chapter. To the extent allowed by law, provider also means a person that does not deliver telecommunications service within the city, but who uses, constructs or maintains facilities or transmission media within the public rights-of-way. 
Public rights-of-way means all present and future public streets, highways, lanes, paths, alleys, sidewalks, boulevards, driver, tunnels, easements or similar property in the city limits in which the city holds a property interest or exercises rights of management or control. 
Telecommunications network or Network means all facilities placed in the public rights-of-way and used to provide telecommunications service to the public. 
Telecommunications service means the providing or offering to provide transmissions between or among points identified by the user, of information of the user's choosing, including voice, video or data, without change in content of the information as sent and received, if the transmissions are accomplished through a telecommunications network. Telecommunications service include ancillary or adjunct switching services and signal conversions rendered as a function of underlying transmission services, but excludes long distance transmissions (inter-LATA (local access transport area) and intra-LATA toll transmissions). Telecommunications service includes all communications services capable of being provided over a telephone system and certificated to telecommunications providers under the Tex. Utility Code, Title 2, Public Utility Regulatory Act, as amended, and Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, expressly excluding cable services or open video systems as defined in Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended. Also excluded are "wireless services" as defined by law. 
Transmission media means any and all of the provider's cables, fibers, wires or other physical devices used to transmit and/or receive communication signals, whether analog, digital or of other characteristic, and whether for voice, data or other purposes. 
(Ord. No. 933, § 4, 11-17-98)  
Sec. 15.5-540. - Municipal consent required. 
(a)  Prior to placing, reconstructing, or altering facilities in, on or over the public rights-of-way, a provider must obtain a municipal consent from the city. 
(b)  The use of public rights-of-way for the delivery of any service not covered by this chapter is subject to all other applicable city requirements. 
(c)  Any provider with a current, unexpired consent, franchise, agreement or other authorization from the city ("grant") to use the public rights-of-way that is in effect at the time this telecommunications ordinance takes effect shall continue to operate under and comply with that grant until the grant expires or until it is terminated by mutual agreement of the city and the provider and a municipal consent under this division is granted and in effect. 
(Ord. No. 933, § 5, 11-17-98)  
Sec. 15.5-550. - Application for municipal consent. 
(a)  A person must submit an application to the city manager to initiate the process to obtain a municipal consent. 
(b)  The application must be on a form prescribed by the city manager, and it must include the following: 
(1)  The identity of the applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant that may have physical control of the network, to the extent known at the time of the application; 
(2)  A general description of the services to be provided initially; 
(3)  With respect to post-application construction a route map of the applicant's proposed network, if any; and 
(4)  A description of the effect on the rights-of-way, of any post-application construction to the extent known, but not including routine maintenance and construction for additions to existing networks, except as may be required in Section 15.5-660, including: 
a.  The location and route required for applicant's proposed telecommunications network. 
b.  The location of all overhead and underground public utility, telecommunication, cable, water, sewer, drainage and other facilities in the rights-of-way along the proposed route. 
c.  The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any, that the applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate. 
(5)  While not a requirement for the issuance of a municipal consent, if applicable, the applicant shall provide: 
a.  Evidence that the applicant holds or has applied for a Public Utility Commission of Texas Certificate and information to establish that the applicant will obtain all other governmental approvals and permits prior to construction. 
b.  Certification or other documentation to evidence the Public Utility Commission of Texas or any other required governmental approval showing compliance with E911 requirements of Chapters 771 and 772 of the Texas Health and Safety Code on Emergency Communication, and the Texas Public Utility Council Substantive Rules on interconnection, particularly Section 23.97(a), (d) and (e), as amended. 
(6)  Such other and further information as may be reasonably requested by the city manager as it relates to the use of the public rights-of-way. 
(c)  Each applicant that shall submit a non-refundable application fee of eight hundred fifty dollars ($850.00) with the application, with a credit in the amount of eight hundred fifty dollars ($850.00) on its first quarterly payment due under section 15.5-610. 
(d)  The city manager shall review an application submitted under this chapter and shall recommend to the city council that it grant or deny the application. The city manager shall make recommendation to the city council as soon as practicable, but no later than the 90th day after a completed application has been filed. Upon mutual written agreement between the city and the provider, action on an application may be postponed for one or more periods not exceeding thirty (30) days each. 
(e)  Except for delay caused by the applicant, the city council must take an initial action on the city manager's recommendation within forty-five (45) days after receipt by the council of the city manager's recommendation or the city manager's recommendation to grant an application shall be deemed approved. No city council action is required to confirm a denial recommendation, except acknowledgment of receipt of the recommendation.  
Sec. 15.5-560. - Municipal consent ordinance. 
(a)  If the city manager finds that the application meets the requirements of this chapter, the city manager shall request the city attorney or designee to prepare a municipal consent ordinance for the city council's consideration. 
(b)  A municipal consent ordinance submitted to the city council must include the following provisions: 
(1)  A term of not more than five (5) years for the municipal consent; 
(2)  A requirement that the provider substantially comply with this chapter; 
(3)  A requirement that the provider's municipal consent is subject to termination by the city council, after notice and hearing, for the provider's failure to comply with this chapter or on a showing that the provider has breached the terms of the municipal consent; 
(4)  A provision that incorporates the requirements of section 15.5-630 (Transfer) of this chapter; 
(5)  A provision that incorporates the requirements of sections 15.5-660 (Construction obligations), 15.5-670 (Conditions of public rights-of-way occupancy), and 15.5-680 (Insurance requirements) of this chapter, if applicable; 
(c)  Review and approval by the city does not constitute a guarantee of sufficiency of the design of the telecommunications network. The applicant retains full responsibility for the adequacy of the design of the telecommunications network. 
(Ord. No. 933, § 7, 11-17-98)  
Sec. 15.5-570. - Petition for reconsideration. 
A person whose application for a municipal consent is denied, or whose application is not considered by the city council within a reasonable time after the city manager submits a recommendation under section 15.5-560 or whose municipal consent is terminated may petition the city council for reconsideration before seeking judicial remedies. A petition for reconsideration is considered denied if the city council does not act within sixty (60) days after the petition is filed with the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 933, § 8, 11-17-98)  
Sec. 15.5-580. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  The city manager shall administer this division and enforce compliance with a municipal consent conveyed under this division. 
(b)  A provider shall report information related to the use of the public rights-of-way that the city manager requires in the form and manner prescribed by the city manager. 
(c)  The city manager shall report to the city council upon the determination that a provider has failed to comply with this division. 
(Ord. No. 933, § 9, 11-17-98)  
Sec. 15.5-590. - Applicability. 
(a)  Sections 15.5-660 (Construction obligations), 15.5-670 (Conditions of public rights-of-way occupancy) and 15.5-680 (Insurance requirements) of this division apply only to a provider that constructs, operates, maintains, owns or controls facilities in the public rights-of-way. 
(b)  Section 15.5-690 (Indemnity) of this division applies to a provider that has a property interest in a network. 
(Ord. No. 933, § 10, 11-17-98)  
Sec. 15.5-600. - Compensation to city. 
A provider shall compensate the city by payment of the fees as provided below: 
(1)  Access line fee calculation. To compensate the city for the use of the rights-of-way, a provider whose telecommunications network is used to serve persons in the city shall pay the city a monthly fee to be calculated as provided below for each access line owned or used by the provider, as calculated as of month-end, that is activated for use by an end user customer of the provider or of another person as a certificated telecommunications utility, by lease or otherwise, subject to subsection (6) below or of any other person: 
a.  Access line fee calculation amount: 
1.  Following the effective date of the municipal consent, a provider shall submit to the city manager on a quarterly basis, a certified statement together with the access line fee payment under section 15.5-610, indicating the number of access lines used to provide telecommunications service at month end, for each month of the quarter and for each customer class identified herein. The statement shall be provided on a form prescribed by the city manager. 
2.  For each month of the quarter following the effective date of the municipal consent, a provider shall pay an access line fee which is based upon its number of access lines calculated as follows: 
Access Line Fee 
Calculation 
Amount 	Monthly Amount 
Per Access Line 
From Effective 
Date 
Type (1) or (2): 	
 Residential 	$0.88  
 Non-residential       3.50 
Type (3): 	
 Private line 	
 Termination point(s)       5.75 
 
The city reserves the right to make reasonable adjustments to the access line fee, with one hundred eighty (180) days notice, but not to exceed ten (10) percent in any one year. 
Amounts appearing above are used to calculate the total compensation due the city and are not to be construed as the setting of a charge for end-users. 
(To the extent allowed by law, and not at the direction or request of the city, pursuant to Tex. Utilities Code § 54.206, a provider has the discretion to collect the access line fee imposed by the city pursuant to this division through a pro rata charge to the customers in the boundaries of the city, including from any other persons who are leasing, reselling, rebundling or otherwise using the provider's access lines to provide telecommunications service.) 
(For purposes of this section only, lines terminating at customers with "lifeline," "tel-assistance," or other service that is required to be similarly discounted pursuant to state or federal law or regulation for the purpose of advancing universal service to the economically disadvantaged shall not be included in the lines upon which the fee is calculated, but provider shall provide information on the number of such lines upon request by the city.) 
b.  Number of access lines. Subject to city's agreement not to disclose this information unless required by law, provider agrees to provide annually or as requested by the city, within a reasonable time after receipt of the city's written request, a report showing the number of access lines being maintained or operated by provider that are serving premises within the city. The city agrees that the report shall be used solely for the purposes of verifying the number of provider's access lines serving premises within the city. Upon written request, provider shall verify the information in the report and, upon reasonable advance notice, all non-customer specific records and other documents required for such verification shall be subject to inspection by the city expressly excluding any records, documents or other writings the disclosure of which is prohibited by state or federal law, including the Electronic Communications Privacy Act, 18 U.S.C. § 2701 et seq. 
(2)  Minimum annual fee. Notwithstanding any other provision in this division, for all new installations of facilities placed in, on or under the public rights-of-way from the effective date of the municipal consent, and for each calendar year period thereafter, the provider shall pay the city a minimum annual public street crossing fee of either the greater of: 
(i)  The access line fee; or 
(ii)  Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
This annual minimum fee is to compensate the city for the reasonable rental value of the public rights-of-way used by the provider, and to recover the administrative cost in monitoring and enforcing the provisions of this division and of the municipal consent. Each municipal consent shall provide that the minimum fee of (2)(ii) above may be adjusted once every three (3) years by the city in its sole reasonable discretion to properly reflect the reasonable rental value of the public rights-of-way and administrative cost to the city, but such adjustment shall not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) in any one three-year period. 
(3)  Confidential records. If the provider notifies the city by a conspicuous written notation of the confidential nature of any information (including, but not limited to the information in paragraph (2) of this section), reports, documents, or writings, the city agrees to maintain the confidentiality of the information, reports, documents, and writings to the extent permitted by law. Upon receipt by the city of requests for the provider's confidential information, reports, documents, or writings, the city shall notify the provider of the request in writing by facsimile transmission. The city shall furnish the provider with copies of all requests for attorney general opinions pertaining to the provider's confidential information, reports, documents or writings. The city shall request an attorney general's opinion before disclosing any confidential information, reports, documents or writings, and shall furnish the provider with copies of attorney general opinion requests as soon as practicable that it may pertain to the provider's confidential information, reports, documents or writings. 
(4)  No other fees. The payments due hereunder shall be in lieu of any construction, building or other permit, approval, inspection, or other similar fees or charges, including, but not limited to, all general business permit fees customarily assessed by the city for the use of the public rights-of-way against persons operating businesses similar to that of a provider. Further, such access line fee shall constitute full compensation to the city for all provider's facilities located within the public rights-of-way, including interoffice-transport and other transmission media that do not terminate at an end-user customer's network interface device, even though those types of lines are not used in the calculation of the public rights-of-way fee. The compensation paid herein is not in lieu of any generally applicable ad valorem taxes, sales taxes or other generally applicable taxes, fees, development impact fees or charges, or other statutory charges or expenses recoverable under the Texas Public Utility Regulatory Act, or successor statutes. 
(5)  Uncollectibles. Any other provision of this agreement notwithstanding, provider shall not be obligated to pay the city for any access lines or private line termination points the revenues for which remain uncollectible. 
(6)  Payments by or use of the network by other telecommunications carriers and providers. 
(i)  Direct payment—Facilities provided to other telecommunications service providers: To the extent allowed by applicable state and federal law, any telecommunications service providers who purchase unbundled network elements or other facilities or services for the purpose of rebundling those facilities and/or services to create telecommunications service for sale to persons within the city ("rebundler"), must pay to the city the access line fee that is calculated as of month-end by applying the appropriate access line fee, as specified in section 15.5-600 above, to each access line created by rebundling telecommunications service or facilities. Direct payment further ensures that the access line fee imposed herein can be applied on a non-discriminatory basis to all telecommunications service providers that sell telecommunications service within the city. Other provisions of this ordinance notwithstanding, the provider shall not include in its monthly count of access lines any facilities or services provided to other telecommunications service providers for rebundling into telecommunications service, if the telecommunications service provider who is rebundling those facilities for resale has provided a signed statement to the provider that the telecommunications service provider is paying the access line fees applicable to those rebundled services directly to the city. If provider provides a copy of the signed statement to the city from the rebundler which is acceptable to the city, then provider is absolved of all responsibility for the access line fees payable on the services, unbundled network facilities, and other facilities rebundled for the creation of telecommunications service for sale within the city by each such rebundler. 
(ii)  Indirect payments public rights-of-way fee application to use of network by others: With respect to any person leasing, reselling, or otherwise using a provider's access lines, if a provider believes it does not have sufficient information to determine the appropriate rate to apply, then the higher access line fee may be applied until such time as the person using the access lines provides to the provider sufficient written information to determine the correct access line fee. If a person provides sufficient written information for the application of the access line fee, provider may, at its discretion and not at the city's request, bill the person on the basis of the information provided. Provider shall provide to the city any information regarding the locations to which it is providing service or facilities for use by another person for the provision of telecommunications service to end-user customers, so long as city first obtains written permission of such other person for provider to provide the information to the city. Any other provision of this ordinance notwithstanding, however, a provider shall not be liable for underpayment of access line fees resulting from the provider's reliance upon the written information provided by any person who uses provider's services or facilities for the provision of telecommunications service to end-user customers. 
(Ord. No. 933, § 11, 11-17-98)  
Sec. 15.5-610. - City payment due dates. 
(a)  Access line fee. A provider shall remit the access line fee on a quarterly basis together with the certified statement required in section 15.5-600(1)a.1. Payment shall be made on or before the forty-fifth day following the close of each calendar quarter for which the payment is calculated and shall be paid by wire transfer to an account designated by the city manager. 
(b)  Minimum fee payment. This fee per section 15.5-600(2), if applicable, shall be due on January 31 of every year of the consent agreement. 
(Ord. No. 933, § 12, 11-17-98)  
Sec. 15.5-620. - Audits. 
(a)  On thirty (30) days' notice to a provider the city may audit a provider for a period of time to the fullest extent allowed by law. The provider shall furnish information to demonstrate its compliance with the municipal consent and/or other provisions of this division. 
(b)  A provider shall keep complete and accurate books of accounts and records of business and operations that cumulatively reflect the monthly count of all access lines for a period of seven (7) years. The city manager may require the keeping of additional records or accounts that are reasonably necessary for purposes of identifying, accounting for, and reporting the number of access lines used to deliver telecommunication services or for calculation of the payments due hereunder. The city may examine the provider's books and records referred to above, expressly excluding any records, documents or other writings the disclosure of which is prohibited by state or federal law, including the Electronic Communications Privacy Act, 18 U.S.C. § 2701 et seq. to the extent such records reasonably relate to providing information to verify compliance with this division and the municipal consent. 
(c)  A provider shall make available to the city or the city's designated agent (hereinafter "agent"), for the city or its agent to examine, audit, review and copy, in the city, on the city manager's written request, its books and records referred to above, including papers, books, accounts, documents, maps, plans and other provider records that pertain to municipal consent conditions and requirements obtained under this division. A provider shall fully cooperate in making records available and otherwise assist the city examiner. The city examiner shall not inspect or copy or otherwise demand production of customer specific information or any records, documents or other writings the disclosure of which is prohibited by state or federal law, including the Electronic Communications Privacy Act, 18 U.S.C. § 2701 et seq. 
(d)  The city manager may, at any time, make inquiries pertaining to providers' performance of the terms and conditions of a municipal consent conveyed under this chapter. Providers shall respond to such inquiries on a timely basis. 
(e)  Upon written request by the city manager, to the extent the documents are reasonably identified, providers shall furnish to the city within thirty (30) business days from the date of the written request copies of all public petitions, applications, written communications and reports submitted by providers, to the FCC and/or to the PUC or their successor agencies, relating to any matters affecting the physical use of city public rights-of-way. 
(f)  The provisions of this section shall be continuing and shall survive the termination of a municipal consent granted under this chapter and shall extend beyond the term of the municipal consent granted to the provider and the city shall have all the rights described in this section for so long as provider is providing any telecommunications service within the city. 
(Ord. No. 933, § 13, 11-17-98)  
Sec. 15.5-630. - Transfer. 
(a)  No municipal consent nor any rights or privileges that a provider has under a municipal consent, or the facilities held by a provider for use under such municipal consent which are in the public rights-of-way, shall be sold, resold, assigned, transferred or conveyed by the provider, either separately or collectively, to any other person, without the prior written approval of the city by ordinance or resolution. The city's approval shall be based upon the transferee providing adequate information to the city that it has the ability to perform and comply with the obligations and requirements of the municipal consent. Such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. Should a provider sell, assign, transfer, convey or otherwise dispose of any of its rights or interests under its municipal consent, including such provider's telecommunications network, or attempt to do so, without the city's prior consent, the city may revoke the provider's municipal consent for default, in which event all rights and interest of the provider under the municipal consent shall cease. 
(b)  Any transfer in violation of this section shall be null and void and unenforceable. Any change of control of a provider shall constitute a transfer under this section. However, such a change in control shall not void the municipal consent as to the transferee, unless and until the city has given notice that such a change in control necessitates compliance with section 15.5-630. If the provider does not initiate compliance with section 15.5-630 by a request for municipal consent within thirty (30) days after the above notice has been given by the city, the municipal consent shall be null and unenforceable as to the transferee. 
(c)  There shall be a rebuttable presumption of a change of control of a provider upon a change of fifteen (15) percent or greater in the ownership of such provider. Such a change in control shall be deemed a transfer which requires consent of the city. 
(d)  A mortgage or other pledge of assets to a bank or lending institution in a bona fide lending transaction shall not be considered an assignment or transfer. 
(e)  Every municipal consent granted under this section 15.5-630 shall specify that any transfer or other disposition of rights which has the effect of circumventing payment of required access line fees or minimum fees and/or evasion of payment of such fees by failure to accurately count or report the number of access lines by a provider is prohibited. 
(f)  Notwithstanding anything else in this section 15.5-630, if the city has not approved or denied a request to transfer under this section within one hundred twenty (120) days of written notice of such request from the provider to the city, it shall be deemed approved. Such time frame may be extended by mutual agreement of the parties. 
(g)  Notwithstanding any other provision in this section 15.5-630, a provider may transfer, without city approval, the facilities in the public rights-of-way under a municipal consent to another provider who has a municipal consent under this chapter. The provider transferring the facilities remains subject to all applicable obligations and provisions of the municipal consent unless the provider to which the facilities are transferred is also subject to the same, as applicable, obligations and provisions. The provider transferring the facilities must give written notice of the transfer to the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 933, § 14, 11-17-98)  
Sec. 15.5-640. - Notices to city. 
(a)  A provider shall notify the city manager as is provided in the consent agreement. 
(b)  A provider shall give written notice to the city not later than fifteen (15) days before a transfer or change in operations that may affect the applicability of sections 15.5-670 (Conditions of public rights-of-way occupancy), 15.5-680 (Insurance requirements), 15.5-690 (Indemnity), and 15.5-700 (Renewal of municipal consent), to the provider. 
(Ord. No. 933, § 15, 11-17-98)  
Sec. 15.5-650. - Circumvention of fee prohibited. 
A person may not circumvent payment of access line fees or evade payment of such fees by bartering, transfer of rights, or by any other means that result in undercounting a provider's number of lines. Capacity or services may be bartered if the imputed lines are reported in accordance with section 15.5-600. 
(Ord. No. 933, § 16, 11-17-98)  
Sec. 15.5-660. - Construction obligations. 
(a)  A provider is subject to the reasonable regulation of the city to manage its public rights-of-way pursuant to the city's rights as a custodian of public property under state and federal laws. A provider is subject to city ordinances and requirements and federal and state laws and regulations in connection with the construction, expansion, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of facilities in the public rights-of-way. 
(b)  At the city's request, a provider shall furnish the city accurate and complete information relating to the construction, reconstruction, removal, maintenance, operation and repair of facilities performed by the provider in the public rights-of-way. 
(c)  The construction, expansion, reconstruction, excavation, use, maintenance and operation of a provider's facilities within the public rights-of-way are subject to applicable city requirements. 
(1)  A provider may be required to place certain facilities within the public rights-of-way underground according to applicable city requirements absent a compelling demonstration by the provider that, in any specific instance, this requirement is not reasonable or feasible nor is it equally applicable to other similar users of the public rights-of-way. 
(2)  A provider shall perform operations, excavations and other construction in the public rights-of-way in accordance with all applicable city requirements, including the obligation to use trenchless technology whenever commercially economical and practical and consistent with obligations on other similar users of the public right-of-way. The city shall waive the requirement of trenchless technology if it determines that the field conditions warrant the waiver, based upon information provided to the city by the provider. All excavations and other construction in the public rights-of-way shall be conducted so as to minimize interference with the use of public and private property. A provider shall follow all reasonable construction directions given by the city in order to minimize any such interference. 
(3)  A provider must obtain a permit, as reasonably required by applicable city codes, prior to any excavation, construction, installation, expansion, repair, removal, relocation or maintenance of the provider's facilities. Once a permit is issued, provider shall give to the city a minimum of forty-eight (48) hours notice (which could be at the time of the issuance of the permit) prior to undertaking any of the above listed activities on its network in, on or under the public rights-of-way. The failure of the provider to request and obtain a permit from the city prior to performing any of the above listed activities in, on or over any public right-of-way, except in an emergency as provided for in subsection (10) below, will subject the provider to a stop-work order from the city and enforcement action pursuant to the city's code of ordinances. If the provider fails to act upon any permit within ninety (90) calendar days of issuance, the permit shall become invalid, and the provider will be required to obtain another permit. 
(4)  When a provider completes construction, expansion, reconstruction, removal, excavation or other work, the provider shall promptly restore the rights-of-way in accordance with applicable city requirements. A provider shall replace and properly relay and repair the surface, base, irrigation system and landscape treatment of any public rights-of-way that may be excavated or damaged by reason of the erection, construction, maintenance, or repair of the provider's facilities within thirty (30) calendar days after completion of the work in accordance with existing standards of the city in effect at the time of the work. 
(5)  Upon failure of a provider to perform any such repair or replacement work, and five (5) days after written notice has been given by the city to the provider, the city may repair such portion of the public rights-of-way as may have been disturbed by the provider, its contractors or agents. Upon receipt of a invoice from the city, the provider will reimburse the city for the costs so incurred within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the city invoice. 
(6)  Should the city reasonably determine, within two (2) years from the date of the completion of the repair work, that the surface, base, irrigation system or landscape treatment requires additional restoration work to meet existing standards of the city, a provider shall perform such additional restoration work to the satisfaction of the city, subject to all city remedies as provided herein. 
(7)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the city determines that the failure of a provider to properly repair or restore the public rights-of-way constitutes a safety hazard to the public, the city may undertake emergency repairs and restoration efforts. A provider shall promptly reimburse the city for all costs incurred by the city within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the city invoice. 
(8)  A provider shall furnish the city with construction plans and maps showing the location and proposed routing of new construction or reconstruction at least fifteen (15) days (subject to subsection (d)), before beginning construction or reconstruction that involves an alteration to the surface or subsurface of the public rights-of-way. A provider may not begin construction until the location of new facilities and proposed routing of the new construction or reconstruction and all required plans and drawings have been approved in writing by the city, which approval will not be unreasonably withheld, taking due consideration of the surrounding area and alternative locations for the facilities and routing. 
(9)  If the city manager declares an emergency with regard to the health and safety of the citizens and requests by written notice the removal or abatement of facilities, a provider shall remove or abate the provider's facilities by the deadline provided in the city manager's request. The provider and the city shall cooperate to the extent possible to assure continuity of service. If the provider, after notice, fails or refuses to act, the city may remove or abate the facility, at the sole cost and expense of the provider, without paying compensation to the provider and without the city incurring liability for damages. 
(10)  Except in the case of customer service interruptions and imminent harm to property or person ("emergency conditions"), a provider may not excavate the pavement of a street or public rights-of-way without first complying with city requirements. The city manager or designee shall be notified immediately regarding work performed under such emergency conditions, and the provider shall comply with the requirements of city standards for the restoration of the public rights-of-way. 
(11)  Within sixty (60) days of completion of each new permitted section of a provider's facilities, the provider shall supply the city with a complete set of "as built" drawings for the segment in a format used in the ordinary course of the provider's business and as reasonably prescribed by the city, and as allowed by law. 
(12)  The city may require reasonable bonding requirements of a provider, as are required of other entities that place facilities in the public rights-of-way. 
(d)  In determining whether any requirement under this section is unreasonable or unfeasible, the city manager or his/her designee shall consider, among other things, whether the requirement would subject the provider or providers to an unreasonable increase in risk of service interruption, or to an unreasonable increase in liability for accidents, or to an unreasonable delay in construction or in availability of its services, or to any other unreasonable technical or economic burden. 
(Ord. No. 933, §, 11-17-98)  
Sec. 15.5-670. - Conditions of public rights-of-way occupancy. 
(a)  In the exercise of governmental functions, the city has first priority over all other uses of the public rights-of-way. The city reserves the right to lay sewer, gas, water, and other pipe lines or cables and conduits, and to do underground and overhead work, and attachments, restructuring or changes in aerial facilities in, across, along, over or under a public street, alley or public rights-of-way occupied by a provider, and to change the curb, sidewalks or the grade of streets. 
(b)  The city shall assign the location in or over the public rights-of-way among competing users of the public rights-of-way with due consideration to the public health and safety considerations of each user type, and to the extent there is limited space available for additional users, may limit new users, as allowed under state or federal law. 
(c)  If, during the term of a municipal consent, the city authorizes abutting landowners to occupy space under the surface of any public street, alley, or public rights-of-way, the grant to an abutting landowner shall be subject to the rights of the provider. If the city closes or abandons a public right-of-way that contains a portion of a provider's facilities, the city shall close or abandon such public right-of-way subject to the rights conveyed in the municipal consent. 
(d)  If the city gives written notice, a provider shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of provider's facilities that are in the public rights-of-way within one hundred twenty (120) days, except in circumstances that require additional time as reasonably determined by the city based upon information provided by the provider. For projects expected to take longer than one hundred twenty (120) days to remove, change or relocate, the city will confer with provider before determining the alterations to be required and the timing thereof. The city shall give notice whenever the city has determined that removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for the construction, operation, repair, maintenance or installation of a city or other governmental public improvement in the public rights-of-way. This section shall not be construed to prevent a provider's recovery of the cost of relocation or removal from private third parties who initiate the request for relocation or removal, nor shall it be required if improvements are solely for beautification purposes without prior joint deliberation and agreement with provider. 
If the provider fails to relocate facilities in the time allowed by the city in this section, the provider may be subject to liability to the city for such delay and as set forth in the city codes or ordinance, now or hereafter enacted. 
Notwithstanding anything in this subsection (d), the city manager and a provider may agree in writing to different time frames than those provided above if circumstances reasonably warrant such a change. 
(e)  During the term of its municipal consent, a provider may trim trees in or over the rights-of-way for the safe and reliable operation, use and maintenance of its network. All tree trimming shall be performed in accordance with standards promulgated by the city. Should the provider, its contractor or agent, fail to remove such trimmings within twenty-four (24) hours, the city may remove the trimmings or have them removed, and upon receipt of a bill from the city, the provider shall promptly reimburse the city for all costs incurred within thirty (30) working days. 
(f)  Providers shall temporarily remove, raise or lower its aerial facilities to permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures, if the city gives written notice of no less than forty-eight (48) hours. The expense of these temporary rearrangements shall be paid by the party or parties requesting and benefitting from the temporary rearrangements. Provider may require prepayment or prior posting of a bond from the party requesting temporary move. 
(Ord. No. 933, § 18, 11-17-98)  
Sec. 15.5-680. - Insurance requirements. 
(a)  A provider shall obtain and maintain insurance in the amounts reasonably prescribed by the city with an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Texas acceptable to the city throughout the term of a municipal consent conveyed under this chapter. A provider shall furnish the city with proof of insurance at the time of filing the acceptance of a municipal consent. The city reserves the right to review the insurance requirements during the effective period of a municipal consent, and to reasonably adjust insurance coverage and limits when the city manager determines that changes in statutory law, court decisions, or the claims history of the industry or the provider require adjustment of the coverage. For purposes of this section, the city will accept certificates of self-insurance issued by the State of Texas or letters written by the Provider in those instances where the State does not issue such letters, which provide the same coverage as required herein. However, for the city to accept such letters the provider must demonstrate by written information that it has adequate financial resources to be a self-insured entity as reasonably determined by the city, based on financial information requested by and furnished to the city. The city's current insurance requirements are described in Exhibit "A" attached hereto. 
(b)  Provider shall furnish, at no cost to the city, copies of certificates of insurance evidencing the coverage required by this section to the city. The city may request the deletion, revision or modification of particular policy terms, conditions, limitations or exclusions, unless the policy provisions are established by a law or regulation binding the city, the provider, or the underwriter. If the city requests a deletion, revision or modification, a provider shall exercise reasonable efforts to pay for and to accomplish the change. 
(c)  An insurance certificate shall contain the following required provisions: 
(1)  Name the city of and its officers, employees, board members and elected representatives as additional insureds for all applicable coverage; 
(2)  Provide for thirty (30) days notice to the city for cancellation, non-renewal, or material change; 
(3)  Provide that notice of claims shall be provided to the city manager by certified mail; and 
(4)  Provide that the terms of the municipal consent which impose obligations on the provider concerning liability, duty, and standard of care, including the indemnity section, are included in the policy and that the risks are insured within the policy terms and conditions. 
(d)  Provider shall file and maintain proof of insurance with the city manager during the term of a municipal consent or an extension or renewal. An insurance certificate obtained in compliance with this section is subject to city approval. The city may require the certificate to be changed to reflect changing liability limits. A provider shall immediately advise the city attorney of actual or potential litigation that may develop may affect an existing carrier's obligation to defend and indemnify. 
(e)  An insurer has no right of recovery against the city. The required insurance policies shall protect the provider and the city. The insurance shall be primary coverage for losses covered by the policies. 
(f)  The policy clause "other insurance" shall not apply to the city if the city is an insured under the policy. 
(g)  The provider shall pay premiums and assessments. A company which issues an insurance policy has no recourse against the city for payment of a premium or assessment. Insurance policies obtained by a provider must provide that the issuing company waives all right of recovery by way of subrogation against the city in connection with damage covered by the policy. 
(Ord. No. 933, § 19, 11-17-98)  
Sec. 15.5-690. - Indemnity. 
(a)  Each municipal consent granted under this telecommunications ordinance shall contain provisions whereby the provider agrees to promptly defend, indemnify and hold the city harmless from and against all damages, costs, losses or expenses (i) for the repair, replacement, or restoration of city's property, equipment, materials, structures and facilities which are damaged, destroyed or found to be defective solely as a result of the provider's acts or omissions, (ii) from and against any and all claims, demands, suits, causes of action, and judgments for (a) damage to or loss of the property of any person (including, but not limited to the provider, its agents, officers, employees and subcontractors, city's agents, officers and employees, and third parties); and/or (b) death, bodily injury, illness, disease, loss of services, or loss of income or wages to any person (including, but not limited to the agents, officers and employees of the provider, provider's subcontractors and city, and third parties), arising out of, incident to, concerning or resulting from the negligent or willful act or omissions of the provider, its agents, employees, and/or subcontractors, in the performance of activities pursuant to such municipal consent. 
(b)  No municipal consent indemnity provision shall apply to any liability resulting from the negligence of the city, its officers, employees, agents, contractors, or subcontractors. 
(c)  The provisions of the required indemnity provision set forth in an individual municipal consent shall provide that: 
(1)  It is solely for the benefit of the parties to the municipal consent and is not intended to create or grant any rights, contractual or otherwise, to any other person or entity; 
(2)  To the extent permitted by law, any payments made to, or on behalf of the city under the provisions of this section are subject to the rights granted to providers under Sections 54.204-54.206 of the Texas Utilities Code; and 
(3)  Subject to the continued applicability of the provisions of sections 54.204-54.206 of the Texas Utilities Code, as set forth in (2) above, the provisions of the indemnity shall survive the expiration of the municipal consent. 
(Ord. No. 933, § 20, 11-17-98)  
Sec. 15.5-700. - Renewal of municipal consent. 
A provider shall request a renewal of a municipal consent by making written application to the city manager at least ninety (90) days before the expiration of the consent. 
(Ord. No. 933, § 21, 11-17-98)  
Sec. 15.5-710. - Annexation; disannexation. 
Within thirty (30) days following the date of the passage of any action affecting the annexation of any property to or the disannexation of any property from the city's corporate boundaries, the city agrees to furnish provider written notice of the action and an accurate map of the city's corporate boundaries showing, if available, street names and number details. For the purpose of compensating the city under this division, a provider shall start including or excluding access lines within the affected area in the provider's count of access lines on the effective date designated by the Comptroller of Public Accounts Texas for the imposition of state local sales and use taxes; but in no case less than thirty (30) days from the date the provider is notified by the city of the annexation or disannexation. 
(Ord. No. 933, § 22, 11-17-98)  
Sec. 15.5-720. - Severability. 
The provisions of this division are severable. However, in the event this division or any tariff that authorizes the provider to recover the fee(s) provided for this division or any procedure provided in this division or any compensation due the city under this division becomes unlawful, or is declared or determined by a judicial, administrative or legislative authority exercising its jurisdiction to be excessive, unrecoverable, unenforceable, void, illegal or otherwise inapplicable, in whole or in part, or is exchanged for another means of compensation under higher authority, the provider and city shall meet and negotiate a new agreement that is in compliance with the authority's decision or enactment. Unless explicitly prohibited, the new agreement shall provide the city with a level of compensation comparable to that set forth in this division as long as the agreed-to compensation is recoverable by the provider in a manner permitted by law for the unexpired portion of the term of this division. 
(Ord. No. 933, § 23, 11-17-98)  
Sec. 15.5-730. - Governing law. 
This division shall be construed in accordance with the city code(s) in effect on the date of passage of this division to the extent that such code(s) are not in conflict with or in violation of the Constitution and laws of the United States or the State of Texas, subject to the city's ongoing authority to adopt reasonable regulations to manage its public rights-of-way, pursuant to sections 15.5-660 and 15.5-670 or as otherwise provided by law. Municipal consents entered into pursuant to this ordinance are performable in Tarrant County, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 933, § 24, 11-17-98)  
Sec. 15.5-740. - Termination. 
(a)  The city shall reserve the right to terminate any municipal consent and any rights or privileges conveyed under this division in the event of a material breach of the terms and conditions of the municipal consent or of this division, subject to a thirty-day written notice and the opportunity to cure the breach during that thirty-day period. 
(b)  Material breaches of a municipal consent specifically include, but are not limited to, continuing violations of sections 15.5-600 (Compensation to city), 15.5-660 (Construction obligations) and/or 15.5-670 (Conditions of public rights-of-way occupancy), and the furnishing of service of any kind that requires municipal authorization but that is not authorized by subsection 15.5-520(a). 
(c)  A material breach shall not be deemed to have occurred if the violation occurs without the fault of a provider or occurs as a result of circumstances beyond its control. Providers shall not be excused from performance of any of their obligations under this division by economic hardship, nor misfeasance or malfeasance of their city managers, officers or employees. 
(d)  A termination shall be declared only by a written decision by motion, resolution or ordinance of the city council after an appropriate public proceeding before the city council, which shall accord the provider due process and full opportunity to be heard and to respond to any notice of grounds to terminate. All notice requirements shall be met by giving the provider at least fifteen (15) days prior written notice of any public hearing concerning the proposed termination of its consent. Such notice shall state the grounds for termination alleged by city. 
(Ord. No. 933, § 25, 11-17-98)  
Sec. 15.5-750. - Unauthorized use of public rights-of-way. 
(a)  Any person seeking to place facilities on, in or over the public rights-of-way, city property, city structures, or utility infrastructure shall first file an application for a municipal consent with the city and shall abide by the terms and provisions of this division pertaining to use of the public rights-of-way and pay the fees specified herein. 
(b)  The city may institute all appropriate legal action to prohibit any person from knowingly using the public rights-of-way unless the city has consented to such use in accordance with the terms of this chapter and with a municipal consent. 
(c)  Any person using the public rights-of-way without a municipal consent shall be liable for the same fees and charges as provided for herein. 
(Ord. No. 933, § 26, 11-17-98)  
Secs. 15.5-760—15.5-890. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - NON-CERTIFICATED PROVIDERS 
 
Sec. 15.5-900. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this division is to: 
(1)  Establish an application and regulatory process for non-certificated telecommunications provider's use and occupancy of the public rights-of-way; 
(2)  Compensate the city for the private, commercial use and occupancy of the public rights-of-way by non-certificated telecommunications providers in a non-discriminatory and competitively neutral manner; 
(3)  Assist the city in its efforts to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(b)  This division may be referred to as the "Non-Certificated Telecommunications Provider Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 980, § 1, 9-17-99)  
Sec. 15.5-910. - Granting clause. 
Subject to the restrictions set forth herein, the city may consent to the non-exclusive right and privilege to use the public rights-of-way in the city by a non-certificated telecommunications provider for the operation of a telecommunications system, consisting of facilities. The terms of this division shall apply throughout the city and to all operations of the provider within the city public rights-of-way, and in the public rights-of-way in any newly annexed areas in accordance with section 15.5-1100 herein. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 2, 9-17-99)  
Sec. 15.5-920. - Authority; scope. 
(a)  This division applies to all telecommunications providers, except certificated telecommunications providers, that place facilities in, on or over public rights-of-way, excluding services provided solely by means of a wireless transmission. No municipal consent granted under this ordinance authorizes the provision of any services not covered by the municipal consent, including, but not limited to, cable service and open video systems as defined in Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934 (Title 47, Chapter 5, Subchapter V-A of the United States Code (47 U.S.C. § 521, et seq.)) and any other content service are expressly excluded. 
(b)  The right of a person to apply for or to use city utility infrastructure shall be governed by the Construction in Public Rights-Of-Way Ordinance [Art. II] and other provisions of the City Code. The granting of a municipal consent under this division does not grant attachment rights or authorize the use of city utility infrastructure. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 3, 9-17-99)  
Sec. 15.5-930. - Definitions. 
In this division: 
Access line means the same as in the Local Government Code, § 283.002(1), as adopted in 1999. 
Access line fee means the amount as determined by the Texas Public Utility Commission in accordance with the Local Government Code § 283.055(a)(1). 
Affiliate means a person who controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with a provider. Affiliate does not include a person who serves end use customers by means of a wireless transmission. There is a rebuttable presumption of control if a provider owns twenty-five (25) percent or more of the affiliate's stock or assets. 
Certificated telecommunications provider means the same as in the Texas Local Government Code, § 283.002(a) (any entity that has been granted a certificate by the Texas Public Utility Commission under Chapter 54 of Tex. Utility Code to provide local exchange telephone service). 
City means The City of Keller, Texas. As used throughout, the term city also includes the designated agent of the city. 
City manager means the city manager of the city or the city manager's designee. 
Direction of the city means all ordinances, laws, rules, resolutions, and regulations of the city that are not inconsistent with this division and that are now in force or may hereafter be passed and adopted. 
Facilities means any and all of the provider's wires, cables, fibers, duct spaces, manholes, poles, conduits, underground and overhead passageways and other equipment, structures, plant and appurtenances and physical devices in, on or under the public rights-of-way. 
Municipal consent means the individual grant to use the public rights-of-way issued by the city and accepted by the individual providers under this division governing the provider's use of the public rights-of-way, and which provides for the payment of compensation. 
Non-certificated telecommunications provider means a person, excluding any certificated telecommunications provider, that delivers telecommunications service within the city to person(s) by way of facilities that are placed in, on or over the public rights-of-way. To the extent allowed by law, this also includes a person that does not deliver telecommunications service within the city, but who places, constructs or maintains facilities within the public rights-of-way for the delivering of telecommunications service outside the city, except a certificated telecommunications provider. 
Person means a natural person (an individual), corporation, company, association, partnership, firm, limited liability company, joint venture, joint stock company or association, and other such entity. 
Public rights-of-way means the same as in the Texas Local Government Code, § 283.002(6) (the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway, or utility easement in which the municipality has an interest. The term does not include the airwaves above a public right-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications). 
Public rights-of-way use fee means the fee paid quarterly as determined in accordance with section 15.5-1000. 
Telecommunications service means the providing or offering to provide transmissions between or among points identified by the user, of information of the user's choosing, including voice, video or data, without change in content of the information as sent and received, if the transmissions are accomplished through facilities place in, on or over the public rights-of-way, expressly excluding cable services or open video systems as defined in Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, and "wireless services" providers, as defined by law, and any service that may only be offered by certificated telecommunications providers. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 4, 9-17-99)  
Sec. 15.5-940. - Municipal consent required. 
(a)  Any person, except a certificated telecommunications provider, prior to placing, reconstructing, or altering facilities in, on or over the public rights-of-way, shall obtain a municipal consent from the city. 
(b)  The use of public rights-of-way for the delivery of any service not covered by this division is subject to all other applicable city requirements. 
(c)  Any non-certificated telecommunications provider with a current, unexpired consent, franchise, agreement or other authorization from the city (grant) to use the public rights-of-way that is in effect at the time this telecommunications ordinance takes effect shall continue to operate under and comply with that grant until the grant expires or until it is terminated by mutual agreement of the city and the non-certificated telecommunications provider and a municipal consent under this ordinance is granted and in effect. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 5, 9-17-99)  
Sec. 15.5-950. - Application for municipal consent. 
(a)  A person must submit an application to the city manager to initiate the process to obtain a municipal consent. 
(b)  The application must be on a form prescribed by the city manager, and it must include the following: 
(1)  The identity of the applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant that may have physical control of the facilities, to the extent known at the time of the application; 
(2)  A general description of the services to be provided initially; 
(3)  A description of the effect on the rights-of-way, of any post-application construction to the extent known, but not including routine maintenance and construction for additions to existing facilities including: 
a.  The location and route required for applicant's proposed facilities. 
b.  The location of all overhead and underground public utility, telecommunication, cable, water, sewer, drainage and other facilities in the rights-of-way along the proposed route. 
c.  The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any, that the applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate. 
(c)  Each applicant that shall submit a non-refundable application fee of eight hundred fifty dollars ($850.00) with the application, with a credit in the amount of eight hundred fifty dollars ($850.00) on its first quarterly payment due under section 15.5-1000. 
(d)  The city manager shall review an application submitted under this division and shall recommend to the city council that it grant or deny the application. The city manager shall make recommendation to the city council as soon as practicable, but no later than the next council meeting forty (40) days after a completed application has been filed. Upon mutual written agreement between the city and the non-certificated telecommunications provider, action on an application may be postponed for one or more periods. 
(e)  Except for delay caused by the applicant, the city council must take an initial action on the city manager's recommendation within thirty (30) days after receipt by the council of the city manager's recommendation. No city council action is required to confirm a denial recommendation, except acknowledgment of receipt of the recommendation. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 6, 9-17-99)  
Sec. 15.5-960. - Municipal consent ordinance. 
(a)  If the city manager finds that the application meets the requirements of this ordinance, the city manager shall request the city attorney or designee to prepare a municipal consent ordinance for the city council's consideration at the same time the application is before council. 
(b)  A municipal consent ordinance submitted to the city council must include the following provisions: 
(1)  A term of not more than five (5) years for the municipal consent; 
(2)  A requirement that the non-certificated telecommunications provider substantially comply with this division; 
(3)  A requirement that the non-certificated telecommunications provider's municipal consent is subject to termination by the city council, after notice and hearing, for the non-certificated telecommunications provider's failure to comply with this division or on a showing that the non-certificated telecommunications provider has breached the terms of the municipal consent; 
(4)  A provision that incorporates the requirements of section 15.5-1030 (Transfer) of this division; 
(5)  A provision that incorporates the requirements of the Construction in the Public Rights-of-Way Ordinance [Article II]. 
(c)  Review and approval by the city does not constitute a guarantee of sufficiency of the design of the facilities. The applicant retains full responsibility for the adequacy of the design of the facilities. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 7, 9-17-99)  
Sec. 15.5-970. - Petition for reconsideration. 
A person whose application for a municipal consent is denied or whose municipal consent is terminated may petition the city council for reconsideration before seeking judicial remedies. A petition for reconsideration is considered denied if the city council does not act within forty (40) days after the petition is filed with the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 8, 9-17-99)  
Sec. 15.5-980. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  The city manager shall administer this division and enforce compliance with a municipal consent conveyed under this division. 
(b)  A non-certificated telecommunications provider shall report information related to the use of the public rights-of-way that the city manager reasonably requires of all similarly situated non-certificated telecommunications providers in the form and manner prescribed by the city manager. 
(c)  The city manager shall report to the city council upon the determination that a non-certificated telecommunications provider has failed to comply with this division. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 9, 9-17-99)  
Sec. 15.5-990. - Applicability of Construction in the Public Rights-of-Way Ordinance. 
All providers with facilities in the rights-of-way shall also comply with the Construction in the Public Rights-Of-Way Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 10, 9-17-99)  
Sec. 15.5-1000. - Compensation to city. 
A non-certificated telecommunications provider shall compensate the city by payment of a public rights-of-way use fee as provided below: 
(1)  Public rights-of-way use fee. From the effective date of the municipal consent, and for each calendar quarter period thereafter, the non-certificated telecommunications provider shall pay a public rights-of-way use fee to the city which shall be the greater of either a. or b. and shall also pay, to the extent applicable, the street crossing fee described in c. below: 
a.  The access line fee described in (2) below; or 
b.  The total of ten cents ($0.10) per linear foot, for each linear foot of facilities in the public rights-of-way; and 
c.  Street crossing fee: For each new public rights-of-way crossing by facilities in the applicable calendar quarter since the last quarterly payment in which a public rights-of-way is crossed underground and which the surface was altered or disturbed, except as to boring, or in which the public rights-of-way was crossed overhead and the pedestrian or vehicular traffic was materially affected the non-certificated provider shall pay the city $850.00. It shall be presumed to be a material affect if a sidewalk or lane of traffic is blocked, in whole or in part, for more than four hours. In the event the access line fee is the greater amount between a. and b. above, the amount of the access line fee paid to the city in the applicable calendar quarter shall be a credit applied to the street crossing fee due that quarter. 
These fees are used to calculate the total compensation due the city and are not to be construed as the setting of a charge for end-users. 
Each municipal consent shall provide that the public rights-of-way use fee of this subsection (1) b. and c. above may be adjusted once every three (3) years by the city, but such adjustment shall not exceed ten (10) percent in any one three-year period. 
(2)  Access line fee calculation. to the extent that the access line fee is applicable to the non-certificated provider in accordance with subsection (1) above: 
a.  The non-certificated telecommunications provider shall pay the access line fee for each access line owned or used by the non-certificated telecommunications provider, as calculated as of month-end that is activated for use by an end user customer in the city of the non-certificated telecommunications provider or by another non-certificated telecommunications provider by lease or otherwise. 
b.  Number of access lines. Subject to city's agreement not to disclose this information unless required by law, non-certificated telecommunications provider agrees to provide quarterly or as requested by the city, within a reasonable time after receipt of the city's written request, a report showing the number of access lines being maintained or operated by non-certificated telecommunications provider that are serving premises within the city, on a month end basis. The city agrees that the report shall be used solely for the purposes of verifying the number of non-certificated telecommunications provider's access lines serving premises within the city. Upon written request, non-certificated telecommunications provider shall verify the information in the report and, upon reasonable advance notice, all non-customer specific records and other documents required for such verification shall be subject to inspection by the city expressly excluding any records, documents or other writings the disclosure of which is prohibited by state or federal law, including the Electronic Communications Privacy Act, 18 U.S.C., § 2701 et seq. 
(3)  Confidential records. If the non-certificated telecommunications provider notifies the city by a conspicuous written notation of the confidential nature of any information (including, but not limited to the information in paragraph (2) of this section), reports, documents, or writings, the city agrees to maintain the confidentiality of the information, reports, documents, and writings to the extent permitted by law. Upon receipt by the city of requests for the non-certificated telecommunications provider's confidential information, reports, documents, or writings, the city shall notify the non-certificated telecommunications provider of the request in writing by facsimile transmission. The city shall furnish the non-certificated telecommunications provider with copies of all requests for Attorney General's opinions pertaining to the non-certificated telecommunications provider's confidential information, reports, documents or writings. The city shall request an Attorney General's opinion before disclosing any confidential information, reports, documents or writings, and shall furnish the non-certificated telecommunications provider with copies of Attorney General opinion requests as soon as practicable that it may pertain to the non-certificated telecommunications provider's confidential information, reports, documents or writings. 
(4)  No other fees. The payments due hereunder shall be in lieu of any construction, building or other permit, approval, inspection, or other similar fees or charges, including, but not limited to, all general business permit fees customarily assessed by the city for the use of the public rights-of-way against persons operating businesses similar to that of a non-certificated telecommunications provider. Further, such fees shall constitute full compensation to the city for all non-certificated telecommunications provider's facilities located within the public rights-of-way, including interoffice-transport and other facilities that do not terminate at an end-user customer's network interface device, even though those types of lines are not used in the calculation of the public rights-of-way fee. The compensation paid herein is not in lieu of any generally applicable ad valorem taxes, sales taxes or other generally applicable taxes, fees, development impact fees or charges, or other statutory charges or expenses recoverable under the Texas Public Utility Regulatory Act, or successor statutes. 
(5)  Uncollectibles. any other provision of this agreement notwithstanding, non-certificated telecommunications provider shall not be obligated to pay the city for any access lines or private line termination points the revenues for which remain uncollectible. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 11, 9-17-99)  
Sec. 15.5-1010. - City payment due dates. 
A non-certificated telecommunications provider shall remit the public rights-of-way use fee on a quarterly basis, and if applicable, the certified statement required in section 15.5-1000(2)b. Payment shall be made on or before the forty-fifth day following the close of each calendar quarter for which the payment is calculated and shall be paid by wire transfer to an account designated by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 12, 9-17-99)  
Sec. 15.5-1020. - Audits. 
(a)  On thirty (30) days' notice to a non-certificated telecommunications provider the city may audit a non-certificated telecommunications provider for a period of time to the fullest extent allowed by law. The non-certificated telecommunications provider shall furnish information to demonstrate its compliance with the municipal consent and/or other provisions of this division. 
(b)  A non-certificated telecommunications provider shall keep complete and accurate books of accounts and records of business and operations that commutatively reflect the monthly count of all access lines, the linear feet of facilities in the public rights-of-way, and the street crossings for a period of one (1) year after the expiration of the term of municipal consent. The city manager may require the keeping of additional records or accounts that are reasonably necessary for purposes of identifying, accounting for, and reporting the number of access lines, facilities in the public rights-of-way, or street crossings used to deliver telecommunication services or for calculation of the payments due hereunder. The city may examine the non-certificated telecommunications provider's books and records referred to above, expressly excluding any records, documents or other writings the disclosure of which is prohibited by state or federal law, including the Electronic Communications Privacy Act, 18 U.S.C. § 2701 et seq, but only to the extent such records reasonably relate to providing information to verify compliance with this division and the municipal consent. 
(c)  A Non-certificated telecommunications provider shall make available to the city or the city's designated agent (hereinafter "agent"), for the city or it's agent to examine, audit, review and copy, in the city, on the city manager's reasonable written request, its books and records referred to above, including papers, books, accounts, documents, maps, and plans that pertain to compliance with the municipal consent. A non-certificated telecommunications provider shall fully cooperate in making records available and otherwise assist the city examiner. The city examiner shall not inspect or copy or otherwise demand production of customer specific information or any records, documents or other writings the disclosure of which is prohibited by state or federal law, including the Electronic Communications Privacy Act, 18 U.S.C. § 2701 et seq. 
(d)  The city manager may, at any time, make reasonable inquiries pertaining to non-certificated telecommunications providers' performance of the terms and conditions of a municipal consent granted under this division. Non-Certificated telecommunications providers shall respond to such inquiries on a timely basis. 
(e)  Upon written request by the city manager, to the extent the documents are reasonably identified, non-certificated telecommunications providers shall furnish to the city within 30 business days from the date of the written request copies of all public petitions, applications, written communications and reports submitted by non-certificated telecommunications providers, to the FCC and/or to the PUC or their successor agencies, but only as they relate to any matters affecting the physical use of the public rights-of-way in the city. 
(f)  The provisions of this section shall be continuing and shall survive the termination of a municipal consent granted under this ordinance and shall extend for one year beyond the term of the municipal consent granted to the non-certificated telecommunications provider and the city shall have all the rights described in this section. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 13, 9-17-99)  
Sec. 15.5-1030. - Transfer. 
(a)  No municipal consent nor any rights or privileges that a non-certificated telecommunications provider has under a municipal consent, or the facilities held by a non-certificated telecommunications provider for use under such municipal consent which are in the public rights-of-way, shall be sold, resold, assigned, transferred or conveyed by the non-certificated telecommunications provider, either separately or collectively, to any other person, without the prior written approval of the city by ordinance or resolution. The city's approval shall be based upon the transferee providing adequate information to the city that it has the ability to perform and comply with the obligations and requirements of the municipal consent. Such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed. Should a non-certificated telecommunications provider sell, assign, transfer, convey or otherwise dispose of any of its rights or interests under its municipal consent, including such non-certificated telecommunications provider's telecommunications network, or attempt to do so, without the city's prior consent, the city may revoke the non-certificated telecommunications provider's municipal consent for default, in which event all rights and interest of the non-certificated telecommunications provider under the municipal consent shall cease. 
(b)  Any transfer in violation of this section shall be null and void and unenforceable. However, such a transfer shall not void the municipal consent as to the transferee, unless and until the city has given notice that such a change in control necessitates compliance with section 14 and either the non-certificated telecommunications provider does not initiate compliance with section 15.5-1030 within thirty (30) days after the above notice has been given by the city, or the city has validly denied granting its approval to the transfer. 
(c)  Any change of control of a non-certificated telecommunications provider shall constitute a transfer under this section. There shall be a rebuttable presumption of a change of control of a non-certificated telecommunications provider upon a change of twenty-five (25) percent or greater in the ownership of such non-certificated telecommunications provider. Such a change in control shall be deemed a transfer that requires consent of the city. 
(d)  A mortgage or other pledge of assets to a bank or lending institution in a bona fide lending transaction shall not be considered an assignment or transfer. 
(e)  Notwithstanding anything else in this section 15.5-1030, if the city has not approved or denied a request to transfer under this section at the next council meeting following forty (40) days after written notice of such request from the non-certificated telecommunications provider to the city, it shall be deemed approved. Such time frame may be extended by mutual agreement of the parties. 
(f)  Notwithstanding any other provision in this section 15.5-1030, a non-certificated telecommunications provider may without city approval, (i) transfer or assign the facilities in the public rights-of-way under a municipal consent to another non-certificated telecommunications provider who has a municipal consent under this ordinance; (ii) transfer or assign the municipal consent to an affiliate that is a certificated telecommunications provider or (iii) collaterally assign the municipal consent to its lender as security, and said lender may exercise its security interest and transfer the municipal consent to a third party that is a certificated telecommunications provider; however, unless there is prior consent by the city which releases the holder of the municipal consent (assignor) from its obligations and liabilities under the municipal consent, such assignor is not released from any obligations or liabilities that arise from this division and/or the municipal consent. The non-certificated telecommunications provider transferring or assigning the facilities the municipal consent must give written notice of such to the city manager within fourteen (14) days notice of such action. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 14, 9-17-99)  
Sec. 15.5-1040. - Notices to city. 
(a)  A non-certificated telecommunications provider shall notify the city manager as is provided in the municipal consent agreement. 
(b)  A non-certificated telecommunications provider shall give written notice to the city not later than fifteen (15) days before a transfer or change in operations that may affect the city. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 15, 9-17-99)  
Sec. 15.5-1050. - Circumvention of fee prohibited. 
A person may not circumvent payment of any fees payable hereunder or evade payment of such fees by bartering, transfer of rights, or by any other means. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 16, 9-17-99)  
Sec. 15.5-1060. - Renewal of municipal consent. 
A non-certificated telecommunications provider shall request a renewal of a municipal consent by making written application to the city manager at least ninety (90) days before the expiration of the consent. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 17, 9-17-99)  
Sec. 15.5-1070. - Annexation; disannexation. 
Within thirty (30) days following the date of the passage of any action affecting the annexation of any property to or the disannexation of any property from the city's corporate boundaries, the city agrees to furnish non-certificated telecommunications provider written notice of the action and an accurate map of the city's corporate boundaries showing, if available, street names and number details. For the purpose of compensating the city under this ordinance, a non-certificated telecommunications provider shall start including or excluding access lines within the affected area in the non-certificated telecommunications provider's count of access lines on the effective date designated by the Comptroller of Public Accounts Texas for the imposition of state local sales and use taxes; but in no case less than thirty (30) days from the date the non-certificated telecommunications provider is notified by the city of the annexation or disannexation. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 18, 9-17-99)  
Sec. 15.5-1080. - Severability. 
The provisions of this division are severable. However, in the event this division or any tariff that authorizes the non-certificated telecommunications provider to recover the fee(s) provided for in this division or any procedure provided in this division or any compensation due the city under this division becomes unlawful, or is declared or determined by a judicial, administrative or legislative authority exercising its jurisdiction to be excessive, unrecoverable, unenforceable, void, illegal or otherwise inapplicable, in whole or in part, or is exchanged for another means of compensation under higher authority, the remaining parts shall be fully enforceable and the non-certificated telecommunications provider and city shall meet and negotiate a new agreement that is in compliance with the authority's decision or enactment. Unless explicitly prohibited, the new agreement shall provide the city with a level of compensation comparable to that set forth in this ordinance as long as the agreed-to compensation is recoverable by the non-certificated telecommunications provider in a manner permitted by law for the unexpired portion of the term of this division. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 19, 9-17-99)  
Sec. 15.5-1090. - Governing law. 
This division shall be construed in accordance with the city code(s) in effect on the date of passage of this division to the extent that such code(s) are not in conflict with or in violation of the Constitution and laws of the United States or the State of Texas, subject to the city's ongoing authority to adopt reasonable regulations to manage its public rights-of-way pursuant to the Construction Public Rights-Of-Way Ordinance [Art. II]. Municipal consents entered into pursuant to this division are performable in Tarrant County, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 20, 9-17-99)  
Sec. 15.5-1100. - Termination. 
(a)  The city shall reserve the right to terminate any municipal consent and any rights or privileges conveyed under this division in the event of a material breach of the terms and conditions of the municipal consent or of this division, subject to thirty (30) days' written notice and the opportunity to cure the breach during that thirty—day period (or if reasonably determined by the city, a longer notice and cure period will be allowed, if the breach takes longer than thirty (30) days to cure and the non-certificated telecommunications provider acts diligently and in good faith to cure the breach). 
(b)  Material breaches of a municipal consent specifically include, but are not limited to, continuing violations of sections 15.5-1000 (Compensation to City), the Construction in the Public Rights-Of-Way Ordinance, [Art. II] and the furnishing of service of any kind that requires municipal authorization but that is not authorized by section 15.5-920(a). 
(c)  A material breach shall not be deemed to have occurred if the violation occurs without the fault of a non-certificated telecommunications provider or occurs as a result of circumstances beyond its control. Non-certificated telecommunications providers shall not be excused from performance of any of their obligations under this ordinance by economic hardship, nor misfeasance or malfeasance of their city managers, officers or employees. 
(d)  A termination shall be declared only by a written decision by motion, resolution or ordinance of the city council after an appropriate public proceeding before the city council, which shall accord the non-certificated telecommunications provider due process and full opportunity to be heard and to respond to any notice of grounds to terminate. All notice requirements shall be met by giving the non-certificated telecommunications provider at least fifteen (15) days prior written notice of any public hearing concerning the proposed termination of its consent. Such notice shall state the grounds for termination alleged by city. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 21, 9-17-99)  
Sec. 15.5-1110. - Unauthorized use of public rights-of-way. 
(a)  Any person seeking to place facilities on, in or over the public rights-of-way, city property, city structures shall first file an application for a municipal consent with the city and shall abide by the terms and provisions of this division pertaining to use of the public rights-of-way and pay the fees specified herein. 
(b)  The city may institute all appropriate legal action to prohibit any person from knowingly using the public rights-of-way without the city's consent in accordance with the terms of this division and with a municipal consent. 
(c)  Any person using the public rights-of-way without a municipal consent shall be liable for the same fees and charges as provided for herein. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 22, 9-17-99)  
Chapter 17 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Power to tax, § 8.16. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 17-100. - Texas Tax Code adopted. 
(a)  The provisions of Section 33.07, Texas Tax Code, be and are hereby adopted so that hereafter an additional penalty, as authorized by said Section 33.07 of the Texas Tax Code, be imposed and collected on taxes becoming delinquent on or after January 1, 1982. 
(b)  The provisions of Section 33.08, Texas Tax Code, are hereby adopted so that hereafter taxes which become delinquent shall incur an additional penalty to defray costs of collection, not to exceed the maximum allowable penalty, as authorized by Section 6.30, Texas Tax Code, in the event said taxes become delinquent on or after June 1st, under Section 26.07(F), 26.15(E), 31.03, 31.031, 31.032, or 31.04 of the Texas Tax Code. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 2, 11-16-99; Ord. No. 1187, § 2, 4-20-04)  
Sec. 17-101. - Tax imposed on goods-in-transit. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Dealer's motor vehicle inventory, dealer's vessel and outboard motor inventory, dealer's heavy equipment inventory, and retail manufactured housing inventory have the meanings assigned by Subchapter B, Chapter 23 of the Texas Tax Code. 
(2)  Goods in transit means tangible personal property that: 
a.  Is acquired in or imported into this state to be forwarded to another location in this state or outside this state; 
b.  Is stored under a contract of bailment by a public warehouse operator at one or more public warehouse facilities in this state that are not in any way owned or controlled by the owner of the personal property for the account of the person who acquired or imported the property; 
c.  Is transported to another location in this state or outside this state not later than one hundred seventy-five (175) days after the date the person acquired the property in or imported the property into this state; and 
d.  Does not include oil, natural gas, petroleum products, aircraft, dealer's motor vehicle inventory, dealer's vessel and outboard motor inventory, dealer's heavy equipment inventory, or retail manufactured housing inventory. 
(3)  Location means a physical address. 
(4)  Petroleum product means a liquid or gaseous material that is an immediate derivative of the refining of oil or natural gas. 
(5)  Bailee and warehouse have the meanings assigned by Section 7.102, Business & Commerce Code. 
(6)  Public warehouse operator means a person that: 
a.  Is both a bailee and a warehouse; and 
b.  Stores under a contract of bailment, at one (1) or more public warehouse facilities, tangible personal property that is owned by other persons solely for the account of those persons and not for the operator's account. 
(b)  Tax imposed. The city hereby imposes a tax on "goods-in-transit" as provided by Texas Tax Code §11.253, and not exempt from taxation by any other law. 
(Ord. No. 1575, § 2, 11-15-11)  
Sec. 17-105. - Homestead exemption—Residential. 
(a)  There is hereby exempted from ad valorem taxation the greater of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or four (4) per cent of the market value of the residential homestead of married or unmarried adults, including those living alone. The term residential homestead shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in term by section 11.13 of the Texas Property Tax Code. An eligible adult is entitled to receive other applicable exemptions provided by law. 
(b)  This exemption shall be effective beginning with taxes levied and assessed for the year 1986. 
(Ord. No. 452, §§ 1, 2, 3-18-86; Ord. No. 1800, § 2, 7-5-16 )  
Sec. 17-110. - Same—For persons over sixty-five. 
The owner of a residential homestead who makes application between January 1, and May 1 of each year for a homestead exemption and who furnishes a copy of a birth certificate or other proof satisfactory to the tax assessor that such owner is sixty-five (65) years of age or older on or before January 1 of the tax year for which application is made shall be entitled to an exemption of forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00) from assessed valuation for city ad valorem tax purposes. 
(Ord. No. 391, § 1, 9-26-84; Ord. No. 501, § 1, 3-17-87; Ord. No. 645, § 1, 2-19-91) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 391, section 1, adopted Sept. 26, 1984, amended the Code by adding § 17-300. For purposes of classification, the editor has redesignated these provisions as § 17-110. Subsequently, Ord. No. 501, § 1, adopted March 17, 1987, added new provisions designated as § 17-300; said provisions have been included herein as amendatory § 17-10.  
Sec. 17-115. - Same—For disabled persons. 
(a)  There is hereby exempted from ad valorem taxation the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) of the market value of the resident's homestead of disabled individuals. The term "disabled" shall have the same meaning as assigned to that term by section 11.13 of the Texas Property Tax Code. The term "residential homestead" shall have the same meaning as assigned to that term by section 11.13 of the Texas Property Tax Code. 
(b)  This exemption shall be effective beginning with taxes levied and assessed for the year 1986. 
(Ord. No. 454, §§ 1, 2, 4-1-86) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 454, §§ 1, 2, adopted April 1, 1986, did not expressly amend the Code; hence, codification as § 17-115 was at the editor's discretion.  
Sec. 17-117. - Ad valorem tax limitation for the elderly and the disabled. 
The city council does hereby establish an ad valorem tax limitation on residential homesteads of the disabled and persons sixty-five (65) years of age or older and their spouses, as authorized and defined by the Texas Constitution, Article VIII, Taxation and Revenue, Section 1-b, Residence Homestead Exemption, and the Texas Tax Code, Chapter 11, Taxable Property and Exemptions, Section 11.261, Limitation of County, Municipal, or Junior College District Tax on Homesteads of Disabled and Elderly. 
(Ord. No. 1209, § 2, 8-3-04)  
Sec. 17-120. - Taxation of telecommunication services. 
(a)  A tax is hereby authorized on all telecommunication services sold within the city. For purposes of this section, the sale of telecommunication services is consummated at the location of the telephone or other telecommunication device from which the call or other communication originates. If the point of origin cannot be determined, the sale is consummated at the address to which the call or other communication is billed. 
(b)  The rate of the tax imposed by this section shall be the same as the rate imposed by the city for all other local sales and use taxes as authorized by the legislature of the state. The rate of tax imposed by this section shall specifically include the city crime control and prevention district tax. 
(c)  The city secretary shall forward to the comptroller of the State of Texas by United States Registered Mail a copy of the ordinance from which this article derives along with a copy of the minutes of the city council's vote and discussion on this article. 
(Ord. No. 510, § 1, 5-5-87; Ord. No. 1112, § 2, 8-20-02)  
Sec. 17-121. - Taxation of constitutionally exempt property. 
Goods, wares, merchandise, other tangible personal property and ores, other than oil, natural gas and other petroleum products, shall not be exempt from taxation, even if acquired in or imported into the state to be forwarded outside the state and is detained in this state for assembly, storing, manufacturing, processing and fabricating and is transported outside the state not later than one hundred seventy-five (175) days after the date it is acquired. The purpose of this section is to tax property otherwise exempt under the provisions of article 8, section 1-J of the Texas Constitution, in the tax year 1990 and all subsequent years thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 607, § 1, 12-19-89)  
Sec. 17-122. - Residential homestead property tax exemption. 
The city council does hereby approve a residential homestead property tax exemption of twelve (12) percent as authorized and defined by section 11.13(n) of the Texas Property Tax Code. 
(Ord. No. 1848 , § 2, 6-20-17; Ord. No. 1892 , § 2, 6-19-18; Ord. No. 1937, § 2, 6-18-2019)  
Sec. 17-123. - Levying taxes on all taxable properties. 
(a)  The city council shall hereby levy the following taxes on each one hundred dollars ($100.00), of taxable valuation on all taxable property within the city limits, to be assessed and collected by the tax assessor/collector for the tax year 2018 (fiscal year 2018-19) for the purposes hereinafter stipulated: 
(1)  For the general fund maintenance and operations levied on the one hundred dollars ($100.00) of taxable valuation .....$0.332943 
(2)  For the interest and sinking fund levied on the one hundred dollars ($100.00) of taxable valuation: .....0.080307 
Total tax rate .....0.413250 
(b)  This tax rate will raise more taxes for maintenance and operations than last year's rate. The maintenance and operations tax rate will effectively be raised by seven and ninety-eights (7.98) percent over the effective maintenance and operations rate and will raise taxes for maintenance and operations on a one hundred thousand dollar ($100,000.00) home by approximately twenty-four dollars and sixty-one cents ($24.61). 
(c)  There shall be exempted from the valuation of all residential homesteads for which proper application shall have been made, an amount equal to the greater of ten (10) percent of the appraised value of such residential homestead, or five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The exemption shall be granted to any such residential homestead and the improvements qualifying for same as provided by law. 
(d)  There shall be exempted the sum of forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00) of the assessed value of residence homesteads of residents of the city, who are sixty-five (65) years of age or older, from all ad valorem taxes thereafter levied by the city. 
(e)  There shall be exempted the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) of the assessed value of residence homesteads of residents of the city, meeting the definition of a "disabled" individual, as defined by the Texas Tax Code. 
(f)  There shall be exempted from valuation any other exemption or exemptions, which may be authorized by the Texas Tax Code for which proper application by the taxpayer, shall have been made. 
(g)  Section 17-117 provided for the establishment of an ad valorem tax limitation on residential homesteads of disabled and persons sixty-five (65) years of age or older and their spouses, as authorized and defined by the Texas Constitution, article VIII, Taxation and Revenue, section 1-b, Residence Homestead Exemption, and the Texas Tax Code, chapter 11, Taxable Property and Exemptions, section 11.261, Limitation of County, Municipal, or Junior College District Tax on Homesteads of Disabled and Elderly. 
(h)  The taxes are hereby assessed and levied and are due and payable on October 1, 2018 and shall be payable not later than January 31, 2019. The penalties and interest provided for shall accrue after this date. However, if the entire taxes due are paid in full by January 31, 2019, no penalty or interest shall be due. 
(i)  In addition to the taxes assessed and levied herein, there is also assessed and levied a penalty for the failure to pay taxes due as state law provides. 
(j)  In addition to the taxes and penalty and interest assessed and levied herein, there is also assessed and levied a twenty (20) percent collection fee on all taxes, and penalty, and interest that become delinquent and remain unpaid on July 1, 2019. 
(Ord. No. 1862 , §§ 2—11, 9-19-17; Ord. No. 1906, §§ 1—11, 9-18-18)  
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATIONAL TAX ON COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT MACHINES 
 
Sec. 17-200. - Tax on machines. 
Every person, individual, firm, company, association or corporation, save an owner holding an import license and holding coin-operated machines solely for resale, who owns, controls, possesses, exhibits, displays, or who permits to be exhibited or displayed in this city any coin-operated amusement machine shall pay and there is hereby levied on each such machine an annual occupation tax of seven dollars and fifty cents ($7.50). Any machine exempted by the State of Texas from state tax shall be exempt under this section.  
Sec. 17-210. - License fee. 
Every person, individual, firm, company, association or corporation engaging in the business of owning or exhibiting skill or pleasure coin-operated machines within the city shall pay an annual license fee to the city as follows: 
(1)  For an owner or exhibitor with fifty (50) or fewer machines: $100.00; 
(2)  For an owner or exhibitor with fifty-one (51) through two hundred (200) machines: $200.00; 
(3)  For an owner or exhibitor of two hundred (200) or more machines: $250.00.  
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 850, §§ 1-9, adopted March 4, 1997, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as Art. III, §§ 17-300—17-380, was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 17-300. - Definition of terms. 
The following words, terms and phrases are, for the purpose of this article, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, defined as follows: 
City manager shall mean the city manager of the city or such person as is specifically delegated by the city manager. 
Consideration shall mean the cost of the room in such hotel only if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping, and shall not include the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant of such room not related to the cleaning and readying of such room for occupancy. 
Convention center facilities or convention center complex shall mean civic centers, civic center buildings, auditoriums, exhibition halls and coliseums that are owned by the city or other governmental entity or that are managed in whole or in part by the city. The term includes parking areas or facilities that are for the parking or storage of conveyances and that are located at or in the immediate vicinity of other convention center facilities. 
Hotel shall mean any building or buildings in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations. The term shall include hotels, motels, tourist homes, tourist houses, houses or courts, lodging houses, inns, rooming houses, or other buildings where rooms are furnished for a consideration, but "hotel" shall not be defined so as to include hospitals, sanitariums, or nursing homes. 
Occupancy shall mean the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room in a hotel if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping and if the occupant's use, possession, or right to use or possession extends for a period of less than thirty (30) days. 
Occupant shall mean anyone, who, for a consideration uses, possesses, or has a right to use or possess any room in a hotel if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping. 
Permanent resident shall mean any occupant who has or shall have the right of occupancy of any room or rooms or sleeping space or facility in a hotel for at least thirty (30) consecutive days during the current calendar year or preceding year. 
Person shall mean any individual, company, corporation, or association owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel. 
Quarterly period shall mean the regular calendar quarters of the year, the first being composed of the months of October, November and December; the second quarter being the months of January, February, and March; the third quarter being the months of April, May and June; and the fourth quarter being the months of July, August and September. 
Tourism shall mean the guidance or management of tourists. 
Tourist shall mean an individual who travels from the individual's residence to a different municipality, county, state, or country for pleasure, recreation, education or culture. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 1, 3-4-97)  
Sec. 17-310. - Levy of tax; rate; exceptions. 
(a)  There is hereby levied a tax upon the cost of occupancy of any room or space furnished by any hotel equal to seven (7) percent of the consideration paid by the occupant of such room, space or facility to such hotel, exclusive of other occupancy taxes imposed by other governmental agencies. 
(b)  The price of a room in a hotel does not include the cost of food served by the hotel or the cost of personal services performed by the hotel for the person except for those services related to cleaning and readying the room for use or possession. 
(c)  The tax does not apply to a person who has the right to use or possess a room in a hotel for thirty (30) or more days. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 2, 3-4-97; Ord. No. 1692, § 2, 5-6-14)  
Sec. 17-320. - Disposition of revenue. 
The revenue derived from this hotel occupancy tax may only be used for the purposes authorized by the Texas Tax Code Annotated, section 351.001 et. seq., as the city council of the city may direct and authorize, and further as follows: 
(1)  Revenue derived from the municipal hotel occupancy tax may be used only to promote tourism and the convention and hotel industry, and such use is limited to the following: 
a.  The acquisition of sites for and the construction, improvement, enlarging, equipping, repairing, operation, and maintenance of convention center facilities; 
b.  The furnishing of facilities, personnel, and materials for the registration of convention delegates or registrants; 
c.  Advertising and conducting solicitation and promotional programs to attract tourists and convention delegates or registrants to the city and its vicinity; 
d.  The encouragement, promotion, improvement, and application of the arts, including music (instrumental and vocal), dance, drama, folk art, creative writing, architecture, design and allied fields, painting, sculpture, photography, graphic and craft arts, motion pictures, radio, television, tape and sound recording, and the arts related to the representation, performance, execution, and exhibition of these major art forms; and 
e.  Historical restoration and preservation projects or activities or advertising and conducting solicitation and promotional programs to encourage tourists and convention delegates or registrants to visit preserved historic sites or museums: (i) at or in the immediate vicinity of convention center facilities; or (ii) located elsewhere in the city and its vicinity that would be frequented by tourists, convention delegates, or other visitors to the city. 
(2)  Hotel occupancy tax revenue spent for a purpose authorized by this section may be spent for day-to-day operations, supplies, salaries, office rental, travel expenses, and other administrative costs only if those administrative costs are incurred directly in the promotion and servicing of expenditures authorized under this section. The portion of the total administrative costs for which the hotel occupancy tax revenue may be used may not exceed the portion of those administrative costs actually incurred in conducting the activities for which the hotel tax revenue may be used. 
(3)  Municipal hotel occupancy tax revenue may not be spent for travel for a person to attend an event or conduct an activity for the primary purpose of which is not directly related to the promotion of tourism and the convention and hotel industry or the performance of the person's job in an efficient and professional manner. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 3, 3-4-97)  
Sec. 17-330. - Collection. 
(a)  Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax imposed in section 17-310 hereof for the City of Keller. Provided, however, that failure of an operator, manager, management company or controller of any hotel to collect or make payment of the full amount of such tax owed to the City of Keller places the responsibility for the full amount of such tax owed to the City of Keller upon the person owning the hotel or its successor or assignee, which shall include any person acquiring ownership through foreclosure or any other legal means. 
(b)  Every person collecting the subject tax is hereby authorized to deduct and withhold from the said person's payment to the City of Keller, as reimbursement for the cost of collecting the tax, one (1) percent of the amount of tax collected and required to be reported to the City of Keller. 
(c)  Every person collecting the subject tax shall forfeit the one (1) percent reimbursement for failure to pay the tax or to file reports as required by this article. 
(d)  Upon the sale of a hotel, the purchaser of the hotel, or other successors in interest to the hotel, shall withhold from the purchase price an amount sufficient to pay the City of Keller the full amount of all collected but unpaid hotel occupancy taxes owed to the city. Upon payment of such taxes to the city the tax collector shall deliver a certificate of paid hotel occupancy tax. The purchaser of a hotel or other successors in interest to a hotel who fails to withhold the full amount of hotel tax collected but unpaid to the city out of the purchase price as required by this section is liable for the amount required to be withheld. 
(e)  If a person forecloses upon a hotel which has collected hotel occupancy taxes that have not been paid to the city, responsibility for the payment of the full amount of such collected but unpaid taxes shall be that of the person foreclosing upon the hotel. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 4, 3-4-97)  
Sec. 17-340. - Reports. 
On the last day of the month following each quarterly period, every person required in section 17-330 hereof to collect the tax imposed herein, shall file a report with the city showing the consideration paid for all room occupancies in the preceding quarter, the amount of the tax collected on such occupancies, and any other information as the city manager may reasonably require. Such person shall pay the tax due on such occupancies at the time of filing such report. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 5, 3-4-97)  
Sec. 17-350. - Rules and regulations. 
The city manager shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are necessary to effectively collect the tax levied herein, and shall upon reasonable notice have access to books and records necessary to enable the city manager to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this article and the amount of taxes due under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 6, 3-4-97)  
Sec. 17-360. - Penalties. 
(a)  If any person shall fail to collect the tax imposed herein, shall fail to file a report as required herein, shall fail to pay to the city the tax as imposed herein when said payment is due, shall fail to withhold an amount from the purchase price to satisfy outstanding hotel occupancy taxes collected but unpaid to the city when purchasing or acquiring an interest in a hotel or shall file a false report, or any person who forecloses upon any hotel which has collected but not paid to the city the full amount of hotel tax, such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction be punished by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which an offense occurs or continues. In addition, such person who fails to remit the tax imposed by this ordinance within the time required shall be charged five (5) percent of the amount due as a penalty, and after the first thirty (30) days shall be charged an additional ten (10) percent of such tax. Provided, however, that the penalty shall never be less than one dollar ($1.00). Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the rate of ten (1) percent per annum beginning sixty (60) days from the date due. 
(b)  The city attorney or other attorneys acting for the city may bring suit against a person who is required to collect the tax imposed and pay the collections over to the city and who has failed to file a tax report or pay the tax when due to collect the tax not paid or to enjoin the person from operating a hotel in the municipality until the tax is paid or the report filed, as applicable, as provided by the court's order. In addition to the amount of any tax owed, this person is liable to the city for the city's reasonable attorney's fees and a penalty equal to fifteen (15) percent of the total amount of the tax owed. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 7, 3-4-97)  
Sec. 17-370. - Collection fee. 
The city may retain five (5) percent of the gross amount of the hotel occupancy tax collected to cover the cost of said collection duties. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 8, 3-4-97)  
Sec. 17-380. - Fee for certificate. 
A certificate of paid hotel occupancy tax shall not be issued by the city's tax collector unless a ten dollar ($10.00) fee has been paid to the city for such certificate. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 9, 3-4-97)  
Chapter 18 - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation, Ch. 12; signs not to constitute traffic hazard, § 20-711. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 18-100. - Portions of texas statutes adopted. 
The provisions of the Texas State Transportation Code, found in Title 7. Vehicles and Traffic, Subtitle C. Rules of the Road, Chapter 542. General Provisions, Subchapter B. Uniformity and Interpretation of Traffic Laws, Section 542.202 Powers of Local Authorities, and Section 542.203. Limitation on Local Authorities as amended and as hereinafter may be amended are hereby adopted and made the Traffic Code of the City of Keller, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 1633, § 2, 12-4-12)  
Sec. 18-110. - Amendments to articles adopted. 
All future amendments made to said Section 542.202 and Section 542.203 of the Texas State Transportation Code shall be automatically a part of and become a part of the traffic code of the City of Keller, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 1633, § 2, 12-4-12)  
Sec. 18-112. - Definitions. 
Highway means a tolled or nontolled public road or part of a tolled or nontolled public road and a bridge, culvert, building, or other necessary structure related to a public road. All public streets in the City of Keller are considered highways with respect to this sections 18-100—18-118. 
Local authority means a county, municipality, or other local entity authorized to enact traffic laws under the laws of the State of Texas. For sections 18-100—18-118, it will mean the City of Keller, Texas. 
Traffic control device means a sign, signal, marking or device that is used to regulate, warn or guide traffic. Such term includes a traffic control signal which is a manual, electric or mechanical device that alternately directs traffic to stop and to proceed. 
(Ord. No. 1633, § 2, 12-4-12)  
Sec. 18-114. - Authority. 
The city manager appoints the director of public works as the city's traffic engineer. As traffic engineer the director of public works shall exercise the powers and duties so provided in this Code and other ordinances of the city relative to traffic. 
(Ord. No. 1633, § 2, 12-4-12)  
Sec. 18-116. - Powers and duties. 
It shall be the duty of the traffic engineer to: 
(1)  Determine the installation and proper timing of traffic control devices; 
(2)  Conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and devise remedial measures, where required by the city manager; 
(3)  Conduct engineering investigations of traffic conditions, when appropriate; 
(4)  Cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions; and 
(5)  Carry out additional powers and duties granted by law. 
(Ord. No. 1633, § 2, 12-4-12)  
Sec. 18-118. - Existing devices. 
All traffic control devices located on public streets of the city on December 4, 2012, are hereby declared to be authorized as official traffic control devices. 
(Ord. No. 1633, § 2, 12-4-12)  
Sec. 18-120. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
All ordinances or parts thereof in conflict with this chapter are repealed to the extent of such conflict and only to the extent of such conflict. Except as to the extent of such conflict in repeal all prior ordinances are continued in full force and effect.  
Sec. 18-130. - Imposition of fee for service of certain arrest warrants; expense for services performed in a court case to be dismissed because of other actions. 
(a)  The city shall impose a fee not to exceed the maximum allowed by state law for the issuance and service warrant of arrest for any offense under Section 149, Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, Article 6701d, Vernon's Texas Civil Statues, and after due notice, said fee shall not exceed the maximum allowed by state law and shall be paid into the city treasury for the use and benefit of the city. 
(b)  The city hereby authorizes and imposes a special expense for services performed in cases in which the laws of the state require that the case be dismissed because of actions by or on behalf of the defendant which were subsequent to the date of the alleged offense. Such actions are limited to compliance with the provisions of Subsection A, Section 143a, Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, Article 6701d, Vernon's Texas Civil Statues, such act being commonly known as defensive driving school. Such special expense shall not exceed the maximum allowed by state law and shall be paid to the city treasury for the use and benefit of the city. 
(Ord. No. 515, §§ 1, 2, 9-15-87; Ord. No. 979, § 2, 8-17-99).  
Sec. 18-131. - Municipal court building security fund. 
(a)  The city council of the City of Keller, Texas hereby establishes a municipal court building security fund, requiring that a defendant convicted for a misdemeanor offense in the municipal court shall pay the maximum allowed by state law security fee as a cost of the court. 
(b)  The fee shall be collected by the clerk of the court. 
(c)  The fund designated by this section may be used solely to finance the following items when used for the purpose of providing security services for the housing of the municipal court, as may be required: 
(1)  The purchase or repair of X-Ray machines and conveying systems; 
(2)  Hand held metal detectors; 
(3)  Walk through metal detectors; 
(4)  Identification cards and systems; 
(5)  Electronic locking and surveillance equipment; 
(6)  Bailiffs, deputy sheriffs, deputy constables, or contract security personnel during times when they are providing security services for the Keller Municipal Court; 
(7)  Signage; 
(8)  Confiscated weapon inventory and tracking systems; 
(9)  Locks, chains, or other security hardware; 
(10)  Purchase or repair of bullet proof glass; or 
(11)  Continuing education on security issues. 
(d)  The fund designated by this ordinance shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 979, § 3, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 1168, § 2, 11-18-03)  
Sec. 18-132. - Municipal court technology fund. 
(a)  The city council of the City of Keller, Texas hereby establishes a municipal court technology fund, requiring that a defendant convicted for a misdemeanor offense in the municipal court shall pay the maximum fee allowed by state law as a cost of the court. 
(b)  The fee shall be collected by the clerk of the court beginning September 1, 1999. 
(c)  The fund designated by this section may be used only to finance the purchase of or to maintain technological enhancements for a municipal court, or municipal court of record, including: 
(1)  Computer systems; 
(2)  Computer networks; 
(3)  Computer hardware; 
(4)  Computer software; 
(5)  Imaging systems; 
(6)  Electronic kiosks; 
(7)  Electronic ticket writers; and 
(8)  Docket management systems. 
(d)  The fund designated by this ordinance shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 979, § 4, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 1168, § 3, 11-18-03)  
Sec. 18-133. - Juvenile case manager fund. 
(a)  The city council of the City of Keller, Texas hereby establishes a juvenile case manager fund, requiring that a defendant convicted of a fine only misdemeanor offense in the municipal court shall pay a juvenile case manager fee not to exceed five dollars ($5.00) per offense as a cost of the court. The term "convicted", as used herein is used pursuant to the definition given in Article 102.0174, Texas Code of Criminal Procedures; 
(b)  The fee shall be collected by the Clerk Of The Court beginning October 1, 2006; 
(c)  The fund designated by this section shall be used solely to finance the salary and benefits of the juvenile case manager; 
(d)  The fund designated by this section authorizes the municipal judge to waive the juvenile case manager fee in case of financial hardship; and 
(e)  The fund designated by this section shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council of the City of Keller, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 1345, § 2, 9-19-06)  
Sec. 18-140. - Fines. 
Any person, firm or corporation that violates, disobeys, neglects or refuses to comply with, or that resists the enforcement of, any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) and not more than the maximum allowed by state law for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Ord. No. 979, § 5, 8-17-99)  
ARTICLE II. - SPEED LIMITS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Speed limits in city park, § 12-200. 
 
Sec. 18-200. - Various speed limits on public streets. 
Upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation heretofore made as authorized by the provisions of Chapter 545, Paragraph 545.356 of the Texas Transportation Code, the following prima facie maximum speed limits hereinafter indicated for vehicles are hereby determined and declared to be reasonable and safe; and such speed limits are hereby fixed at the rate of speed indicated for vehicles traveling upon the said streets and highways, or parts thereof, and described as follows: 
(1)  U.S. Highway 377 (North Main Street and South Main Street) north and south bound vehicular traffic: 
a.  45 miles per hour: From the south city limit line of the City of Keller to a point located two hundred fifty (250) feet north of the intersection of Bear Creek Parkway and U.S. Highway 377 (South Main Street). 
b.  35 miles per hour: From a point located two hundred fifty (250) feet north of the intersection of Bear Creek Parkway and U.S. Highway 377 (South Main Street) to the intersection of Lorine Street and U.S. Highway 377 (North Main Street). 
c.  40 miles per hour: From the intersection of Lorine Street and U.S. Highway 377 (North Main Street) to the intersection of Jennifer Court and U.S. Highway 377 (North Main Street). 
d.  55 miles per hour: From the intersection of Jennifer Court and U.S. Highway 377 (North Main Street) to the north city limit line of the City of Keller. 
(2)  Keller Parkway (FM 1709) east and west bound vehicular traffic: 
a.  40 miles per hour: From the west city limit line of the City of Keller to a point located four hundred twenty-two (422) feet west of the intersection of Cindy Street and Keller Parkway (FM 1709). 
b.  45 miles per hour: From a point located four hundred twenty-two (422) feet west of the intersection of Cindy Street and Keller Parkway (FM 1709) to the east city limit line of the City of Keller. 
(3)  Mt. Gilead Road: 
a.  40 miles per hour: From the intersection of U.S. Highway 377 (North Main Street) to Roanoke Road. 
(4)  Bear Creek Parkway: 
a.  35 miles per hour: From the west right-of-way line of Davis Boulevard (FM 1938) west to the intersection of Keller-Smithfield Road South. 
(5)  Johnson Road: 
a.  35 miles per hour: From the intersection of Rufe Snow Drive west to the intersection of U.S. Highway 377 (North Main Street). 
(6)  Rufe Snow Drive: 
a.  40 miles per hour: From the intersection of Keller Parkway (FM 1709) south to the intersection of Bursey Road. 
(7)  Pearson Lane: 
a.  35 miles per hour: From the intersection of Florence Road north to the north city limit line of the City of Keller. 
(8)  Meadows of Bear Creek Subdivision: 
a.  20 miles per hour: On Bear Hollow, Glen Hollow, Forest Bend Lane, Falcon Drive, and Pleasant Run. 
(9)  Shadowbrook Place Subdivision: 
a.  20 miles per hour: On Shadowbrook Drive, Country Manor, Creekside Drive, Eastwood Drive, and Kingwood Drive. 
(10)  Chase Oaks Subdivision: 
a.  20 miles per hour: On Chase Oaks Drive, Sawtooth Oak Trail, Vasey Oak Drive, Pin Oak Trail, Durrand Oak Drive, Blackjack Trail, Overcup Lane, Lacey Oak Lane, Shumard Oak Trail, Scarlet Way, and Mountain Laurel Drive. 
(11)  The Keys Subdivision, Williamsburg Estates, and Rolling Oaks Estates: 
a.  20 miles per hour: On Williamsburg Lane, Windemere Way, Runnymede Drive, and Wales Drive. 
(12)  The Preserves at Hidden Lakes Subdivision: 
a.  25 miles per hour: On Watercrest Drive, Arcadia Drive, and Cypress Drive. 
(13)  FM Highway 1938 (Davis Boulevard) north and south bound vehicular traffic: 
a.  50 miles per hour: From the north city limit line (at TXDOT Mile Post 0.892) south to the south city limit line (at TXDOT Mile Post 1.712) of the City of Keller. 
(14)  Danbury Parks Subdivision: 
a.  25 miles per hour: On Danbury Parks Drive, Wishing Tree Lane, Wickford Court, and Britney Court. 
(15)  Harmonson Farms Subdivision: 
a.  25 miles per hour: Lavena Court, Lavena Street (west section starting at 400 block from Bourland Road), Majestic Court, Hideaway Drive, Hideaway Court, Norma Lane, Gentlewind Drive, Northshore Court, Farm View Trail, Pimlico Drive, Sunlight Court, Homestead Drive, Foxcroft Court, and Foxcroft Lane. 
(16)  Heatherwood Estates Subdivision: 
a.  25 miles per hour: Heather Lane (west of Rufe Snow Drive), Scot Lane, Cliffmoor Drive, Birchmont Lane, and Edinburgh Lane. 
(17)  The Courts of Canterbury Forest Subdivision: 
a.  25 miles per hour: Canterbury Lane, Stratford Place, Avebury Court, Lark Haven Lane, Trowbridge Court, Bradford Court, Oxford Court, and Cambridge Court. 
(18)  North Tarrant Parkway: 
a.  40 miles per hour: From the intersection of U.S. Highway 377 (South Main Street) east to the east City limits of the City of Keller, Texas. 
(19)  The Woodlands at Hidden Lakes Subdivision: 
a.  25 miles per hour: Haddington Lane and Ranger Drive. 
(20)  Brentwood Estates Subdivision: 
a.  25 miles per hour: Brentwood Trail, Rockwood Drive, Rosewood Drive, Tealwood Drive, Tealwood Court, And Tealcrest Court. 
(21)  Serene Villas: 
a.  25 miles per hour: Serene Court. 
(22)  North Tarrant Parkway: 
a.  35 miles per hour: North Tarrant Parkway from the 800 to 1100 blocks. 
(23)  Hidden Lakes Subdivision: 
a.  25 miles per hour: Hidden Meadow Drive. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1, 5-21-85; Ord. No. 424, § 1(A)—(F), 5-21-85; Ord. No. 448, § 1, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 465, § 1, 7-15-86; Ord. No. 497, § 1, 2-3-87; Ord. No. 833, § 1, 8-6-96; Ord. No. 992, § 2, 11-16-99; Ord. No. 1012, § 2, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 1015, § 2, 6-11-00; Ord. No. 1019, § 2, 8-1-00; Ord. No. 1031, § 2, 11-7-00; Ord. No. 1047, § 2, 3-20-01; Ord. No. 1068, § 2, 10-16-01; Ord. No. 1106, § 2, 6-4-02; Ord. No. 1109, § 2, 7-16-02; Ord. No. 1294, § 2, 11-15-05; Ord. No. 1321, § 2, 3-21-06; Ord. No. 1355, § 2, 12-19-06; Ord. No. 1392, § 2, 11-20-07; Ord. No. 1529, § 2, 11-2-10; Ord. No. 1570, § 2, 10-18-11; Ord. No. 1571, § 2, 10-18-11; Ord. No. 1595, § 2, 5-1-12; Ord. No. 1616, § 2, 8-21-12; Ord. No. 1639, § 2, 2-5-13; Ord. No. 1647, § 2, 5-7-13; Ord. No. 1669, § 2, 11-19-13; Ord. No. 1719, § 2, 11-18-14; Ord. No. 1871, § 2, 12-5-17 ; Ord. No. 1953 , § 2, 10-15-19)  
Sec. 18-210. - School zone speed provisions. 
Upon the basis of engineering and traffic investigation heretofore made as authorized by the provisions of Chapter 545, Paragraph 545.356, of the Texas Transportation Code the following prima facie maximum speed limits hereinafter indicated for vehicles are hereby fixed at the rate of speed indicated for vehicles traveling upon the named streets and highways, or parts thereof, and at the speed and times described as follows: 
(1)  Bear Creek Intermediate School: 
a.  20 miles per hour: On Pate-Orr Road from Clover Lane to Bear Creek Parkway, and on Bear Creek Parkway from Gloria Street to Pate-Orr Road during the posted times of: 
7:15 a.m. to 8:15 a.m. 
2:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. 
(2)  Hidden Lakes Elementary School: 
a.  20 miles per hour: On Preston Lane from Moss Hill Lane to Marblewood Drive, and on Bear Creek Parkway from San Saba Street to one hundred feet (100') west of Promontory Drive, and on Meandering Woods Drive from one hundred twenty five feet (125') north of Wellington Court to a point seven hundred feet (700') north during the posted times of: 
7:25 a.m. to 8:25 a.m. 
2:40 p.m. to 3:40 p.m. 
(3)  Indian Springs Middle School and Keller Center for Advanced Learning: 
a.  20 miles hour: On Willis Lane from Bursey Road to North Tarrant Parkway, during the posted times of: 
7:15 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. 
2:30 p.m. to 4:15 p.m. 
b.  25 miles hour: On North Tarrant Parkway from Willis Lane to Whitley Road, during the times of: 
7:15 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. 
2:30 p.m. to 4:15 p.m. 
(4)  South Keller Intermediate School: 
a.  20 miles hour: On Willis Lane from Bursey Road to North Tarrant Parkway during the posted times of: 
7:15 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. 
2:30 p.m. to 4:15 p.m. 
b.  25 miles hour: On North Tarrant Parkway from Willis Lane to Whitley Road, during the posted times of: 
7:15 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. 
2:30 p.m. to 4:15 p.m. 
(5)  Keller High School: 
a.  20 miles hour: On Johnson Road from Rufe Snow Drive to Bluebonnet Drive and on Pate-Orr Road from Johnson Road to Meadow Circle North during the posted times of: 
8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. 
3:15 p.m. to 4:15 p.m. 
(6)  Keller-Harvel Elementary School: 
a.  20 miles hour: On Johnson Road from three hundred (300) feet west of Jessie Street to Blue Stem, and on Norma Lane from Johnson Road north to a point one hundred fifty-five feet (155') north of Foxcroft Lane during the posted times of: 
7:25 a.m. to 8:25 a.m. 
2:40 p.m. to 3:40 p.m. 
(7)  Keller Middle School: 
a.  20 miles hour: On Lorine Street from Linda Street to Jessie Street, and on Jessie Street from Hovenkamp Street to Keller Parkway (FM 1709), and on College Avenue from Hovenkamp Street to Keller Parkway (FM 1709), and on Pearl Street from Jessie Street to Linda Street, and on Blue Stem from Hovenkamp Street to Lorine Street during the posted times of: 
8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. 
3:15 p.m. to 4:15 p.m. 
(8)  Shady Grove Elementary School: 
a.  20 miles hour: On Sarah Brooks Drive from two hundred twenty (220') feet south of Shady Grove Road, continuing north on Sarah Brooks to a point four hundred seventy feet (470') south of the intersection of Village Trail-Sarah Brooks Drive, and on Shady Grove Road from a point three hundred seven feet (307') east of Sarah Brooks Drive to the intersection of Keller-Smithfield Road during the posted times of: 
7:25 a.m. to 8:25 a.m. 
2:40 p.m. to 3:40 p.m. 
(9)  Willis Lane Elementary School: 
a.  20 miles hour: On Willis Lane from a point seven hundred seventy feet (770') south of the intersection of Doyle Drive extending south one thousand two hundred sixty feet (1,260') during the posted times of: 
7:25 a.m. to 8:25 a.m. 
2:40 p.m. to 3:40 p.m. 
(10)  Ridgeview Elementary School: 
a.  20 miles hour: On Marshall Ridge Parkway from Ridge Pointe Parkway to a point one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') south of Ridge Pointe Parkway during the posted times of: 
7:25 a.m. to 8:25 a.m. 
2:40 p.m. to 3:40 p.m. 
(11)  Saint Elizabeth Ann Seton Catholic School: 
a.  20 miles hour: On Willis Lane from the north right of way of North Tarrant Parkway to a point one thousand six hundred seventy-five feet (1,675') north during the posted times of: 
7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. 
2:45 p.m. to 3:45 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 465, § 1, 7-15-86; Ord. No. 516, § 1, 9-15-87; Ord. No. 562, § 2, 2-7-89; Ord. No. 649, § 3, 4-16-91; Ord. No. 654, § 1, 9-3-91; Ord. No. 751, § 1, 9-20-94; Ord. No. 790, § 1, 8-15-95; Ord. No. 819, § 1, 5-7-96; Ord. No. 841, § 1, 10-15-96; Ord. No. 871, § 1, 9-2-97; Ord. No. 1024, § 2, 9-5-00; Ord. No. 1057, § 2, 8-7-01; Ord. No. 1058, § 2, 8-21-01; Ord. No. 1109, § 3, 7-16-02; Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 8-17-04; Ord. No. 1227, § 2, 10-5-04; Ord. No. 1268, § 2, 7-19-05; Ord. No. 1290, § 2, 10-18-05; Ord. No. 1336, § 2, 7-18-06; Ord. No. 1372, § 2, 7-17-07; Ord. No. 1379, § 2, 9-4-07; Ord. No. 1372, § 2, 7-17-07; Ord. No. 1395, § 2, 12-18-07; Ord. No. 1469, § 2, 8-18-09; Ord. No. 1514, § 2, 7-20-10; Ord. No. 1555, § 2, 8-16-11; Ord. No. 1558, § 2, 9-6-11; Ord. No. 1587, § 2, 3-6-12; Ord. No. 1706, § 2, 8-19-14; Ord. No. 1823, § 2, 11-15-16 )  
Sec. 18-220. - Authorization to erect signs. 
The city council of the City of Keller declares and affixes the above maximum speed limits, and the department of public works is hereby authorized to proceed with the erection of appropriate signs. 
(Ord. No. 516, § 2, 9-15-87; Ord. No. 841, § 2, 10-15-96)  
ARTICLE III. - PARKING ZONES 
 
Sec. 18-300. - No parking zones. 
(1)  No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon or along: 
a.  The east and west sides of Main Street (U.S. Highway 377), beginning at Keller-Hicks Road and ending at Pecan Street. 
b.  The north and south sides of Johnson Road from the east right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 377 East, to two hundred fifty (250) feet east of Pate-Orr Road; 
c.  The approximate west end of the block on the north side of Oakhill Road an approximate distance of thirty (30) feet and on the south side of Oakhill Road an approximate distance of one hundred (100) feet; 
d.  Phillips Street from Katy Court to Gloria Street along the south curbline on Keller Independent School District school days from 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and from 3:30 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. only; 
e.  The north and south sides of Bear Creek Parkway beginning at the west right-of-way line of Davis Boulevard (FM 1938) and ending at the east right-of-way line of Keller-Smithfield Road South. 
f.  The south side of Hill Street beginning at a point sixty (60) feet west of the southwest corner of the intersection of Hill Street and U.S. Highway 377 and ending seventy-eight (78) feet from said southwest corner of Hill Street and U.S. Highway 377. 
g.  The east side of Keller-Smithfield Road South beginning at the north right-of-way line of Shady Grove Road as it intersects with Keller-Smithfield Road South extending north eight hundred eighty-two (882) feet ending at the south right-of-way line of Village Trail. 
h.  The streets within Keller Sports Park including the east and west sides of Sports Parkway, beginning at Golden Triangle Boulevard and ending at Chisolm Trail/Line Drive Avenue; Chisolm Trail from Big Bear Creek to Sports Parkway; the north and south sides of Line Drive Avenue in its entirety; and the north and south sides of Soccer Parkway in its entirety. 
i.  The west side of Jessie Street beginning at the right-of-way line of Johnson Road as it intersects with Jessie Street extending south one hundred twenty-five (125) feet. 
j.  The south side of Ridgegate Drive beginning at the east right-of-way line of Willis Lane as it intersects with Ridgecrest Drive extending one hundred thirty (130) feet east ending at the west right-of-way line of Ridgecrest Drive. 
k.  The west and east side of 600 Pate-Orr Road from the south right-of-way of Johnson Road to the north right-of-way of Meadow Circle North. 
l.  The south side of Taylor Street beginning at the east right of way of Page Street as it intersects with Taylor Street and extending one hundred ninety (190) feet east ending at the west right-of-way of the Keller Independent School District parking area. 
m.  The east side of Willis Lane beginning at the north right of way of North Tarrant Parkway as it intersects with Willis Lane and extending one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet north. 
n.  The 1407 block to 1417 block of Chase Oaks Drive on the east side of the roadway on Keller Independent School District school days from 7:30 a.m. to 9:30 a.m. and from 2:30 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. only. 
o.  The north end of Mountain Laurel Drive one hundred thirty (130) feet down the east side curb line from the north end to two hundred (200) feet down the west side curb line on Keller Independent School District school days from 7:30 a.m. to 9:30 a.m. and from 2:30 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. only. 
p.  From the west end of Shumard Oak Trail, one hundred eighty (180) feet down the north side and south side curb line on Keller Independent School District school days from 7:30 a.m. to 9:30 a.m. and from 2:30 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. only. 
q.  The west side of Cindy Street South beginning at the south right-of-way of Keller Parkway as it intersects with Cindy Street South and extending three hundred twenty (320) feet south ending at the south right-of-way of Taylor Street. 
r.  The east side of College Avenue from Lorine Street to Hovenkamp Street on Keller Independent School District school days from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and from 3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. only. 
s.  The west side of Blue Stem Avenue from Lorine Street to Hovenkamp Street on Keller Independent School District school days from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and from 3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. only. 
t.  The east or west side of Cedar Ridge Lane beginning at the privacy gates extending to the intersection of Preston Drive and extending twenty feet from the existing fire hydrant on the southeast corner of Cedar Ridge Drive and Preston Lane. 
u.  The north side of Bear Creek Parkway for the first one hundred fifty (150) feet east of the east projected curb line of Town Center Lane and on the south side of Bear Creek Parkway for the first one hundred twenty (120) feet west of the west projected curb line of Town Center Lane. 
v.  The north and south sides of Lyndhurst Way from the east right-of-way line of Davis Boulevard, to two hundred (200) feet east of Glenmont Road. 
w.  The south side of Bear Creek Parkway from the west right-of-way of Elaine Street to the east right-of-way of Whitley Road. 
except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or unloading of passengers or when necessary in obeyance to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals of a police officer. 
(2)  The department of public works shall cause the no parking areas to be maintained and marked off as designated by this article. All such areas shall be clearly indicated by appropriate signs or markings. 
(3)  Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon final conviction thereof fined in an amount not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each and every day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 562, § 1, 2-7-89; Ord. No. 649, § 2, 4-16-91; Ord. No. 841, § 3, 10-15-96; Ord. No. 902, § 1, 2, 5-19-98; Ord. No. 972, § 2, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 990, § 2, 11-16-99; Ord. No. 1020, § 2, 8-1-00; Ord. No. 1062, § 2, 9-18-01; Ord. No. 1067, §§ 2, 3, 10-16-01; Ord. No. 1093, § 2, 2-19-02; Ord. No. 1113, § 2, 9-3-02; Ord. No. 1147, § 2, 6-3-03; Ord. No. 1344, § 2, 9-19-06; Ord. No. 1470, § 2, 8-18-09; Ord. No. 1537, § 2, 1-4-11; Ord. No. 1579, § 2, 1-3-12; Ord. No. 1632, § 2, 12-4-12; Ord. No. 1924 , § 2, 2-19-19)  
Sec. 18-310. - Parking off roadway. 
(1)  No motor vehicle, automobile or truck of any type may park off the pavement or main traveled portion of the roadway or park outside of a designated parking area or permitted parking area or drive over a curb where no curb cut or driveway exists, without effective consent of the owner of said property. 
(2)  It is a defense to prosecution if the parking off the pavement or main traveled portion of the roadway or designated or permitted parking area was required due to emergency malfunction or breakdown of said vehicle or a public or private utility vehicle performing service within an easement. 
(Ord. No. 491, § 1, 12-16-86; Ord. No. 1586, § 2(Exh. A), 2-21-12)  
Sec. 18-320. - Parking on public streets. 
(1)  The following vehicles shall not be parked unoccupied on public streets: 
(a)  Any towed or non-self-propelled vehicle (trailer) to be pulled by an automobile or truck that is designed for hauling animals, produce, goods, or commodities. Examples of such vehicles include camping trailers, boat trailers, motorcycle trailers, personal watercraft trailers, utility trailers, cargo trailers and similar vehicles; 
(b)  A van or utility vehicle used for recreational purposes, such as camping, and equipped with living facilities; or 
(c)  Any pickup truck having a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) greater than fourteen thousand (14,000) pounds. 
(2)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section if the vehicle is parked as a result of: 
(a)  Vehicle breakdown or malfunction and the vehicle will be removed within forty-eight (48) hours; 
(b)  Recreational vehicle, either self-propelled or towed, is being used as a temporary residence for house guest or is parked for loading and unloading for a time period not exceeding seventy-two (72) hours; 
(c)  Vehicle is an emergency vehicle operating in response to an emergency call; or 
(d)  Vehicle is operated by a public or private utility in the performance of inspection or maintenance function. 
(Ord. No. 846, § 1, 12-17-96; Ord. No. 1586, § 2(Exh. A), 2-21-12; Ord. No. 1843 , § 2, 5-16-17)  
ARTICLE IV. - TRUCKS 
 
Sec. 18-400. - Truck routes. 
No person shall operate or cause to be operated any truck or other motor vehicles of a gross weight of more than ten thousand (10,000) pounds on a public street in the city without a destination or point of origin within the corporate limits of the city except upon streets designated as truck routes; provided, however, this section shall not apply to emergency vehicles operating in response to emergency calls nor to vehicles operated by a public utility in the performance of inspection or maintenance functions. Such truck with a destination or point of origin within the corporate limits of the city shall be operated only on truck routes or on the shortest street route between such destination or point of origin and the nearest truck route. The driver of any such truck shall, at any time such truck is operated off a truck route, carry with him a bill of lading or other written evidence showing all points of origin and destination within the city. 
The following streets and parts of streets are designated truck routes: 
Texas 377 
FM 1938 
FM 1709  
Sec. 18-410. - Roads closed to trucks. 
No person shall operate or cause to be operated any commercial motor vehicle, truck-tractor, trailer, semi-trailer, or any combination thereof through those certain streets known as Bandit Trail, Johnson Road and Ottinger Road, which lie within the corporate city limits, unless there be a point of origin upon such streets as they lie within the corporate limits of Keller, Texas, or a destination within the corporate limits of Keller, Texas.  
Sec. 18-420. - Exceptions to road restrictions. 
The provisions of section 18-410 shall not apply: 
(1)  To emergency vehicles operating in response to any emergency call; 
(2)  To vehicles operated by a public utility while cruising in an assigned area for the purpose of inspecting the facilities of such public utility or providing maintenance to the facilities.  
Sec. 18-430. - Regulations on truck size. 
Ready-mixed concrete trucks with tandem axle loads exceeding thirty-six thousand (36,000) pounds, with single axle loads exceeding twelve thousand (12,000) pounds, or with a gross load exceeding forty-eight thousand (48,000) pounds are hereby prohibited from all public streets in the corporate limits of the City of Keller, Texas, with the following exception: Texas 377 and any other public highway maintained by the State of Texas.  
Sec. 18-440. - Special Weight Zones. 
No person shall operate or cause to be operated any truck or other motor vehicle of a gross weight of more than five thousand (5,000) pounds on designated special weight zones; provided, however, this section shall not apply to emergency vehicles operating in response to emergency calls nor to vehicles operated by a public utility in the performance of inspection or maintenance functions, unless there be a point of origin upon such zone as they lie within the corporate limits of Keller, Texas, or a destination within the corporate limits of Keller, Texas. 
The following streets or parts of streets are designated special weight zones: 
(1)  700 Block of Windemere Way between the intersection of Windemere Way and Williamsburg Lane and the intersection of Windemere Way and Runnymede Road. 
(2)  800 Block of Runnymeade Road between the intersection of Runnymeade Road and Windemere Way and the intersection of Runnymede Road and Simmons Drive. 
(Ord. No. 616, § 1, 4-17-90)  
ARTICLE V. - INOPERATIVE MOTOR VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 18-500. - Inoperative motor vehicles—On streets. 
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to stand, park or allow to stand any automobile, truck, or any other motor vehicle or any trailer on any public street, alley or thoroughfare for a period in excess of forty-eight (48) hours, when such motor vehicle or trailer is without one (1) or more wheels or is inoperative for any reason.  
Sec. 18-510. - Same (Inoperative motor vehicles)—On areas other than streets. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to stand, park or allow to stand any automobile, truck or any other motor vehicle or any trailer on any property within the city, private or public, other than a public street, alley or thoroughfare, for a period in excess of ninety-six (96) hours when such a vehicle or trailer is visible from any public street or adjacent property and is without one (1) or more wheels or is inoperative for any reason. 
(2)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section if such vehicle: 
(a)  Is located exterior to any structure or building and is undergoing repair or restoration for a period not to exceed ten (10) days provided such vehicle is screened from view by a minimum six-foot tall solid fence such as a wood stockade fence or similar and provided such vehicle is parked on concrete, asphalt, or alternative parking surface constructed from concrete, brick, or natural stone pavers over compacted sub-grade; or 
(b)  Is located interior to a building and is undergoing repair or restoration. 
(Ord. No. 1586, § 3(Exh. B), 2-21-12)  
Sec. 18-520. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, any vehicle without a current license or inspection sticker and which is wrecked, dismantled in any way, or discarded, shall be deemed to be inoperative. 
(Ord. No. 446, § 1, 1-7-86)  
Sec. 18-530. - Nuisance; notice to owner. 
Vehicles or trailers found to be in violation of this article are hereby declared to be a public nuisance. A notice shall be sent to the violator of this article, being the owner or occupant of the vehicle or trailer or the owner or occupant of the private premises whereupon the public nuisance exists or of the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way whereupon such public nuisance exists, by certified mail, return receipt requested, within five (5) days. Such notice shall state the nature of the public nuisance on private property or on public property or on a public right-of-way and that it must be removed and abated within ten (10) days from receipt of said notice and that a request for a hearing may be made in writing to the clerk of the municipal court before the expiration of said ten (10) days. If the notice is returned undelivered by the United States Post Office, official action to abate said nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten (10) days from the date of such return.  
Sec. 18-540. - Removal by city. 
If the nuisance is not removed and abated or a hearing is not requested within the ten-day period provided in section 18-530, then said vehicle or trailer shall be removed and impounded by the police department or any person designated by the chief of police, and such vehicle or trailer shall not be claimed except on proof of ownership and payment of the towing charges and cost of storage.  
ARTICLE VI. - COLLEGE STREET 
 
Sec. 18-600. - College Street parking regulations. 
No person shall stand, park or stop any automobile on the east side of College Street between Vine and F.M. 1709 between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on school days, except in compliance with other traffic regulations.  
Sec. 18-610. - Designated loading zone. 
The west side of College Street between Vine Street and F.M. 1709 is hereby designated as a loading zone and no person shall park or allow an automobile to stand at such location between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on school days; provided, however, this shall not be deemed to prohibit the stopping of an automobile for the purpose of loading and unloading passengers so long as such automobile is not stopped for more than three (3) minutes.  
Sec. 18-620. - Crosswalk. 
A crosswalk is hereby established across College Avenue between Hill and Taylor Streets.  
Sec. 18-630. - Posting of signs. 
City employees are hereby authorized and directed to cause the marking and erection of signs necessary to give notice to the public of the foregoing regulations as required by state law. There is also hereby authorized and directed the erection of "one-way" and "no entry" signs for the entry and exit of a loading zone driveway off of F.M. 1709 adjacent to the school. Such signs shall be placed at the entrance and exit on public property on the south side of F.M. 1709 at such time as the school shall construct such drive.  
ARTICLE VII. - TRAINS 
 
Sec. 18-710. - Speed. 
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any engineer or other person in charge of a locomotive or train to operate the same across any railroad track that crosses a public street, alley or thoroughfare within the corporate limits of the City of Keller at a speed in excess of forty (40) miles per hour unless such railroad crossing is equipped with an automatic mechanical and electronic signal device. For the purposes of this section, an automatic mechanical and electronic signal device is defined as a device which gives visual and audible warning and places a barricade across such railroad crossing automatically immediately prior to the approach of a railroad train or locomotive. 
(Ord. No. 403, § 1, 1-8-85)  
Sec. 18-720. - Obstructing public crossings. 
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any yard master, engineer, conductor or other person in any manner controlling or operating any railway locomotive, engine, car or train of cars, to suffer or permit any such locomotive, engine, car or train of cars to obstruct any public street crossing within the corporate limits of the city for a longer period than five (5) consecutive minutes, and all of the time such locomotive, engine, car or train of cars is permitted to obstruct such public crossing shall be considered one (1) period, unless between such periods at least five (5) minutes elapsed, during which time no such locomotive, engine, car or train of cars is permitted to obstruct such crossing. 
(Ord. No. 403, § 1, 1-8-85)  
Sec. 18-730. - Maintenance of roadbed, right-of-way; notice. 
Every railroad company owning or responsible for the maintenance of its right-of-way shall keep that portion of its roadbed and right-of-way, including any public street crossing in the city "limits of Keller, in a safe, proper, and usable condition. In case of its failure to do so within thirty (30) days after the receipt of written notice from the city manager given to the railroad company, it shall be deemed to be in violation of this article and subject to the penalties provided for herein. 
(Ord. No. 403, § 1, 1-8-85)  
ARTICLE VIII. - ONE-WAY STREETS 
 
Sec. 18-810. - Streets designated one-way. 
The following streets within the City of Keller shall be one-way streets directing traffic in a single direction as so indicated upon said street: 
(1)  Phillips Street: Traffic shall flow only in a westerly direction from Pate Orr Road to Gloria Street. 
(Ord. No. 649, § 1, 4-16-91)  
Sec. 18-820. - Authorization to erect signs. 
City employees are hereby authorized and directed to cause the making and erection of signs necessary to give notice to the public of the foregoing regulation as required by state law including but not limited to the erection of "one-way" and "no entry" signs. 
(Ord. No. 649, § 1, 4-16-91)  
ARTICLE IX. - ROAD HUMPS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 753, adopted October 14, 1994, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as Art. IX, §§ 18-900—18-960 was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 18-900. - Definitions. 
For the context of this article only: 
Application for road humps and ceramic marker strips must include a petition; 
Ceramic marker strip consists of four (4) alternating rows of white ceramic markers (buttons) intended to extend across the driving surface for the purpose of reducing the speed of vehicles traveling along the roadway; 
Low density residential dwellings include single-family houses, townhouses and duplexes; 
Road hump is a geometric design feature of a roadway, consisting of a raised area in the roadway pavement surface extending transversely across the travel way, whose primary purpose is to reduce the speed of vehicles traveling along that roadway; 
Street refers to the length of street that is to be petitioned. The street must be at least a 1,000-foot segment generally centered on the location of the road hump or ceramic marker strip, or the length of the block, whichever is greater. If the 1,000-foot segment extends into any part of an adjacent block, the street shall include the entire length of the adjacent block, unless separated by an intervening thoroughfare, traffic signal or offset intersection. 
(Ord. No. 753, 10-4-94; Ord. No. 839, § 1, 10-1-96)  
Sec. 18-910. - Eligibility requirements. 
The following criteria must be satisfied for a street to be considered eligible for road hump or ceramic marker strip installation. 
(1)  Petition. A document containing the complete name and address of a minimum of three-fourths of the existing households in low density residential dwellings on the street in support of road hump or ceramic marker strip installation. 
(2)  Composition of property or street. The street where the road hump or ceramic marker strips are proposed must be composed primarily of low density residential dwellings. 
(3)  Operational characteristics of the street. 
a.  The street must be used to provide access to abutting low density residential properties (local residential street). 
b.  There must be no more than one (1) moving lane of traffic in each direction. 
c.  The street must not be an identified primary route for emergency vehicles, such as a route that is heavily used due to the proximity of the emergency vehicle facility. 
d.  The street must have a speed limit of thirty (30) mph as determined in accordance with state law for a residential street. 
(4)  Geometric characteristics of the street. 
a.  The street must have adequate sight distance to safely accommodate the road hump as determined by the director of public works. 
b.  The street must not have curves or grades that prevent safe placement of the road humps or ceramic marker strips. Road humps or ceramic marker strips may be located on streets that contain curves and/or grades, but the road hump or ceramic marker strip itself must not be located within a horizontal curve, on a vertical grade greater then eight (8) percent or on their immediate approaches. 
c.  The street shall be paved. If there are no curbs, a special design must be used to prevent vehicle run-arounds. 
d.  The elevation of property adjacent to a road hump location must be above top of curb, as determined by the director of public works, to minimize potential flooding due to the presence of the road hump in the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 753, 10-4-94; Ord. No. 839, § 2, 10-1-96)  
Sec. 18-920. - Neighborhood traffic and speed mitigation policy. 
The city has the authority to maintain publicly dedicated streets and rights-of-way. The city has approved a neighborhood traffic and speed mitigation policy defining procedures and criteria relating to concerns regarding traffic safety, including identifying responsibilities relating to the mitigation of costs associated therewith. 
(Ord. No. 753, 10-4-94; Ord. No. 839, § 3, 10-1-96; Ord. No. 999, § 2, 1-18-00)  
Sec. 18-930. - Road hump or ceramic marker strip removal and alteration. 
Road hump or ceramic marker strip removal or alteration costs are the resident's responsibility to pay. 
(Ord. No. 753, 10-4-94; Ord. No. 839, § 4, 10-1-96)  
Sec. 18-940. - Road hump or ceramic marker strip location. 
A road hump or ceramic marker strip will not be located in front of a property if the occupant objects to its placement or, in the case of a property containing low density multiple dwellings, if a majority of the households on the property object to its placement. Fulfillment of this requirement is the responsibility of the applicant(s). 
(Ord. No. 753, 10-4-94; Ord. No. 839, § 5, 10-1-96)  
Sec. 18-950. - Design standards and procedures. 
The city manager shall prepare and maintain current design standards, installation costs and installation procedures for road humps or ceramic marker strips attached as Appendix A to the ordinance from which this article derives. Appendix A is not set out herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the officer of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 753, 10-4-94; Ord. No. 839, § 6, 10-1-96)  
ARTICLE X. - ROLLER SKATING, ROLLERBLADING, SKATEBOARDING, AND USE OF OTHER SIMILAR DEVICES. 
 
Sec. 18-1000. - Roller skating, rollerblading, skateboarding, and use of other similar devices prohibited in and around Keller Public Library, Keller Senior Citizen's Center, the Municipal Service Center, Keller Town Hall, Keller Town Hall Plaza, and City of Keller Recreation and Aquatic Center. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use roller skates, rollerblades, skateboards, or other similar devices in, around, or upon any sidewalk in front of and entries (portico), to the Keller Public Library and Keller Senior Citizen's Center; on sidewalks between the Keller Public Library and the Keller Senior Citizens Center; on all sidewalks, entries, driveways, and parking areas to the Municipal Service Center; the Keller Town Hall Plaza, including the fountain, all seat walls, seat stones, and sidewalks; all perimeter sidewalks, steps or stairs, handicap ramps, seat walls, retaining walls, plazas or patios, and entries to Keller Town Hall; and all perimeter sidewalks, retaining walls, seat walls, and entries (porticos), at the City of Keller Recreation and Aquatic Center. 
Where it is deemed necessary, signs will be posted prohibiting such activities. 
(Ord. No. 1188, § 3, 4-20-04)  
Sec. 18-1010. - Roller skating, rollerblading, skateboarding, or use of other similar devices prohibited in concession stand patio areas/plazas. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use skates or skateboards in, around, or upon any public park concession stand patio areas/plazas. Patio areas/plazas are defined as being a forty-five-foot) radius around said concession stand. 
Where it is deemed necessary, signs will be posted prohibiting such activities. 
(Ord. No. 1188, § 3, 4-20-04)  
ARTICLE XI. - USE OF WIRELESS COMMUNICATION DEVICES 
 
Sec. 18-1040. - Use of wireless communication devices while operating a motor vehicle in a school crossing zone. 
The provisions of Section 545.425, of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended, are hereby adopted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1474, § 2, 9-15-09)  
Chapter 19 - WATER AND SEWERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings, Ch. 4; certificate of occupancy required for utility connections, § 4-520; mechanical and plumbing codes, Ch. 14; utilities in subdivisions, § 16-360 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 19-100. - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection or lateral. 
City means the City of Keller, Texas, or any authorized person acting in its behalf. 
C.O.D. (chemical oxygen demand) means measure of the oxygen consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in the water or wastewater expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l) as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test, but not differentiating between stable and unstable organic matter and thus not necessarily correlating with biochemical oxygen demand. 
Combined sewer shall mean a sewer intended to receive both wastewater and storm or surface water. 
Commercial customer class. Those customers which have one (1) or more businesses (or other nonresidential, nonindustrial customers) served by a single water meter. 
Concealed fastener systems. All exterior wall systems utilizing edge joints that conceal fasteners. 
Control manhole means a manhole giving access to a building sewer at some point before the building sewer discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
Control point means a point of access to a course of discharge before the discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
Cooling water. The water discharged from any system of condensation such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration. Cooling water shall not be discharged into any public storm drain unless it is unpolluted and below one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit. 
Corrosive waste. Any substance that has been discharged from an industry, commercial enterprise, household or other water consumer which will abnormally affect the longevity or effectiveness of a public sewer or sewage treatment plant due to corrosive action. 
Corrugated panel. An exposed fastener, exterior metal panel typified in Quonset hut construction. Such panels are corrugated, one-half-inch deep, and available in standard widths from thirty (30) inches to forty-eight (48) inches. 
Deep ribbed panel. An exposed fastener, exterior metal panel from three (3) inches to four and one-half (4½) inches deep in twelve-inch and twenty-four-inch widths; capable of twenty (20) foot spans between girts, with an applied wind load of thirty (30) pounds per square foot. 
Easement shall mean an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
Floatable oil is oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
Garbage means animal and vegetable wastes and residue from preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food; and from the handling, processing, storage and sale of food products and produce. 
Grantee. An applicant who has received a grant under PL 92-500, and who is responsible for the treatment of all or part of the sewage produced in the City of Keller. 
Industrial cost recovery system means that system required by PL 92-500 which provides a means whereby industrial users of a public-owned treatment facility repay the proportionate federal share of the construction costs of the treatment works allocated to their use. 
Industrial customer class means those customers whose sewage contains wastewater from a product manufactured, processed or fabricated by the customer. 
Industrial waste means waste resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade, or business from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of the waste with water or normal wastewater, or distinct from normal wastewater. 
Industrial waste permit means a permit to deposit or discharge industrial waste into any sanitary sewer in the city. 
Living unit means a residential unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one (1) family, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation. 
May is permissive (see "shall"). 
Milligrams per liter (mg/l) means the same as parts per million and is a weight-to-volume ratio; the milligram per liter value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. 
Natural outlet shall mean any outlet, including storm sewers, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or groundwater. 
Normal domestic wastewater means wastewater excluding industrial wastewater discharged by a person into sanitary sewers and in which the average concentration of total suspended solids is not more than ninety (90) mg/l and BOD is not more than two hundred twenty (220)mg/l. 
Overload means the imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment facility in excess of its engineered design capacity. 
Owner or occupant means a person, firm or public or private corporation, using the lot, parcel of land, building or premises connected to and discharging sewage, industrial wastewater or liquid, into the sanitary sewage system of the city, and who pays, or is legally responsible for the payment of, sewer rates or charges made against the said lot, parcel of land, building or premises, or who would pay or be legally responsible for such payment if so connected. 
Person includes corporation, organization, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership association, and any other legal entity. 
pH means the logarithm (Base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. 
Profiled panel. An exposed fastener, exterior metal panel ranging in depth from one (1) inch to two (2) inches; widths from twenty-eight (28) inches to forty (40) inches with patterns and colors. 
Public sewer means pipe or conduit carrying wastewater or unpolluted drainage in which owners of abutting properties shall have the use, subject to control by the City of Keller. 
Residential customer class means those customers which discharge only normal sewage from one (1) or more living units. 
Sanitary sewer shall mean a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm, and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally. 
Sewage is the spent water of a community. The preferred term is "wastewater." 
Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water. 
Shall is mandatory (see "may"). 
Slug shall mean any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment works. 
Standard methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" as prepared, approved, and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
Storm sewer (sometimes termed "storm drain") means a public sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage and into which domestic wastewater or industrial wastes are not intentionally passed. 
Storm water means rainfall or any other forms of precipitation. 
Superintendent means the water and wastewater superintendent of the City of Keller or his duly authorized deputy, agent, or representative. 
Suspended solids shall mean total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" and referred to as nonfilterable residue. 
To discharge includes to deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep, or otherwise release or dispose of, or to allow, permit, or suffer any of these acts or omissions. 
Trap means a device designed to skim, settle, or otherwise remove grease, oil, sand, flammable wastes or other harmful substances. 
Unpolluted wastewater means water containing: 
(a)  No free or emulsified grease or oil; 
(b)  No acids or alkalis; 
(c)  No phenols or other substances producing taste or odor in receiving water; 
(d)  No toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state, or solution; 
(e)  No noxious or otherwise obnoxious or odorous gases; 
(f)  Not more than an insignificant amount in mg/l each of suspended solids and BOD, as determined by the Texas Water Quality Board; and, 
(g)  Color not exceeding fifty (50) units as measured by the Platinum—Cobalt method of determination as specified in "Standard Methods." 
Waste means rejected, unutilized or superfluous substances in liquid, gaseous, or solid form resulting from domestic, agricultural, or industrial activities. 
Wastewater shall mean the spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present. 
Wastewater facilities shall mean the structures, equipment, and processes required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent. 
Wastewater treatment works shall mean an arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or "water pollution control plant." 
Watercourse means a natural or manmade channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. No. 371, § 2, 2-7-84)  
ARTICLE II. - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED 
 
Sec. 19-200. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 865, § 1, adopted July 15, 1997, repealed former section 19-200 in its entirety which pertained to monthly service and volume charges and derived from Ord. No. 658, § 1, adopted Oct. 1, 1991.  
Sec. 19-210. - Disposal of wastewater. 
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City of Keller or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.  
Sec. 19-220. - Facilities for disposal of wastewater. 
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.  
Sec. 19-230. - Connection to public sanitary sewer system required for new construction. 
(a)  Single-family and two-family residential developments. All new single-family and two-family residential subdivisions of more than five (5) lots, at the owner's or occupant's expense, are required to extend the sanitary sewer lines necessary to serve the subdivision as shown on the City's Sanitary Sewer Master Plan. The extension of the sanitary sewer lines shall be in accordance with the Subdivision Ordinance and all other applicable regulations. 
(b)  Non-residential and multi-family developments. All new non-residential and multi-family developments, at the owner's or occupant's expense, are required to extend sanitary sewer services to the development and connect to the public sanitary sewer prior to the occupancy of the building(s). This provision also applies to building expansions and additions of existing non-residential developments. The extension of the sanitary sewer lines shall be in accordance with the Subdivision Ordinance and all other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 877, § 1, 10-7-97)  
Sec. 19-240. - Sewer service connections. 
The property owner shall install a sanitary sewer service line at his expense to the city's lateral, in accordance with regulations and subject to the inspection of the city; and thereafter maintain said service line to and including the "Y." A tap fee as set out in the city's fee schedule [Appendix C] shall be paid to the city prior to any tap within the city limits or its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 482, § 1, 11-25-86; Ord. No. 549, § 2, 8-16-88; Ord. No. 1052, § 2, 5-15-01)  
ARTICLE III. - PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Septic systems, § 19-1100 et seq. 
 
Sec. 19-300. - When allowed. 
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 19-230, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of Tarrant County Commissioners' Court Order No. 42703 "Sewage Regulations."  
Sec. 19-310. - License required. 
Prior to issuance of a building permit by the city, a private sewage facility license shall be obtained from the Tarrant County Health Department for each lot for which a building permit is desired.  
Sec. 19-320. - Compliance with the department of public health recommendations. 
The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the department of public health of the State of Texas.  
Sec. 19-330. - Installation of septic systems for single-family and two-family residential uses. 
Installation of an approved septic system is allowed for new residential developments of five (5) lots or less if a public sanitary sewer line is not available within three hundred (300) feet of the development. 
No building permit for new construction shall be issued on property within three hundred (300) feet of the location of a public sanitary sewer line if said sewer line is either under construction or having been approved for construction by the city. 
Existing lots/parcels or structures that are located within three hundred (300) feet of a public sanitary sewer line shall not replace or repair a failing septic system or extend laterals. Such properties are required to connect to the public sanitary sewer line upon failure of the septic system; however, existing properly functioning septic systems may continue to be utilized. The Tarrant County Commissioners Court Order Number 42703 (Sewage Regulation) shall be the regulatory authority determining if a septic system is functioning properly. All abandoned septic tanks shall be properly filled with sand. 
(Ord. No. 877, § 2, 10-7-97)  
Sec. 19-340. - Operation in sanitary manner. 
The owner(s) shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city.  
Sec. 19-350. - Interpretation of article. 
No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the county health officer.  
ARTICLE IV. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 
 
Sec. 19-400. - Permit. 
No unauthorized person(s) shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent.  
Sec. 19-410. - Types of permits. 
There shall be two (2) types of building sewer permits: (a) for residential and commercial service, and (b) for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner(s) or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the superintendent.  
Sec. 19-420. - Costs borne by owner. 
All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner(s). The owner(s) shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.  
Sec. 19-430. - Independent sewers for every building. 
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one (1) building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one (1) building sewer, but the city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection aforementioned.  
Sec. 19-440. - Connection of old sewers with new buildings. 
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all requirements of this chapter.  
Sec. 19-450. - Conformity with the building and plumbing code required. 
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
Cross reference— Building code, §§ 4-100, 4-110; plumbing code, §§ 14-100, 14-110.  
Sec. 19-460. - Elevation of sewer. 
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer.  
Sec. 19-470. - Approval required for runoff or groundwater connections to sewer. 
No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved by the superintendent for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage.  
Sec. 19-480. - Connection of building sewer to public sewer. 
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the superintendent before installation.  
Sec. 19-490. - Notification of readiness for inspection required. 
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent or his representative.  
Sec. 19-500. - Guarding of excavations. 
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.  
ARTICLE V. - WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT PROGRAM[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1142, § 2, adopted April 15, 2003, amended former Art. V, §§ 19-600—19-675, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. V pertained to industrial waste regulations and derived from Ord. No. 431, § 1, adopted Aug. 6, 1985. 
 
Sec. 19-600. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)  This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works for the City of Keller and enables Keller to comply with all applicable State and Federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code § 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations Part 403). The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will interfere with its operation; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works; 
(3)  To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public; 
(4)  To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the publicly owned treatment works; 
(5)  To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the publicly owned treatment works; and 
(6)  To enable the control authority to comply with its national pollutant discharge elimination system permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject. 
(b)  This article shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment works. This article authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-602. - Administration. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, director of public works shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the director of public works may be delegated by the director of public works to other personnel. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-604. - Abbreviations. 
The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the designated meanings: 
BOD 	- 	Biochemical oxygen demand 
CFR 	- 	Code of Federal Regulations 
COD 	- 	Chemical oxygen demand 
EPA 	- 	U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
gpd 	- 	Gallons per day 
mg/l 	- 	Milligrams per liter 
NPDES 	- 	National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
POTW 	- 	Publicly owned treatment works 
RCRA 	- 	Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 
SIC 	- 	Standard Industrial Classification 
SIU 	- 	Significant industrial user 
TCEQ 	- 	Texas Commission on Environmental Quality 
TPDES 	- 	Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
TRA 	- 	Trinity River Authority 
TSS 	- 	Total suspended solids 
TTO 	- 	Total toxic organics 
U.S.C. 	- 	United States Code 
 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-606. - Definitions. 
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated. 
Act or the Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. 
Approval authority. The regional administrator of EPA, or the director of a state agency delegated to act on EPA's behalf with an approved pretreatment program (e.g. Director of TCEQ). 
Authorized representative of the user. 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than two hundred fifty (250) persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000) (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in paragraphs (1) through (3), above, may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city. 
Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five (5) days at 20° centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l). 
Categorical pretreatment standard or Categorical standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405—471. 
City. The City of Keller, the City Council of Keller, or contracting party of the Trinity River Authority's Central Regional Wastewater System. 
Composite sample. A sample that is collected over time, formed either by continuous sampling or by mixing discrete samples. The sample may be composited either as a time composite sample: composed of discrete sample aliquots collected at constant time intervals providing a sample irrespective of stream flow; or as a flow proportional composite sample: collected either as a constant sample volume at time intervals proportional to flow, or collected by increasing the volume of each aliquot as the flow increases while maintaining a constant time interval between the aliquots. 
Control authority. Trinity River Authority of Texas as holder of the NPDES permit. 
Director of public works and/or his designee. The person designated by the city who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this aretcile, or a duly authorized representative. 
Environmental Protection Agency or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the regional water management division director, or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
Existing source. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act. 
Grab sample. A sample which is taken from a waste stream without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes. 
Indirect discharge or discharge. The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act. 
Industrial user. An industry that discharges wastewater into the wastewater system. 
Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit. The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
Interference. A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the control authority's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued there under, or any more stringent state or local regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); 40 CFR 503 sludge regulations; any state regulations contained in any State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act and 30 TAC 312; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
Medical waste. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
NPDES (National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System). National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit program of the Environmental Protection Agency, and/or the permit program of the state agency delegated to act on EPA's behalf with an approved pretreatment program (e.g. TPDES or Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System). 
New source. 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)b. or c. above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction program; 
(i)  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
(ii)  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
Non-contact cooling water. Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
Normal wastewater. Wastewater which the average concentration of suspended solids and five-day BOD does not exceed two hundred fifty (250) mg/l each. 
Pass through. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the control authority's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
Person. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities. 
pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units. 
Pollutant. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment Requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment standards or standards. Pretreatment standards shall mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
Prohibited discharge standards or Prohibited discharges. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in section 19-608. 
Publicly owned treatment works or POTW. A "treatment works," as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. §1292) which is owned by the city and/or the control authority. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. 
Septic tank waste. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
Sewage. Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.). 
Shall is mandatory; may is permissive. 
Significant industrial user. 
(1)  A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
(2)  A user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of twenty- five thousand (25,000) gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
b.  Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five (5) percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(3)  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
Slug load or slug. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration, which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 19-608. 
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code. A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget. 
Storm water. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt. 
Director of public works and/or his designee. The person designated by the city who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article, or a duly authorized representative. 
Suspended solids. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
Total toxic organics or TTO. The sum of the masses or concentration of the toxic organic compounds listed in 40 CFR 122 Appendix D, Table II, excluding pesticides, found in industrial users' discharge at a concentration greater than 0.01 mg/L. Only those parameters reasonably suspected to be present, to be determined by the director of public works, if any, shall be analyzed for with non-categorical industries. With categorical industries, TTOs will be sampled for as stipulated in the particular category or those parameters reasonably suspected to be present, to be determined by the director of public works, where not stipulated. 
User or industrial user. A source of indirect discharge. 
Wastewater. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
Wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant. That portion of the POTW, which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste. 
Water remediation. The removal and sub sequential treatment of waters that may contain contamination from various sources including but not limited to: Underground storage tanks, contaminated structures, spill remediation sites, etc., as approved by the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-608. - Prohibited discharge standards. 
(1)  General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(2)  Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: 
a.  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
b.  Wastewater having corrosive properties capable of causing damage or injury to structures, equipment and/or personnel of the POTW, as per the specific prohibition in the applicable local limits in section 19-614. In no case shall wastewater containing a pH less than 5.0 be discharged unless the POTW is specifically designed to accommodate such discharges; 
c.  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference, blockage, or damage to the POTW; 
d.  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW; 
e.  Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F (65°C), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104°F (40°C); 
f.  Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
g.  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; 
h.  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the director of public works and the control authority in accordance with section 19-628; 
i.  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair; 
j.  Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the applicable NPDES permit; 
k.  Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
l.  Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the director of public works and the control authority; 
m.  Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes; 
n.  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the director of public works and/or the control authority in a wastewater discharge permit; 
o.  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test; 
p.  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW; 
q.  Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater than that specified in the applicable local limits in section 19-614; 
r.  A discharge of water, normal domestic wastewater, or industrial waste that which in quantity of flow exceeds, for a duration of longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more than four (4) times the average twenty four hour flow during normal operations of the industry; 
s.  Insecticides and herbicides in concentrations that are not amenable to treatment; 
t.  Polychlorinated biphenyls; 
u.  Garbage that is not properly shredded to such an extent that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in wastewater mains, with no particle having greater than one-half (1/2) inch cross-sectional dimension; 
v.  Wastewater or industrial waste generated or produced outside the city, unless approval in writing from the director of public works and the control authority has been given to the person discharging the waste; or 
w.  Without the approval of the director of public works and the control authority, a substance or pollutant other than industrial waste, normal domestic wastewater, septic tank waste or chemical toilet waste that is of a toxic or hazardous nature, regardless of whether or not it is amenable to treatment, including but not limited to bulk or packaged chemical products. 
Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-610. - National categorical pretreatment standards. 
The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405—471 are hereby incorporated. 
(1)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the director of public works may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
(2)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the director of public works shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(3)  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(4)  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-612. - Reserved.  
Sec. 19-614. - Local limits. 
The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass through and interference. No person shall discharge or cause or permit to be discharged, wastewater in excess of the following maximum allowable discharge limits in the following system(s): 
0.1 mg/l arsenic 
1.0 mg/l barium 
0.1 mg/l cadmium 
1.0 mg/l chromium 
1.5 mg/l copper 
0.5 mg/l cyanide 
0.9 mg/l lead 
1.5 mg/l maganese 
0.0004 mg/l mercury 
0.2 mg/l molybdenum 
1.0 mg/l nickel 
100 mg/l oil and grease 
0.05 mg/l selenium 
0.1 mg/l silver 
2.0 mg/l zinc 
1.0 mg/l TTO 
0.1 mg/l Hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide or nitrous oxide 
6.0 = pH = 10.0 
The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for "total" metal unless indicated otherwise. The director of public works may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based limitations above. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-616. - City's right of revision. 
The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-618. - Dilution. 
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The director of public works may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-620. - Plant loading. 
No industry shall discharge wastewater containing a BOD or TSS loading that causes the city's pro-rata share of the total BOD or TSS loading to the POTW system to exceed the city's pro-rata share of the total flow to the POTW system. (Example: If the city contributes twenty-five (25) percent of the total wastewater flow to the system, the city's cumulative BOD or TSS loading to the system, as measured at the city's points of entry to the system, shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total BOD or TSS loading to the system.) 
Any industry with a wastewater strength that will cause the city's cumulative wastewater loading, at the city's points of entry, to exceed the city's pro-rata share of the total wastewater loading based upon flow, shall be required to install pretreatment facilities to reduce its wastewater strength to an acceptable level. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-622. - Pretreatment facilities. 
Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this ordinance and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in section 19-608 within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, the control authority, or the director of public works, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the director of public works for review, and shall be acceptable to the director of public works before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-624. - Additional pretreatment measures. 
(1)  Whenever deemed necessary, the director of public works may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams, and require such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(2)  The director of public works may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(3)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the director of public works, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the director of public works and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense. 
(4)  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter, or other control device as deemed necessary by the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Section 19-626. - Accidental discharge/slug control plans. 
At least once every two (2) years, the director of public works shall evaluate whether each permitted significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The director of public works may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the director of public works and control authority of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by section 19-668; and 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-628. - Hauled wastewater. 
(1)  Septage waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the director of public works and control authority, and at such times as are established by the director of public works and control authority. Such waste shall not violate section 19-608 or any other requirements established by the city. The director of public works and/or control authority may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits. 
(2)  Septage waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of generator, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-630. - Wastewater analysis. 
When requested by the director of public works, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater by the deadline stipulated. The director of public works is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-632. - Wastewater discharge permit required. 
(1)  No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the director of public works, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to section 19-634 may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein. 
(2)  The director of public works may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(3)  Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in sections 19-690 through 19-718 of this artcile. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permitee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-634. - Wastewater discharge permitting—Existing conditions. 
Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this artcile and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, apply to the director of public works for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with section 19-638 of this artcile, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after ninety (90) days of the effective date of this ordinance except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the director of public works. If, in the director of public works judgment, the passing of this article does not significantly affect the industrial user's current permit, then the existing permit will continue through to the expiration date. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-636. - Wastewater discharge permitting—New connections. 
Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with section 19-638, must be filed prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-638. - Wastewater discharge permit application contents. 
(a)  All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. The director of public works may require all users to submit as part of an application the following information: 
(1)  All information required by section 19-658(2) of this article; 
(2)  Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW; 
(3)  Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation; 
(4)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production; 
(5)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge; 
(7)  Time and duration of discharges; and 
(8)  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the director of public works to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. 
(b)  Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-640. - Application signatories and certification. 
All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-642. - Wastewater discharge permit decisions. 
The director of public works will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within sixty (60) days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the director of public works will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The director of public works may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-644. - Wastewater discharge permit duration. 
A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five (5) years, at the discretion of the Director of Public Works. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-646. - Wastewater discharge permit contents. 
A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the director of public works to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW. 
(1)  Wastewater discharge permits must contain: 
a.  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five (5) years; 
b.  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the city in accordance with section 19-652, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
c.  Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
d.  Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law; and 
e.  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law. 
(2)  Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions: 
a.  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
b.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
c.  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine discharges; 
d.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
e.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW; 
f.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
g.  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and 
h.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the director of public works to ensure compliance with this article, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-648. - Reserved.  
Sec. 19-650. - Wastewater discharge permit modifications. 
The director of public works may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(3)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to POTW, POTW personnel, or the receiving waters; 
(5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
(6)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
(8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or 
(9)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-652. - Wastewater discharge permit transfer. 
(a)  Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives advance notice to the director of public works and the director of public works approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to The director of public works must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
(1)  States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
(2)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and 
(3)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit. 
(b)  Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-654. - Wastewater discharge permit revocation. 
The director of public works may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to notify the director of public works of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(2)  Failure to provide prior notification to the director of public works of changed conditions pursuant to section 19-666; 
(3)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(4)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
(5)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(6)  Refusing to allow the director of public works timely access to the facility premises and records; 
(7)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(8)  Failure to pay fines; 
(9)  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
(10)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(11)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(12)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or 
(13)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article. 
(b)  Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-656. - Wastewater discharge permit reissuance. 
A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with section 19-638, prior to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-658. - Baseline monitoring reports. 
(1)  Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the director of public works a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (2), below. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that will become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the director of public works a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (2), below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(2)  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below. 
(a)  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
(b)  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(c)  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram, which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
(d)  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured or estimated average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(e)  Measurement of pollutants. 
(i)  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
(ii)  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the director of public works, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 19-676. 
(iii)  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 19-678. 
(g)  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(h)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in section 19-660. 
(i)  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 19-640. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-660. - Compliance schedule progress reports. 
The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by subsection 19-658(2)(h): 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
(2)  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months; 
(3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the director of public works no later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(4)  In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-662. - Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. 
Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the director of public works a report containing the information described in subsection 19-658(2)(d—f) of this article. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 19-640. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-664. - Periodic compliance reports. 
(1)  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the director of public works but in no case less than twice per year, submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 19-640. 
(2)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(3)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the director of public works, using the procedures prescribed in section 19-676 and 19-678, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-666. - Reports on changed conditions. 
Each user must notify the director of public works of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater before the change is made. 
(1)  The director of public works may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 19-638. 
(2)  The director of public works may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 19-642 or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 19-650 in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(3)  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of twenty (20) percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants that are determined to be of concern. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-668. - Reports of potential problems. 
(1)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the city and the control authority of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(2)  Within five (5) days following such discharge, unless waived by the director of public works, the user shall submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this article. 
(3)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in paragraph (1), above. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-670. - Reports from unpermitted users. 
All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the director of public works as the director of public works may require. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-672. - Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. 
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the director of public works within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the director of public works within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the director of public works monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the director of public works samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-674. - Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. 
(1)  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than one hundred (100) kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months. All notifications must take place no later than one hundred and eighty (180) days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under Section 19-666 of this ordinance. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of sections 19-658, 19-662, and 19-664 of this article. 
(2)  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of paragraph A, above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than fifteen (15) kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(3)  In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the director of public works, the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(4)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(5)  This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this article, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-676. - Analytical requirements. 
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-678. - Sample collection. 
(1)  Except as indicated in subsection (2), below, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the director of public works may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be used to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
(2)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-680. - Timing. 
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Section 19-682. - Record keeping. 
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the director of public works and/or control authority. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Section 19-684. - Right of entry—Inspection and sampling. 
The director of public works and/or the control authority, TCEQ, or USEPA or their designated representative shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow inspecting or sampling person ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. 
(1)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the city, control authority, TCEQ or USEPA will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(2)  The director of public works and/or control authority shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. All sampling and analysis performed by the director of public works and/or control authority to monitor compliance shall be at the expense of the industrial user. 
(3)  The director of public works and/or control authority may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated, at a minimum, annually to ensure their accuracy. 
(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of The director of public works and/or control authority and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the user. 
(5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the inspecting or sampling person access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
(6)  In accordance with 40 CFR 403, the city shall inspect and monitor each permitted industrial user a minimum of once per year. If the city elects to perform compliance monitoring for the industry then the city will monitor the industry a minimum of semi annually. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-686. - Search warrants. 
If the director of public works and/or control authority has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this artcile, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then The director of public works and/or control authority may seek issuance of a search warrant from an appropriate court. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-688. - Confidentiality of information. 
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city and/or control authority, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-690. - Publication of users in significant noncompliance. 
The director of public works shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the users which, during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall mean: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six (66) percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three (33) percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other discharge violation that the director of public works and/or control authority believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the director of public works or control authority's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation(s) which the director of public works determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-692. - Notification of violation. 
When the director of public works finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director of public works may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within the time frame specified in the notice, which is usually, but not always, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the director of public works. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the director of public works to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-694. - Reserved.  
Sec. 19-696. - Show cause hearing. 
The director of public works may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the director of public works and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-698. - Compliance orders. 
When the director of public works finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this artcile, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director of public works may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-700. - Cease and desist orders. 
(a)  When the director of public works finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the director of public works may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
(b)  Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-702. - Reserved.  
Sec. 19-704. - Emergency suspension. 
(a)  The director of public works may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The director of public works may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
(1)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the director of public works or control authority may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The director of public works may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director of public works that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in section 19-708 of this article are initiated against the user. 
(2)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the director of public works prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under sections 19-696 or 19-706 of this article. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-706. - Termination of discharge. 
(a)  In addition to the provisions in section 19-700, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination: 
(1)  Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions; 
(2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge; 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or 
(5)  Violation of the pretreatment standards in sections 19-608 through 19-620 of this article. 
(b)  Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under section 19-696 of this article why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the director of public works shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-708. - Injunctive relief. 
When the director of public works finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director of public works may petition the appropriate court through the city attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the user. The director of public works may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-710. - Civil penalties. 
(1)  A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for a maximum civil penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. 
(2)  The director of public works may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city. 
(3)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(4)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-712. - Criminal prosecution. 
(1)  A user who violates any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per violation, per day, or imprisonment as decided by an appropriate court, or both. 
(2)  A user who negligently introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to the same penalties described in subsection 19-712(1). This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law. 
(3)  A user who makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this article, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to the same penalties described in subsection 19-712(1) of this article. 
(4)  Criminal responsibility. A culpable mental state is not required to prove an offense under this article. A person is criminally responsible for a violation of this article if: 
(a)  The person commits or assists in the commission of a violation, or causes or permits another person to commit a violation; or 
(b)  The person owns or manages the property or facilities determined to be the cause of the illegal discharge under section 19-608, 19-610, 19-614, 19-628, or 19-632. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-714. - Remedies nonexclusive. 
The remedies provided for in this artcile are not exclusive. The director of public works may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan. However, the director of public works may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the director of public works is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-716. - Applicability of more stringent regulations. 
(1)  If national pretreatment standards, categorical or otherwise, more stringent than the discharge limits prescribed in this article are promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency for certain industries, the more stringent national pretreatment standards will apply to the affected industrial user. A violation of the more stringent national pretreatment standards will also be considered a violation of this article. 
(2)  Applicability of more stringent discharge limits. An industrial user within the city who discharges industrial waste ultimately received and treated by another governmental entity pursuant to a wholesale wastewater contract or a reciprocal agreement with the city is subject to the following additional rules: 
(a)  If the governmental entity has more stringent discharge limits than those prescribed by this article, or by a discharge permit issued hereunder, because the United States Environmental Protection Agency requires the more stringent discharge limits as part of the governmental entity's wastewater pretreatment program, the more stringent discharge limits shall prevail. 
(b)  The director of public works is authorized to issue a discharge permit to an industrial user affected by subsection (a), to insure notice of and compliance with the more stringent discharge limits. If the industrial user already has a discharge permit, the director of public works may amend the permit to apply and enforce the more stringent discharge limits. An industrial user shall submit to the director of public works an expected compliance date and an installation schedule if the more stringent discharge limits necessitate technological or mechanical adjustments to discharge facilities or plant processes. 
(c)  If the director of public works chooses not to issue or amend a permit under subsection (b), the director of public works shall notify the affected industrial user in writing of the more stringent discharge limits and their effective date. Regardless of whether or not a permit is issued or amended, an industrial user shall be given a reasonable opportunity to comply with the more stringent discharge limits. 
(d)  The more stringent discharge limits cease to apply upon termination of the city's wholesale wastewater contract or reciprocal agreement with the governmental entity, or upon modification or elimination of the limits by the government entity or the United States Environmental Protection Agency. The director of public works shall take the appropriate action to notify the affected industrial user of an occurrence under this subsection (d). 
(3)  Variances in compliance dates. The director of public works may grant a variance in compliance dates to an industry when, in the director of public works' opinion, such action is necessary to achieve pretreatment or corrective measures. In no case shall the director of public works grant a variance in compliance dates to an industry affected by national categorical pretreatment standards beyond the compliance dates established by the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
(4)  Authority to regulate. The director of public works may establish regulations, not in conflict with this article or other laws, to control the disposal and discharge of industrial waste into the wastewater system and to insure compliance with the city's pretreatment enforcement program with all applicable pretreatment regulations promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency. The regulations established shall, where applicable, be made part of any discharge permit issued to an industrial user by the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Section 19-718. - Reserved.  
Sec. 19-720. - Upset. 
In an action brought in federal court only: 
(1)  For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(2)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of paragraph (3), below, are met. 
(3)  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
a.  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
b.  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
c.  The user has submitted the following information to the director of public works within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset, if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five (5) days: 
(i)  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
(ii)  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
(iii)  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(4)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(5)  Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(6)  Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-722. - Act of God. 
In an action brought in municipal or state court only: 
(1)  An event that would otherwise be a violation that is caused solely by an act of God, war, strike, riot, or other catastrophe is not a violation. 
(2)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an act of God, war, strike, riot, or other catastrophe shall have the burden of proof. 
(3)  In the event that (1) and (2) above has been demonstrated the user shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-724. - Bypass. 
(1)  For the purposes of this section: 
(a)  "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
(b)  "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities, which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(2)  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of paragraphs (3) and (4) of this section. 
(3)  (a)  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the director of public works, at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
(b)  A user shall submit oral notice to the director of public works of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within twenty-four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The director of public works may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty-four (24) hours. 
(4)  (a)  Bypass is prohibited, and the director of public works may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless 
(i)  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
(ii)  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
(iii)  The user submitted notices as required under paragraph (3) of this section. 
(b)  The director of public works may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the director of public works determines that it will meet the three (3) conditions listed in paragraph (4)(a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-726. - Reserved.  
Sec. 19-728. - Pretreatment charges and fees. 
(1)  The city may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program which may include: 
(a)  Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing such applications; 
(b)  Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users; 
(c)  Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(d)  Fees for filing appeals; 
(e)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the city. 
(f)  Fees for treating abnormal strength wastes; and 
(g)  Fees incurred from an upset, bypass or unauthorized discharge. 
(2)  Surcharge. The city may surcharge industrial users for the treating of abnormal strength wastes. Water or wastes having 1) a five (5) day biochemical oxygen demand greater than two hundred fifty (250) parts per million (ppm) by weight or 2) containing more than two hundred fifty (250) parts per million by weight of total suspended solids shall be subject to the review and approval of the director of public works. Where the director of public works has approved the admission of (a) or (b) above into the POTW, that discharge may be subject to a surcharge as determined by the director of public works. In no case shall a discharge be accepted that will prevent the POTW from meeting its limits. 
The surcharge will be assessed according to the following formula each month using the most current pollutant concentration data and the current months' wastewater flow: 
_____ 
Surcharge =   Q   × [a(BOD - x) + b(TSS - y)][8.34] 
      1,000,000 
Where: 
Q 	= 	flow in gallons 
8.34 	= 	weight in pounds of one gallon of water 
x 	= 	normal limits of BOD in domestic wastewater expressed in milligrams per liter 
y 	= 	normal limits of TSS in domestic wastewater expressed in milligrams per liter 
a 	= 	unit cost of treatment per pound of BOD 
b 	= 	unit cost of treatment per pound of TSS 
BOD 	= 	measured amount of BOD, in mg/l 
TSS 	= 	measured amount of TSS, in mg/l 
 
_____
A surcharge is an additional charge by the POTW for the increased cost of handling discharge of unusual strength and character and shall not serve as a variance to the requirements of this article. Exercise of this provision shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
ARTICLE VI. - PROHIBITED DISCHARGES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1142, §§ 2, 3, adopted April 15, 2003, repealed former Art. VI, §§ 19-800—19-830, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Art. VI pertained to the powers and duties of city inspectors of industrial wastewater dischargers and derived from this codification. 
 
Sec. 19-800. - Purpose and policy. 
This article sets forth uniform requirements for discharges to the storm drainage system or watercourses in The City of Keller. 
This article shall apply to any person who will discharge water into the storm drainage system or water courses within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 3, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-802. - Prohibited discharges generally. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person, either as owner, tenant or employee, to commit such acts as listed below that will adversely affect the quality of water in the storm drainage system and watercourses within the city. 
(2)  Grease and sand traps from automotive centers, service stations, and vehicle wash operations must be connected to the sanitary sewer. 
(3)  Bus and truck lines, who operate more than two (2) vehicles, who perform vehicle wash operations, shall provide such effluent to be trapped and placed in the sanitary sewer in accordance with the city plumbing code. 
(4)  Aircraft washing shall be trapped and effluent placed in the sanitary sewer in accordance with the city plumbing code. 
(5)  Dumping of grass clipping, leaves brush, or any debris to curb, gutter, storm inlet, storm drain, or watercourse is prohibited. 
(6)  No person shall permit crankcase drainings, vehicle engine wash or other oils, greases or like material to go to any area that will drain to the storm system or watercourse. 
(7)  No liquid, semi-liquid, or chemical waste shall be deposited in any area that will drain to the storm system or watercourse. All such materials shall be disposed of at a site approved for the disposal of such liquids. 
(8)  With the exception of clean untreated water, no cooling tower, compressor or boiler blowdown water will be permitted to flow to the storm system or watercourse. 
(9)  Water from nurseries used to water plants is prohibited from flowing to streets or alleys to the extent that a nuisance is created by standing water, damage to streets or alleys or affecting the free passage of the foot traffic. 
(10)  Filter backwash from swimming pools and fountains shall drain to the sanitary sewer. 
(11)  Animal pens for kennels, animal hospitals, packing houses, poultry processing plants and dairies shall be connected to the sanitary sewer in accordance with the plumbing code. Exceptions shall be made when such establishment is issued a permit by U.S. Corps of Engineers, Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, city department of public works and the county health department. 
(12)  Ready mixed concrete mortar and asphalt base material delivery trucks are prohibited from dumping unused materials to any area that will drain to streams and watercourses. All residue shall be disposed of, and vehicles wash down at a site approved for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 1142, § 2, 4-15-03)  
Sec. 19-804. - Administration. 
(1)  In order to reduce sewer blockages, customers in the City of Keller service area that discharge wastewater that contains grease must install and properly operate and maintain a grease trap or interceptor. 
(2)  The intent of this section is to provide guidelines and procedures to ensure compliance with the City of Keller's Wastewater Pretreatment Program. This section is designed to aid in the prevention of sanitary sewer blockages and obstructions from contributions and accumulation of fats, oils, and greases discharged to the sanitary sewer system from industrial or commercial establishments, particularly food preparation and serving facilities. 
(3)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not normally be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity which is certified by a qualified professional, as meeting the city plumbing requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1363, § 2, 2-20-07)  
Sec. 19-806. - Definitions. 
Cooking establishments: Those establishments primarily engaged in activities of preparing, serving, or otherwise making available food for consumption and that use one or more of the following preparation activities: cooking by frying (all methods), baking (all methods), grilling, sautéing, rotisserie cooking, broiling (all methods), boiling, blanching, roasting, toasting, or poaching and which discharge wastewater into the sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. Also included are infrared heating, searing, barbecuing, and any other food preparation activity that produces a hot, non-drinkable food product in, or on a receptacle that requires washing. 
Fats, oils, and greases: Organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical test. All are sometimes referred to herein as "grease" or "greases". 
Food preparation or serving facility: Any commercial or industrial facility that prepares or serves food, including but not limited to a restaurant, café, cafeteria, snack bar, grill, deli, catering service, bakery, grocery store, butcher shop, or similar establishment that discharges wastewater into the city sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. 
Grease trap or interceptor: A device for separating and retaining waterborne greases and grease complexes prior to the wastewater exiting the trap and entering into the City of Keller sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. These devices also serve to collect settable solids, generated by and from food preparation activities, prior to the water exiting the trap and entering into the city sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. Grease traps and interceptors are sometimes referred to herein as "grease interceptors." 
Minimum design capability: The design features of a grease interceptor and its ability or volume required to effectively intercept and retain greases from grease-laden wastewaters discharged into the public sanitary sewer. 
Non-cooking establishments: Those establishments primarily engaged in the preparation of precooked foodstuffs that do not include any form of cooking. These include cold dairy and frozen foodstuffs preparation and serving establishments. 
User: Any person, business, establishment, or facility including those located outside the jurisdictional limits of the City of Keller, who contributes, causes, or permits the contribution or discharge of wastewater into the city sanitary sewer collection and treatment system, including persons who contribute such wastewater from mobile sources, such as those who discharge hauled wastewater. 
Vehicle maintenance facility: Any commercial or industrial facility where automobiles, trucks, or equipment are serviced or maintained, including garages, service stations, repair shops, oil and lubrication shops, or similar establishments. 
(Ord. No. 1363, § 3, 2-20-07)  
Sec. 19-808. - Applicability. 
(1)  The following types of facilities will be required to have grease interceptors: restaurants, schools, hospitals, service stations, car washes, vehicle repair and lubrication facilities, nursing homes, and any other facilities that handle grease and which discharges wastewater containing grease into the sewer collection system. 
(2)  All vehicle maintenance facilities are required to have a properly sized grease, oil, and sand interceptor. 
(3)  Facilities other than those noted in subsection (1) and (2) may require the installation of a grease and oil interceptor. The public works director or his/her designee shall determine the need and applicability of such device. 
(Ord. No. 1363, § 4, 2-20-07)  
Sec. 19-810. - Design. 
(1)  Access manholes, with a minimum diameter of twenty-four (24) inches, shall be provided over each chamber and sanitary tee. The access manholes shall extend at least to finished grade and be designed and maintained to prevent water inflow or infiltration. The manholes shall also have readily removable covers to facilitate inspection, grease removal, and wastewater sampling activities. 
(2)  All interceptors shall be located outside of the building in such a manner that personnel from the city can inspect the interceptors at any time. 
(3)  The city shall be notified of any changes of operation or process at the permitted establishment. 
(4)  The following documents shall be submitted to the city for review and approval prior to issuance of a permit for installation of an interceptor. Any changes to the approved plan shall be approved by the city, prior to implementation. 
(a)  A site plan showing the location of the interceptor, lines, and cleanout or manhole; 
(b)  Details of the interceptor, lines and cleanout or manhole; 
(c)  Formula and calculations used to determine the interceptor capacity. 
(5)  Every interceptor shall have sufficient capacity to perform the service for which it is intended. Interceptors shall be designed to provide for a minimum hydraulic retention time of twenty-four (24) minutes at actual peak flow or twelve (12) minutes at the calculated theoretical peak flow rate as predicted by the Uniform Plumbing Code fixture criteria, between the influent and effluent baffles with twenty (20) of the total volume of the grease interceptor being allowed for sludge to settle and accumulate. 
(6)  All grease traps and interceptors must be designed using standard engineering principles for sedimentation and floatation in gravity separators. Baffles and good inlet design are required to deflect the flow across the surface areas of the units and sufficient grease and solids storage capacity is required. Grease traps and interceptors shall be rated for the designed flow-through rate of the unit in gallons/minute. 
(7)  Grease interceptors shall be installed by users as required by the city. Grease interceptors shall be installed at the user's expense. 
(Ord. No. 1363, § 5, 2-20-07)  
Sec. 19-812. - Existing users. 
(1)  Users subject to this regulation which were in operation before the effective date of this regulation ("existing users") and do not have grease interception systems are generally required to install such a system within one year of the effective date of this regulation. Such businesses may receive approval from the public works director or his/her designee, to install a system under alternate standards taking into account the circumstances of the business's operation, production of waste grease and the practicality of installation under normal requirements. 
(2)  Existing businesses with an existing grease interception system that does not meet city standards may be required to upgrade the system or may be allowed to continue use of the present system subject to the requirements of the this sections 19-804—19-818. 
(Ord. No. 1363, § 6, 2-20-07)  
Sec. 19-814. - Servicing and records. 
(1)  Servicing and maintenance is essential for the efficient operation of grease traps and interceptors. All grease interceptors shall be serviced and emptied of accumulated waste content as required in order to maintain minimum design capability or effective volume of the grease interceptor. Servicing frequency is site-specific and is dependent on the amount of oil and grease and suspended solids generated at each operation and the size of the grease trap or interceptor. The volumes of greases and solids in grease traps and interceptors must not exceed the designed grease and solids storage capacity of the unit. All grease interceptors shall be serviced and emptied no less than once every ninety (90) days 
(2)  All grease interceptors shall be cleaned by a properly licensed waste hauler who is licensed by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. 
(3)  All users, including food preparation, serving facilities, and vehicle maintenance facilities shall maintain a written record of maintenance and servicing for a minimum of three (3) years. All such records will be available for inspection by the City of Keller upon request. 
(4)  Every user with a grease trap or interceptor served by the city shall be subject to inspection by the public works director or his/her designee at anytime without prior notice or notification. 
(Ord. No. 1363, § 7, 2-20-07)  
Sec. 19-816. - Variance/appeal. 
(1)  Under certain circumstances, the interceptor size and location may need special exceptions to this policy. If an exception to this policy is requested, the user must demonstrate that the size and location will not cause the facility any problems in meeting the discharge requirements of the city. 
(2)  The public works director or his/her designee, reserves the right to make determinations of grease interceptor adequacy and need, based on review of all relevant information regarding grease interceptor performance, facility site and building plan review and to require repairs to, or modification or replacement of such traps. 
(Ord. No. 1363, § 8, 2-20-07)  
Sec. 19-818. - Enforcement. 
(1)  If, an obstruction of a sewer main(s) occurs that causes a sewer overflow and such overflow can be attributed whole or in part to an accumulation of grease in the city's sewer main(s), the city will take appropriate enforcement actions, as stipulated in the City of Keller's Code of Ordinances, Chapter 19, Article V, Wastewater Pretreatment Program, against the generator or contributor of such grease. These actions may include fines, civil penalties or a discontinuance of water service. 
(Ord. No. 1363, § 9, 2-20-07)  
ARTICLE VII. - SANITARY SEWER RATES 
 
Sec. 19-900. - Schedule of rates for wastewater services; inside city limits. 
(1)  Monthly rates for wastewater services shall be charged by the city for sewer according to water meter size as set out in the city's fee schedule [Appendix C]. 
(2)  The monthly volume charge shall also be made to all customers at the rate set out in the city's fee schedule [Appendix C], not to exceed twenty thousand (20,000) gallons for single-family residential customers only. The monthly volume charge, without a limit on gallons of water used applies to all other residential and non-residential customers of the city sanitary sewer services. 
(a)  Monthly volume charge for single-family residential customers. The monthly volume charge for single-family residential customers shall be based on the individual customer's monthly water use during the previous three (3) winter months December, January, and February. The volumes used to compute the monthly volume charge are based on the amount of water used by the single-family residential customer as measured by the customer's water meter. The previous three (3) winter month's average shall determine the monthly volume charge, which will remain the same each month, for the next twelve-month period beginning with the customer's April billing. Where no entire previous three (3) winter month's average is on record, the city manager or his designee, shall estimate a volume to be used for said monthly volume charge. The monthly charge shall be adjusted annually, based on the average usage during the most previous three (3) winter months, or on any changes made to the monthly wastewater rates or volume charges. 
(b)  Monthly volume charge for non-single-family residential and non-residential customers. The monthly volume charge for non-single-family residential and non-residential customers will be based on the total water used during each month as measured by the customer's water meter. However, if a commercial or industrial customer can show, to the satisfaction of the city manager or his designee, that a significant portion of the meter water usage does not enter the sanitary sewer system, the customer may be charged for only that volume of wastewater actually entering the wastewater system, as may be determined by a calculation method approved by the city manager or his designee. 
(c)  Adjustment to winter average for single-family residential customers. The city council may, by official resolution, approve adjustments to the single-family residential winter average and use the previous year's winter average or the current year's winter average, whichever is less. 
(3)  Pass-through of wastewater treatment cost: Rates established above for billings on or after April 1, 2010 include all current charges by the city's suppliers of purchased water, wastewater treatment and franchise fees. 
Any future changes in the city's cost of wastewater treatment from the city's suppliers, including any related changes in franchise fees, will be passed through to the city's customers. Only changes in the cost of wastewater treatment and related changes in franchise fees will be passed through to the city's customers. 
The charges by the city's suppliers of wastewater treatment will be maintained by the utility billing department and will be made available to utility customers upon request. 
Charges by the city's suppliers of wastewater treatment shall be reviewed and analyzed by appropriate city staff not less than annually. 
(Ord. No. 464, § 1, 7-15-86; Ord. No. 556, § 1, 10-18-88; Ord. No. 601, § 1, 10-3-89; Ord. No. 631, § 1, 10-2-90; Ord. No. 686, § 1, 9-24-92; Ord. No. 865, § 2, 7-15-97; Ord. No. 1052, § 3, 5-15-01; Ord. No. 1250, § 2, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 1320, § 2, 3-21-06; Ord. No. 1491, § 2, 3-2-10; Ord. No. 1499, § 2, 4-20-10; Ord. No. 1520, § 2, 8-31-10; Ord. No. 1717, § 2, 11-18-14) 
Editor's note— Fee amounts set out in § 19-900 have been updated at the request of the city.  
Sec. 19-910. - Monitored group class sewage rate schedule. 
The sewer superintendent shall establish a monitored group class consisting of those commercial and/or industrial customers whose wastewater strength is, in his judgment, in excess of that of normal strength wastewater (20 mg/l BOD and 90 mg/l suspended solids). Charges to customers in this class shall consist of the same charges as detailed in section 19-900 above, plus a surcharge for treating waste of excessive strength and a charge for the costs of monitoring the customer. 
The surcharge levied to monitored customers shall be computed by the following formula: 
C S  = D[(B A - B N ) + (S A - S N )(F)(V A ) 
where: 
C S 	= 	surcharge to user in dollars to be added to monthly billing for sewer service 
D 	= 	unit cost of treatment @ $0.30/lbs. 
B A 	= 	BOD of wastewater discharged by a customer (mg/l) 
B N 	= 	"Normal" BOD (220 mg/l) 
S A 	= 	total suspended solids of wastewater discharges by a monitored customer (mg/l) 
S N 	= 	"Normal" total suspended solids (90 mg/l) 
F 	= 	Factor converting mg/l to pounds/million gallons (8.345) 
V A 	= 	monthly volume of wastewater of excessive strength discharged to collection system by a monitored customer (mgd) 
 
A monitoring (testing) charge shall be charged all monitored customers. The monitoring charge shall consist of all costs for personnel, material, and equipment used to collect and analyze samples from the customer's wastewater to determine the strength of the wastewater produced. The monitored customer's wastewater shall be tested on a more frequent basis if the superintendent of the sewer department considers it necessary or the monitored customer requests more frequent testing.  
Sec. 19-920. - Approved meters required. 
All residential, commercial, and industrial customers connected to the sanitary sewerage system must have meters which are approved, and which may be tested by the city, on their sources of water supply and the volume charges as set forth hereinbefore shall be based on the sum of the volumes delivered by all sources of supply. Such method of volume determination will not be applicable if the customer installs a meter approved by the city on the wastewater produced by the customer before it enters the city's sanitary sewer.  
Sec. 19-930. - Rates for customers outside the City of Keller. 
Charges to all customers outside the city and not within a city with which the City of Keller has a special contract for furnishing sewer services to the citizens thereof shall be one hundred fifteen (115) per cent of the amount charged for like customers within the city limits.  
ARTICLE VIII. - WASTEWATER SYSTEM MASTER PLAN 
 
Sec. 19-1000. - Adoption of a plan. 
The City of Keller hereby adopts a wastewater system master plan, as set forth in Exhibit "A", Wastewater System Master Plan, for the City of Keller, prepared by Freese and Nichols, Inc., of Fort Worth, Texas, dated September 2010; and incorporated herein as if fully set forth. 
(ord. No. 1527, § 2, 10-5-10)  
ARTICLE X. - SEPTIC SYSTEMS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities in subdivisions, § 16-360 et seq.; private wastewater disposal, § 19-300 et seq. 
 
Sec. 19-1100. - Chapter applies to all septic systems for permanent use. 
This chapter relating to the construction and installation of septic systems shall apply to all septic systems designed and installed for permanent use in connection with residential, commercial, or any other type of dwelling or structure. A septic system shall be considered as designed and installed for permanent use whenever such system is intended for use for three (3) or more months. The term "septic system" means any and all types and modes of subsurface liquid waste disposal.  
Sec. 19-1110. - Permit. 
No septic system may be constructed or installed within the city limits or the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Keller, Texas, unless and until a permit authorizing the construction and installation of same has been duly issued by the chief plumbing inspector of the city or one of his duly authorized representatives, or, if there be no chief plumbing inspector or representatives thereof, then by the building inspector of the city or one of his duly authorized representatives.  
Sec. 19-1120. - Certificate required for permit; design requirements. 
No permit authorizing the construction and installation of a septic system shall be issued by the persons or departments named above unless and until a certificate from the Tarrant County Health Department is presented to the said person or department. Such certificate shall be a statement from the Tarrant County Health Department approving the design of the system proposed to be constructed and installed, based upon the minimum standards established for septic systems by the Tarrant County Health Department. The following information shall be submitted to the Tarrant County Health Department along with a request for approval of the design of such septic system: percolation test data, soil boring results and classification data, topographic map, and system design including specification criteria. Such other additional information as required by the Tarrant County Health Department shall be supplied as requested by the said department.  
Sec. 19-1130. - Authorization for residence in structure containing septic system. 
No person shall or shall be permitted to reside in or occupy in any manner any residence, dwelling or other structure containing any septic system made subject of this chapter unless and until the chief plumbing inspector of the City of Keller, Texas, or one of his duly authorized representatives, or, if there by no chief plumbing inspector or representatives thereof, the building inspector of the city, or one of his duly authorized representatives, shall issue a permit authorizing such residence or occupancy.  
Sec. 19-1140. - Certificate required for permit; inspection of installation. 
No permit authorizing the residence in or occupancy of any residence, dwelling or other structure containing any septic system made subject of this chapter shall be issued unless and until a certificate approving the completed septic system from the Tarrant County Health Department is presented to the department or person named herein. Said certificate shall contain a statement from the Tarrant County Health Department that inspection of the completed, installed septic system had been made prior to earth backfill over the system and that the system complies with the minimum requirements of the said department.  
ARTICLE XI. - WATER/SEWER EXTENSIONS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 572, § 6, adopted Mar. 29, 1989, repealed Art. XI of this chapter, relative to water/sewer extensions, which consisted of §§ 19-1200—19-1260; §§ 1—5 of said ordinance enacted similar new provisions as §§ 19-1200—19-1240. At the discretion of the editor, § 19-1260, pertaining to fire hydrants, has been excepted from the repeal provided for above, inasmuch as no related provisions exist elsewhere in the Code. Former §§ 19-1200—19-1250 contained no history notes and are thus presumed derived from the ordinance adopting this Code. 
 
Sec. 19-1200. - Rates for extension. 
(a)  A charge, which shall be known as the "pro rata," shall be made and collected against each lot or tract of land and the owner thereof who may connect to water and sewer or sanitary sewer mains in the city. The extension charges are set by the city's fee ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 572, § 1, 3-29-89)  
Sec. 19-1210. - Costs for oversizing. 
Water and sewer mains and appurtenances, required for the purposes of oversizing or escrow deposits, shall be priced in accordance with contract bid amounts as determined by the city. 
(Ord. No. 572, § 2, 3-29-89; Ord. No. 865, § 3, 7-15-97)  
Secs. 19-1220—19-1240. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 865, § 4, adopted July, 15, 1997, repealed former sections 19-1220—19-1240 in their entirety. Section 19-1220 pertained to a water and sewer fund for the receipt of connection charges. Section 19-1230 pertained to refunding procedure, and section 19-1240 pertained to reimbursement for oversizing and other water or sewer line construction costs. Said former sections derived from Ord. No. 572, §§ 3—5, adopted March 29, 1989.  
Sec. 19-1250. - Reserved. 
Note— See the editor's note to this article.  
Sec. 19-1260. - Fire hydrants. 
(a)  Fire hydrants shall be provided at such locations along off-site and along site lines as will comply with the current requirements by the State Board of Insurance for the best fire insurance key rate available in the State of Texas. 
(b)  Fire hydrants serving properties zoned for residential uses with densities of eleven (11) units per acre or less shall be served by water mains at least six (6) inches in diameter. Fire hydrants in such areas shall be located so that there will not be more than six hundred (600) feet between hydrants as measured along streets. 
(c)  Fire hydrants serving areas zoned for other purposes shall be served by mains at least eight (8) inches in diameter and shall be so located so that there will not be more than three hundred (300) feet between hydrants as measured along streets. A fire hydrant shall be required at each street intersection in commercial areas. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, fire hydrants shall be located so that hose length from any hydrant shall not exceed three hundred (300) feet to any portion of any structure in areas of commercial zoned districts or residential zoned properties which have or will have a density of eleven (11) units per acre. Further, such hose length shall not exceed five hundred (500) feet to any portion of any structure in residential zoned districts which have or will have a density of ten (10) units per acre or less. 
(Ord. No. 379, § 5, 7-10-84; Ord. No. 471, § 6, 8-19-86) 
Note— See the editor's note to this Art. XI. 
Cross reference— Fire prevention, Ch. 6.  
ARTICLE XII. - MANDATORY CONNECTION TO CITY WATER 
 
Sec. 19-1300. - Connection to city water system required. 
Where water service is deemed to be available, it shall be required that all citizens owning buildings and residences connect to said system. Said connection shall be made after payment of applicable tap fees and connection shall be made in accordance with city plumbing standards.  
Sec. 19-1310. - Water service connection charges. 
(1)  The city shall charge for water service connections and installations within and without the corporate limits of the city as set by the city's fee schedule. 
(2)  For all meter installations, either within or outside the corporate limits of the city, three (3) inches and above in size, are required to include the installation of a meter vault and a meter bypass that is one-half (½) the size of the metered service line and shall include a test connection. 
(Ord. No. 483, § 1, 11-25-86; Ord. No. 549, § 1, 8-16-88; Ord. No. 865, § 5, 7-15-97; Ord. No. 905, § 1, 7-8-98; Ord. No. 1052, § 4, 5-15-01)  
ARTICLE XIII. - WATER USE AND SECURITY DEPOSITS 
 
Sec. 19-1400. - Separate meter for each single-family or two-family residence. 
Every single-family or two-family residential dwelling unit hereafter served with water from the city water system shall be required to have a separate water meter. 
(Ord. No. 865, § 6, 7-15-97)  
Sec. 19-1405. - Master meter required for multi-family residential developments and mobile home parks or subdivision. 
Every multi-family residential development and mobile home park or mobile home subdivision hereafter served with water from the city water system shall be required to have a master water meter. Additional water meters for said user may be required as determined by the city water department. 
(Ord. No. 865, § 7, 7-15-97)  
Sec. 19-1406. - Master meter available for other non-residential use. 
For other non-residential (business and commercial) use and upon approval of the city water department, master water meters may be used. 
(Ord. No. 865, § 8, 7-15-97)  
Sec. 19-1410. - Alteration to or interference with city's water meter. 
No person shall interfere with or bypass the city's water meter in such a manner as to obtain water without the full amount thereof being registered on such meter. No person shall make any alteration so as to serve more than one (1) single-family structure through the same meter. Service shall be permanently disconnected from any account where a bypass of the meter is discovered. Such account shall be reconnected only at the discretion of the city and only after payment for water used, as estimated by the city, at twice the rate otherwise applicable, plus the cost of rerouting and repairing the service to properly register on the meter.  
Sec. 19-1420. - Breakage of lock or stopcock. 
No person except authorized employees of the city shall break any lock on the stopcock in the meter box. Service to any account where a broken lock is found will not be restored until all charges, including charges for water received, have been paid together with a charge of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for damage to the lock and for service calls.  
Sec. 19-1430. - Service discontinued where equipment damaged. 
Service will be discontinued to any account where any meter or other city water equipment is damaged. Service will not be reconnected until all damage is paid for and all outstanding bills are paid.  
Sec. 19-1440. - Responsibility for breakage in pipe or plumbing. 
Any person, firm or corporation shall be held responsible for the repair and for the loss of water due to breakage in pipe or plumbing on any city water line or meter, and if this water or the repairs are not paid for according to established rates, then if the breakage is due to a customer, the service shall be discontinued by the city water department until all charges are paid. If the breakage is due to a noncustomer, then the city shall have claim against that party.  
Sec. 19-1450. - Charges for water where meter in disrepair. 
Should any meter fail to register correctly the amount of water used by a consumer since the previous reading, the right shall exist on the part of the city water department to average the month and charge for water on the basis of any three-month average.  
Sec. 19-1460. - Temporary discontinuances in service for repairs. 
The right is reserved in the city water department to temporarily discontinue and to reconnect without notice, water supplied to all consumers for the purpose of making repairs, connections, extensions, and cleaning of mains, machinery, reservoir or any part of the city water department property.  
Sec. 19-1470. - Examination of pipes and fixtures on premises. 
Every person taking water from the city water department shall at all reasonable times permit the appropriate city personnel to enter the premises and building for examination of pipes and fixtures and the manner in which the water is issued, and refusal by any consumer shall result in refusal of water supply from the city water department until such permission be granted.  
Sec. 19-1475. - Charges for water meter relocation, meter re-sizing or miscellaneous service work. 
Should a water user within the city or its water service territory request that the water meter be relocated, the water meter size changed or any other miscellaneous water service work done by the city solely at the request of the water user, the user shall be charged for the actual cost of the work done by the city, including equipment charges, labor and materials, plus an administrative services fee as determined by the city. Any additional water and/or sanitary sewer impact fee due as a result of a larger meter installation shall also be applicable. 
(Ord. No. 865, § 9, 7-15-97)  
Sec. 19-1480. - Security deposit. 
Applicants for water service will be required to place with the city a security deposit to guarantee all amounts which may become due to the city for water, sewer and/or garbage service, the amount of which security deposit shall be based upon the nature of the service requested as set out in the city's fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 331, § 1, 9-21-82; Ord. No. 865, § 10, 7-15-97) 
Editor's note— Fee amounts set out in § 19-1480 have been updated at the request of the city.  
Sec. 19-1481. - Fire hydrant meter deposit and rental. 
Applicants for water service from a city fire hydrant for the filling of tank trucks or for related construction activity as approved by the city water department, shall pay said meter deposit equal to the actual cost of the meter and backflow prevention device as determined by the city. The actual cost of said meter and backflow prevention device shall be determined and approved by the city manager or his designee. If user returns the rented fire hydrant meter and backflow prevention device in good working order, as determined by the city water department, the deposit may be refunded. Any repair costs to the meter and/or backflow prevention device shall be deducted from the meter deposit. 
The customer shall pay a monthly rental fee in the amount as determined by the city and shall be required to return the meter to the city water department every thirty (30) days following the rental date for recording of the water used. In the event the customer fails to return said meter for recording by the city water department, a charge as determined by the city shall be assessed for each thirty (30) day period in which said meter is not returned for recording of the water used. 
(Ord. No. 865, § 11, 7-15-97)  
Sec. 19-1490. - Deposit required for testing of meter. 
Should any consumer demand a meter under one and one-half (1½) inches be tested for accuracy, he shall make a deposit in the amount set out in the city's fee schedule with the city water department; for anything over one and one-half (1½) inches, the deposit shall be the cost of testing and the cost of removal and installation of the meter. If the test shows the meter is registering within the warranty of the meter manufacturer, the deposit shall become the property of the city water department. If the test shows the meter is registering more water than is actually going through the meter, the deposit shall be refunded to the user. If the meter proves to be inaccurate, billing will be adjusted to reflect the inaccuracy. Adjustment shall be limited to the previous three (3) billing periods.  
Sec. 19-1500. - Service discontinued for failure to pay. 
Service to any customer will be discontinued after the fifteenth of the month for any bill containing an arrears balance. A charge as set out in the city's fee schedule shall be made each time a city employee calls on the consumer for the purpose of restoring service. A charge as set out in the city's fee schedule shall be made for restoring service after normal working hours. Service shall not be continued or recommended until current and delinquent charges, together with the penalties established by this chapter, have been paid.  
Sec. 19-1510. - Schedule of rates for water service. 
(1)  Monthly rates shall be charged by the city for water by water meter size as set out in the city's fee schedule [Appendix C]. Any future changes in the city's cost of water purchased from the city's suppliers, including any related changes in franchise fees, will be passed through to the city's customers. Only changes in the cost of water purchases and related changes in franchise fees will be passed through to the city's customers. The charges by the city's suppliers of purchased water will be maintained by the utility billing department and will be made available to utility customers upon request. Charges by the city's suppliers of purchased water shall be reviewed and analyzed by appropriate city staff not less than annually. 
(Ord. No. 463, § 1, 7-15-86; Ord. No. 556, § 2, 10-18-88; Ord. No. 601, § 2, 10-3-89; Ord. No. 631, § 2, 10-2-90; Ord. No. 686, § 2, 9-24-92; Ord. No. 767, § 1, 2-21-95; Ord. No. 865, § 12, 7-15-97; Ord. No. 1000, § 2, 2-1-00; Ord. No. 1052, § 5, 5-15-01; Ord. No. 1250, § 3, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 1320, § 3, 3-21-06; Ord. No. 1491, § 3, 3-2-10; Ord. No. 1499, § 3, 4-20-10; Ord. No. 1717, § 3, 11-18-14) 
Editor's note— Rates set out in § 19-1510 have been updated at the request of the city.  
Sec. 19-1520. - Water access fee. 
(a)  This section shall apply to all residential dwellings and commercial buildings in the city which were in existence on May 3, 1994 but were not connected to the city water distribution, on, or prior to, May 3, 1994. These dwellings and buildings shall be referred to herein as "existing structures". 
(b)  A water access fee as determined by the city is hereby established for all existing structures which shall be imposed when the said existing structure is connected to the city water distribution system. The access fee established by this ordinance must be paid in cash at the time of connection or the owner of the "existing structure", or may execute an agreement with the city to pay the access fee monthly over a twenty-four-month period to be paid as a part of the monthly water (utility) bill. Payment therefore shall be enforced the same as payment of the monthly water bill. Once the property is connected to the water distribution system the monthly payment of the access fee will become a charge against the land until the fee is paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 797, §§ 1—3, 10-3-95)  
Sec. 19-1530. - Theft of water. 
A person commits an offense of theft of water by any of the following actions: 
(1)  A person may not knowingly tamper, connect to, or alter any component of the city's water system including valves, meters, meter boxes, meter box lids, hydrants, lines, pump stations, ground storage tanks, and elevated storage tanks. This shall include diect or indirect efforts to initiaite or restore water service without the approval of the city. 
(2)  If, without the written consent of the city manager or the city manager's designee, the person knowlingly causes, suffers or allows the initiation or restoration of water sevice to the property after termination of services(s). For purposes of this section, it shall be asumed that the owner, occupant, or person in control of the property caused, suffered, or allowed the unlawful initiation or restoration of services(s). 
(3)  A person may not knowlingly make or cause a false report to be made to the city of a reading of a water meter installed for metered billing. 
(4)  A person commits a separate offense each day that the person performs an act prohibited by this section or fails to perform an act required by this section. 
(5)  Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a Class C misdeameanor and shall, upon final conviction thereof, be fined in an amount not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) and/or discontinuance of water service by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1281, §§ 2, 3, 9-20-05)  
ARTICLE XIV. - WATER CONSERVATION AND DROUGHT CONTINGENCY[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 582, § 2, adopted June 6, 1989, repealed former Art. XIV of this chapter, §§ 19-1600—19-1620, relative to water rationing; § 1 of said ordinance added new provisions as §§ 19-1600 and 19-1610, and § 3 of said ordinance has been added as § 19-1620 at the discretion of the editor. Attachment A cited in § 19-1600 has not been set out herein but is available for inspection in appropriate city offices. Former §§ 19-1600—19-1620 contained no history notes and are thus presumed derived from the ordinance adopting this Code.  Ord. No. 974, § 2, adopted Aug. 3, 1999, enacted a new water conservation policy incorporated by reference as Exhibit A. 
The water conservation and drought contingency plan adopted by Ord. No. 974 has been superseded by subsequent plans adopted by Ord. No. 1280, enacted Sept. 20, 2005; Ord. No. 1700, enacted June 17, 2014; Ord. No. 1928 , § 2, 4-16-2019. 
 
Sec. 19-1600. - Adoption of plan and policies. 
The City of Keller hereby adopts a water conservation and drought contingency plan and policy, as set forth in Attachment "A," Water Conservation Plan for the City of Keller; Attachment "B, Drought Contingency and Emergency Water Management Plan for the City of Keller; and incorporated herein as if fully set forth, and a public education and information action plan for the dissemination of information concerning water conservation and drought contingency policies and plans and encouragement of water conservation. 
(Ord. No. 582, § 1, 6-6-89; Ord. No. 910, §§ 1, 2, 7-21-98; Ord. No. 974, § 2, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 1280, § 2, 9-20-05; Ord. No. 1454, § 2, 5-5-09; Ord. No. 1700, § 2, 6-17-14; Ord. No. 1928 , § 2, 4-16-19)  
Sec. 19-1601. - Essential services. 
The governmental use of water for essential services such as police, fire and emergency services which are necessary to preserve or protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Keller are exempt from any and all restrictions or mandates set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1423, § 2, 7-15-08)  
Sec. 19-1602. - Administrative fees. 
The director of public works or the director's designee may assess an administrative fee, in addition to any criminal penalty assessed for a violation of this article as described below. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation. 
(a)  In-ground irrigation systems violations. 
(1)  The director of public works may install a locking device on a double check valve to the irrigation system found to be operating in violation of this article and shall assess an administrative fee as approved by the city council. 
(2)  Notice shall be left on the premise to advise the owner/operator that the double check valve to the irrigation system has been turned off; and 
(3)  Notice shall also be sent by United States Postal Service to the person recorded as the city's water customer notifying that person that the irrigation system has been turned off and locked. The notice shall also state the amount of the assessed administrative fee and shall advise the person of the procedures for payment of the fee and the procedure to request a hearing to contest the assessment of the administrative remedy. 
(b)  Violations for systems without double-check valves or in-ground irrigations systems. 
(1)  The director of public works shall leave notice on the premise to advise the owner/operator that the person was in violation of watering restrictions and may assess an administrative fee as approved by the city council. 
(2)  Notice shall also be sent by United States Postal Service to the person recorded as the city's water customer notifying that person of the assessment of any administrative fee and advising the person of the procedures for payment of the fee and the procedure to request a hearing to contest the assessment of the administrative remedy. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, cause damage to or remove a locking device placed on a check value by the director of public works or the director's designee. 
(Ord. No. 1423, § 3, 7-15-08)  
Sec. 19-1603. - Procedures for paying administrative fees or requesting a hearing on the fees. 
(a)  A person assessed an administrative fee who wishes to re-establish service to the irrigation system is required to make payment of the assessed fee. 
(b)  A person may request a hearing to protest the assessment of administrative fees. To request a hearing, the water customer must make the request in person to the water department within fifteen (15) business days from the date on the written notice of violation. If a locking device was installed it shall remain in place until the conclusion of the hearing and payment of any required fees. 
(c)  The director of public works or the director's designee shall act as the hearing officer. The director shall evaluate all information offered by the petitioner at the hearing. The petitioner making the request for a hearing shall bear the burden of proof to show by a preponderance of the evidence, why the administrative fees should not be assessed. The hearing officer will provide a decision at the time of the hearing or within three (3) business days following the conclusion of the hearing. 
(d)  Payment of any fees assessed at the hearing must be made within seven (7) business days of the decision from the hearing. Any fees not paid within this time limit shall be added to the customer's next water bill. 
(e)  A person may elect to pay administrative fees without requesting a hearing. Any fees not paid within fifteen (15) business days from the date of the written notice shall be added to the person's next water bill. 
(Ord. No. 1423, § 4, 7-15-08)  
Sec. 19-1604. - Re-establishment of service to double check valves that have been locked off. 
The locking device will be removed by the director of public works or the director's designee within three (3) working days after payment is received from customer. 
(Ord. No. 1423, § 4, 7-15-08)  
Sec. 19-1605. - Lawn and landscape irrigation restrictions. 
(a)  Lawns and landscaping may be watered on any day, at any time, by handheld hose, drip irrigation, a soaker hose, or tree bubbler. (The intent of this measure is to allow for the protection of structural foundations, trees, and other high value landscape materials). 
(b)  Except for hand watering, drip irrigation and the use of soaker hoses, a person may only irrigate, water, or cause or permit the irrigation or watering of any lawn or landscape, inclusive of structural foundations, trees, and other high value landscape materials, located on premises owned, leased, or managed by that person: 
(1)  On a day designated as an outdoor water use day for the property's address as shown below; and 
(2)  Between the hours of 12 midnight to 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to 11:59 p.m. on such day. 
a.  Residential addresses ending in an even number (0, 2, 4, 6 or 8) may water on Wednesdays and Saturdays. 
b.  Residential addresses ending in an odd number (1, 3, 5, 7 or 9) may water on Thursdays and Sundays. 
c.  All non-residential locations (apartment complexes, businesses, industries, parks, street and/or roadway medians, and the like) may water on Tuesdays and Fridays. 
(c)  Except for hand watering and the use of soaker hoses, a person commits an offense if that person irrigates, waters, or causes or permits the irrigation or watering of any lawn or landscape located on premises owned, leased, or managed by that person between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
(d)  Except for hand watering, drip irrigation and the use of soaker hoses, a person commits an offense if that person irrigates, waters, or causes or permits the irrigation or watering of any lawn or landscape located on premises owned, leased, or managed by that person on a day that is not designated as an outdoor water use for that property address as shown in subsection (b) above. 
(e)  A person commits an offense if he knowingly or recklessly irrigates, waters, or causes or permits the irrigation or watering of a lawn or landscape located on premises owned, leased or managed by the person in a manner that causes: 
(1)  A substantial amount of water to fall upon impervious areas instead of a lawn or landscape, such that a constant stream of water overflows from the lawn or landscape onto a street or other drainage area; or 
(2)  An irrigation system or other lawn or landscape watering device to operate during any form of precipitation. 
(f)  A person commits an offense if, on premises owned, leased, or managed by that person, a person operates a lawn or landscape irrigation system or device that: 
(1)  Has any broken or missing sprinkler head; or 
(2)  Has not been properly maintained in a manner that prevents the waste of water. 
(g)  Affirmative defenses. 
(1)  It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution of an offense in section 19-1605, subsection (b), that at the time such person irrigates, waters, or causes or permits the irrigation or watering of any lawn or landscape, such activity was for the purpose of: 
a.  Establishing hydro mulch, grass sod, or grass seed; 
b.  Dust control of a sports field; or 
c.  For the maintenance, repair, or testing of an irrigation system. 
(2)  Such activity described in section 19-1605, subsection (g) (1) (a) may be an affirmative defense to prosecution only if the activity occurred for a period of thirty (30) consecutive days or less. After the thirtieth (30th) consecutive day of such activity, a person who irrigates, waters, or causes or permits the irrigation or watering of any lawn or landscape in violation of this section shall be subject to administrative fees and criminal penalties. 
(3)  The activity described in section 19-1605, subsection (g)(1) b. and c. may only occur within a period of two (2) days no more than once every thirty (30) days. Any such activity requiring a longer period or greater frequency shall require a variance as provided by section 19-1607. 
(h)  It shall be exception to prosecution of an offense in this section, if a person who irrigates, waters, or causes or permits the irrigation or watering does so by use of an alternative water source such as a well, reclaimed or reused water, or water from the Trinity River if that person has: 
(1)  Registered such alternative water source with the city; 
(2)  Provided sufficient proof to the director of public works that the alternative water source is from a well, reclaimed or reused water or from the Trinity River and has allowed inspection by the director of public works if deemed necessary; and 
(3)  Complied with the city's backflow and cross-connection control program, Article XVII, Cross Connection Control, sections 19-2000 through 19-3150. 
(Ord. No. 1335, § 2, 7-18-06; Ord. No. 1423, § 5, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 1771, § 2, 1-19-16 )  
Sec. 19-1606. - Rain sensing devices and freeze gauges. 
(a)  Any commercial or industrial customer class irrigation system installed within the city on or after August 1, 2006 must be equipped with properly working rain and freeze sensors. 
(b)  Any commercial or industrial customer class irrigation system installed before August 1, 2006 may not be operated after August 1, 2007 without being equipped with properly working rain and freeze sensors. 
(c)  The potable water supply to lawn irrigation system shall be protected against backflow in accordance with the city's backflow and cross-Connection control program, Article XVII Cross Connection Control, sections 19-2000 through 19-3150. All rain and freeze sensors for commercial customer class lawn irrigation systems shall under go annual inspection and testing concurrent with schedules associated with the requirements of section 19-3090. 
(d)  Any residential customer class irrigation system installed within the city on or after August 1, 2007 must be equipped with properly working rain and freeze sensors. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or recklessly install, operate, cause, or permit the installation of or the operation of, an irrigation system in violation of section 19-1606, paragraphs (a) through (d) on premises owned, leased, or managed by that person. 
(Ord. No. 1335, § 2, 7-18-06; Ord. No. 1423, § 6, 7-15-08)  
Sec. 19-1607. - Variances. 
(a)  The director of public works hereafter refererred to as director may grant variances from the provisions of this Article XIV to persons demonstrating extreme hardship and need as determined by the director and only under the following conditions: 
(1)  The applicant must sign a compliance agreement on forms provided by the director, agreeing to irrigate or water a lawn or landscape only in the amount and manner permitted by the variance. 
(2)  Granting of a variance must not cause an immediate significant reduction in the city's water supply. 
(3)  The extreme hardship or need requiring the variance must relate to the health, safety, or welfare of the person requesting it. 
(4)  The health, safety or welfare of other persons must not be adversely affected by granting the variance. 
(b)  The director may revoke a variance granted when the Director determines that: 
(1)  The conditions of subsection (a) are not being met or are no longer applicable; 
(2)  The terms of the compliance agreement are being violated; or 
(3)  The health, safety or welfare of other persons requires revocation. 
(Ord. No. 1335, § 2, 7-18-06)  
Sec. 19-1610. - Metering and meter repair and replacement. 
The City of Keller shall meter all retail water uses through a master meter or other appropriate means and shall further meter all utility, city and other public facilities' use of water. The city shall establish a regularly scheduled maintenance program of meter testing, repair and replacement in accordance with the following schedule: 
(a)  Production (master) meters: Test once a year. 
(b)  Meters larger than one (1) inch: Test once a year. 
(c)  Meters one (1) inch or smaller: Test every ten (10) years or replace. 
(Ord. No. 582, § 1, 6-6-89)  
Sec. 19-1620. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon final conviction thereof, be fined in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each and every day any such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate violation hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 582, § 3, 6-6-89; Ord. No. 910, § 3, 7-21-98)  
ARTICLE XV. - STORM WATER MANAGEMENT[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1614, § 2, adopted Aug. 7, 2012, repealed former Art. XV, §§ 19-1700—19-1714, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Art. XV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1551, § 2, adopted June 7, 2011. 
 
Sec. 19-1700. - Statement of purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Keller through the regulation of non-storm water discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are: 
(a)  To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) by storm water discharges by any user. 
(b)  To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(c)  To require implementation of appropriate erosion and sediment control best management practices (BMP's) for land disturbance activities during construction and post-construction. 
(d)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 1614, § 2, 8-7-12)  
Sec. 19-1702. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following shall mean: 
Accelerated erosion: Means erosion caused by development activities that exceeds the natural processes by which the surface of the land is worn away by the action of water, wind, or chemical action. 
Applicant: Means a property owner or agent of a property owner who submits an application for a storm water management permit pursuant to this article. 
Authorized enforcement agency: Means the City of Keller acting through its city manager or his designees. 
Best management practices (BMP's): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to storm water, receiving waters, or storm water conveyance systems. BMP's also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
Building: Means any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and occupying more than one hundred (100) square feet of area. 
Channel: Means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
City: Means City of Keller, Texas. 
Clean Water Act: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Clearing: Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover. 
Construction activities subject to TPDES construction permits: TPDES Storm Water Phase II permits are required for construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one (1) acre or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Dedication: Means the deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for general public use. 
Detention: Means the temporary storage of storm runoff in a storm water management practice with the goals of controlling peak discharge rates and providing gravity settling of pollutants. 
Detention facility: Means a detention basin or alternative structure designed for the purpose of temporary storage of stream flow or surface runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer: Any person, firm, corporation, sole proprietorship, partnership, state agency, or political subdivision thereof engaged in a land disturbance activity. 
Drainage easement: Means a legal right granted by a landowner to a grantee allowing the use of private land for storm water management purposes. 
Drainage way: Any channel that conveys surface runoff throughout the site. 
Erosion and sediment control plan: A plan or set of plans which includes a set of best management practices (BMP) or equivalent measures prepared by a licensed engineer indicating the specific measures and sequencing to be used to control surface runoff and erosion and to retain sediment on a particular site during the period in which pre-construction and construction related land disturbances, fills, and soil storage occur, and before final improvements are completed, all in accordance with the specific requirements set forth in this article. 
Erosion control: A measure that prevents erosion. 
Excavation: The mechanical removal of earth material. 
Fee in lieu: Means a payment of money in place of meeting all or part of the storm water performance standards required by this article. 
Fill: A deposit of soil or other earth materials placed by artificial means. 
Final erosion and sediment control plan (final plan): The erosion and sediment control plan approved by the city which includes permanent measures and best management practices (BMP) to control surface runoff and control sediment if not included in the erosion and sediment plan. 
Grade: The vertical location of the ground surface. Existing grade is the grade prior to grading. Rough grade is the stage at which the grade approximately conforms to the approved plan. Finish grade is the final grade of the site which conforms to the approved plan. 
Grading: Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting conditions thereof. 
Hazardous materials: Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
Hotspot: Means an area where land use or activities generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in storm water. 
Hydrologic soil group (HSG): Means a Natural Resource Conservation Service classification system in which soils are categorized into four (4) runoff potential groups. The groups range from A soils, with high permeability and little runoff production, to D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Illegal discharge: Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the storm drain system except as exempted in section 19-1712 of this article. 
Illicit connections: An illicit connection is defined as either of the following: Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-storm water discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency or, any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Impervious cover: Means those surfaces that cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall (e.g., building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc). 
Industrial activity: Activities subject to National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Industrial Permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14). 
Industrial storm water permit: Means a NPDES permit issued to a commercial industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial storm water discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Infiltration: Means the process of percolating storm water into the subsoil. 
Infiltration facility: Means any structure or device designed to infiltrate retained water to the subsurface. These facilities may be above grade or below grade. 
Jurisdictional wetland: Means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophilic vegetation. 
Land disturbance activity: Means any activity which changes the volume or peak flow discharge rate of rainfall runoff from the land surface. Any land change that may result in soil erosion from wind, water and/or ice and the movement of sediments into or upon waters, lands, or rights-of-way within the City of Keller, including but not limited to building demolition, clearing, cutting, digging, excavating of soil, grading, scraping, placement of fill materials, paving, substantial removal of vegetation, transporting and filling of land, construction, or any activity which bares soil or rock or involves the diversion or piping of any natural or man-made watercourse. Land disturbance activity does not include the following: 
(a)  Minor land disturbance activities including, but not limited to, underground utility repairs, home gardens, cemetery graves, minor repairs, and maintenance work which disturbs less than five hundred (500) square feet of land. 
(b)  Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electrical poles and other kinds or poles. 
(c)  Emergency work to protect life, limb, or property and emergency repairs. If the land disturbing activity would have required an approved erosion and sediment control plan except for emergency, then the land area disturbed shall be shaped and stabilized in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
Landowner: Means the legal or beneficial owner of land, including those holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding proprietary rights in the land. 
Maintenance agreement: Means a legally recorded document that acts as a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance of storm water management practices. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water Discharge Permit: means a permit issued by Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) (or by a state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Nonpoint source pollution: Means pollution from any source other than from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances, and shall include, but not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Non-storm water discharge: Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of storm water. 
Notice of intent (NOI): A form provided by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) completed by a licensed engineer which indicates a proposed land disturbance activity. 
Notice of termination (NOT): A form provided by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) completed by a licensed engineer when there is a change in operator or developer or the land disturbance activity has been completed. 
Off-site facility: Means a storm water management measure located outside the subject property boundary described in the permit application for land development activity. 
Perimeter control: A barrier that prevents sediment from leaving a site by filtering sediment-laden runoff or diverting it to a sediment trap or basin. 
Person: Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent. 
Phasing: Clearing a parcel of land in distinct phases, with the stabilization of each phase completed before the clearing of the next. 
Pollutant: Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Premises: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
Qualified personnel: Persons who possess the appropriate competence, skills, and ability (as demonstrated by sufficient education, training, experience, and/or, when applicable, any required certification or licensing) to perform a specific activity in a timely and complete manner consistent with the applicable regulatory requirements and generally accepted industry standards for such activity. The permit applicant is responsible for providing qualifications to the City of Keller's Public Works Department. The public works director and the city engineer have the authority to approve or deny the qualifications of personnel. 
Recharge: Means the replenishment of underground water reserves. 
Redevelopment: Means any construction, alteration or improvement exceeding square feet in areas where existing land use is high density commercial, industrial, institutional or multi-family residential. 
Runoff: Any rainfall, snowmelt, or irrigation water flowing over the ground. 
Sediment: The soils or other surficial materials transported by surface water as a product of erosion. 
Sediment control: The best management practices (BMP) or measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving the site. 
Sedimentation: The process or action of depositing sediment that is determined to have been caused by erosion. 
Site: A parcel of land or a contiguous combination thereof, where grading work is performed as a single unified operation. 
Small municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4): Owned and operated by the United States, a state, city, town, borough, county, parish, district, association, or other public body (created by or pursuant to state law) having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, storm water, or other wastes, including special districts under state law, such as a sewer district, flood control district or drainage district, or similar entity, or a designated and approved management agency under Section 208 of the Clean Water Act that discharges to waters of the United States. 
Stabilization: The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from eroding. 
Start of construction: The first land-disturbing activity associated with a development, including land preparation such as clearing, grading, and filling; installation of streets and walkways; excavation for basements, footings, piers, or foundations; erection of temporary forms; and installation of accessory buildings such as garages. 
Stop work order: Means an order issued which requires that all construction activity on a site be stopped. 
Storm drainage system: Publicly-owned facilities by which storm water is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures. 
Storm water: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Storm water management: Means the use of structural or non-structural practices that are designed to reduce storm water runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes, and/or peak flow discharge rates. 
Storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP): A document which describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to storm water, storm water conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable. 
Storm water retrofit: Means a storm water management practice designed for an existing development site that previously had either no storm water management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the storm water management requirements of the site. 
Storm water runoff: Means flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from precipitation. 
Storm water treatment practices (STP's): Means measures, either structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective, practical means of preventing or reducing point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to storm water runoff and water bodies. 
Structural control (or practice): A pollution prevention practice that requires the construction of a device, or the use of a device, to capture or prevent pollution in storm water runoff. Structural controls and practices may include but are not limited to: wet ponds, bio retention, infiltration basins, storm water wetlands, silt fences, earthen dikes, drainage swales, vegetative lined ditches, vegetative filter strips, sediment traps, check dams, subsurface drains, storm drain inlet protection, rock outlet protection, reinforced soil retaining systems, gabions, and temporary or permanent sediment basins. 
Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) Storm Water Discharge Permit: Means the permit program that controls water pollution by regulating point sources that discharge pollutants into waters in the state, delegated to the State of Texas by the EPA pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b). 
Wastewater: Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm water, discharged from a facility. 
Water quality volume (WQV): Means the storage needed to capture and treat ninety (90) percent of the average annual storm water runoff volume. Numerically (WQV) will vary as a function of long term rainfall statistical data. 
Watercourse: Means a permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface water. 
Waterway: A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to the public storm drain. 
(Ord. No. 1614, § 2, 8-7-12)  
Sec. 19-1704. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all water entering the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) generated on any developed and undeveloped lands within the city limits unless explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency. 
(Ord. No. 1614, § 2, 8-7-12)  
Sec. 19-1706. - Responsibility for administration. 
The city manager or his designee shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the city may be delegated in writing by the city manager of the authorized enforcement agency to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1614, § 2, 8-7-12)  
Sec. 19-1708. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article are minimum standards; therefore this article does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants. 
(Ord. No. 1614, § 2, 8-7-12)  
Sec. 19-1710. - Regulation of non-storm water discharges. 
(a)  Prohibition of illegal discharges. 
(1)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than storm water. 
(2)  The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows: 
(3)  The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this article: water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, non-commercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wet-land flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated - typically less than one (1) PPM chlorine), fire fighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants. 
(4)  Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(5)  Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the time of the test. 
(6)  The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm water discharge permitted under an TPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system. 
(b)  Prohibition of illicit connections. 
(1)  The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited. 
(2)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(3)  A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(c)  Suspension of MS4 access. 
(1)  Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The city manager or his designee may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons. 
(2)  Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. 
a.  Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the authorized enforcement agency for a reconsideration and hearing. 
b.  A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the authorized enforcement agency. 
(d)  Industrial or construction activity discharge. Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity TPDES storm water discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city manager or his designee prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4. 
(e)  Monitoring of discharges. 
(1)  Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have storm water discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction activity. 
(2)  Access to facilities. 
a.  The city manager or his designee shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this article as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency. 
b.  Facility operators shall allow the city manager or his designee ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an TPDES permit to discharge storm water, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law. 
c.  The city manager or his designee shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's storm water discharge. 
d.  The city manager or his designee has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure storm water flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
e.  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the city manager or his designee and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator. 
f.  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city manager or his designee access to a permitted facility are a violation of a storm water discharge permit and of this article. A person who is the operator of a facility with a TPDES permit to discharge storm water associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this article. 
g.  If the city manager or his designee has been refused access to any part of the premises from which storm water is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(f)  Requirement to prevent, control, and eliminate illicit and accidental discharges by the use of best management practices. The city manager or his designee will adopt requirements identifying best management practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of storm water, the storm drain system, or waters of the United States (U.S.). The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and non-structural BMP's. Further, any person responsible for a property or premise, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMP's to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid TPDES permit authorizing the discharge of storm water associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMP's shall be part of a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the TPDES permit. 
(g)  Watercourse protection. Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. 
(h)  Notification of spills. Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into storm water, the storm drain system, or waters of the United States (U.S.) said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city manager or his designee within three (3) business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3) years. 
(Ord. No. 1614, § 2, 8-7-12)  
Sec. 19-1712. - Erosion and sediment control. 
(a)  Regulation of land disturbing activities. 
(1)  No person shall be allowed to develop property or be granted a building permit for land disturbing activity that would require the uncovering of one (1) acre or more without the approval of an erosion and sediment control plan (ESCP) by the city. 
(2)  No ESCP is required for the following activities: 
a.  Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property, or natural resources. 
b.  Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as a permitted main or accessory use. 
(3)  Each ESCP shall bear the name(s) and address(es) of the owner or developer of the site, and of any consulting firm retained by the applicant together with the name of the applicant's principal contact at such firm. 
(4)  Each submittal shall include a statement that any land clearing, construction, or development involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance with the ESCP and that a qualified contractor shall be on site on all days when construction or grading activity takes place. 
(5)  The applicant will be required to file with the city a faithful performance bond, letter of credit, or other improvement security in an amount deemed sufficient by the city to cover all costs of improvements, landscaping, maintenance of improvements for such period as specified by the city, and engineering and inspection costs to cover the cost of failure or repair of improvements installed on the site. 
(b)  Erosion and sediment control plan. 
(1)  The erosion and sediment control plan (ESCP) shall include the following: 
a.  A natural resources map identifying soils, forest cover, and resources protected under other chapters of the City Code. 
b.  A sequence of construction for the site, including stripping and clearing; rough grading; construction of utilities, infrastructure, and buildings; and final grading and landscaping. Sequencing shall identify the expected date on which clearing will begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, areas of clearing, installation of temporary erosion and sediment control measures, and establishment of permanent vegetation. 
c.  All erosion and sediment control measures necessary to meet the objectives of this local regulation throughout all phases of construction and after completion of development of the site. Depending upon the complexity of the project, the drafting of intermediate plans may be required at the close of each season. 
d.  Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer application, kind of mulch, and quantity of mulching for both temporary and permanent vegetative control measures. 
e.  Note stating all construction site waste to be picked up daily and stored in secure containers until the waste is removed from the site. All construction site waste that could possibly cause adverse impacts to water quality shall be picked up immediately. 
f.  Provisions for maintenance of control facilities, including easements and estimates of the cost of maintenance. 
(2)  Review and approval. 
a.  City will review each ESCP submittal to determine its conformance with the provisions of this regulation. Within thirty (30) days after receiving a submittal packet, city shall in writing: 
(i)  Approve the ESCP; 
(ii)  Approve the ESCP subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this regulation; or 
(iii)  Disapprove the plan, indicating the reason(s) and procedure for submitting a revised ESCP. 
b.  Failure of the City of Keller to act on an original or revised ESCP within thirty (30) days of receipt shall authorize the applicant to proceed in accordance with the plans as filed unless such time is extended by agreement between the applicant and the city. Pending preparation and approval of a revised plan, development activities shall be allowed to proceed in accordance with conditions established by the city. 
(3)  Design requirements. 
a.  Grading, erosion control practices, sediment control practices, and waterway crossings shall meet the city's design criteria and utilize the best management practices (BMP's) available in the Dallas-Fort Worth area for slope protection, sediment barriers and perimeter controls, velocity dissipation, channel stabilization, construction access controls, storm drain inlet protection, dewatering controls, material and waste controls, and construction phasing. The design shall be adequate to prevent transportation of sediment from the site to the satisfaction of the city. Cut and fill slopes shall be no greater than 3:1, except as approved by the city to meet other community or environmental objectives. 
b.  Clearing and grading of natural resources, such as forests and wetlands, shall not be permitted, except when in compliance with this article and all state and federal laws. Clearing techniques that retain natural vegetation and drainage patterns are preferred by the city. 
c.  Clearing, except that necessary to establish sediment control devices, shall not begin until all sediment control devices have been installed and have been stabilized. 
d.  Phasing shall be required on all sites disturbing greater than thirty (30) acres, with the size of each phase to be established at plan review and as approved by the city. 
e.  Erosion control requirements shall include the following: 
(i)  Soil stabilization shall be completed within five (5) days of clearing or inactivity in construction. 
(ii)  If seeding or another vegetative erosion control method is used, it shall become established within two (2) weeks or the city may require the site to be reseeded or a non-vegetative option employed. 
(iii)  Special techniques that have been shown to be effective on steep slopes or in drainage ways shall be used to ensure stabilization. 
(iv)  Soil stockpiles must be stabilized or covered at the end of each workday. 
(v)  The entire site must be stabilized using a heavy mulch layer or another method that does not require germination to control erosion, at the close of the construction season. 
(vi)  Techniques shall be employed to minimize the blowing of dust or sediment from the site. 
(vii)  Techniques that divert upland runoff past disturbed slopes shall be employed. 
f.  Sediment control requirements shall include: 
(i)  Settling basins, sediment traps, or tanks and perimeter controls. 
(ii)  Settling basins that are designed in a manner that allows adaptation to provide long term storm water management, if required by the city. 
(iii)  Protection for adjacent properties by the use of a vegetated buffer strip in combination with perimeter controls. 
g.  Waterway and watercourse protection requirements shall include: 
(i)  A temporary stream crossing installed and approved by the city if a wet watercourse will be crossed regularly during construction. 
(ii)  Stabilization of the watercourse channel before, during, and after any in-channel work. 
(iii)  All on-site storm water conveyance channels designed according to the city's criteria outlined in the Uniform Development Code. 
(vi)  Stabilization adequate to prevent erosion located at the outlets of all pipes and paved channels. 
h.  Construction site access requirements shall include: 
(i)  A temporary access road provided at all sites. 
(ii)  Other measures required by the city in order to ensure that sediment is not tracked onto public streets by construction vehicles or washed into storm drains. 
(4)  Inspection of ESCP. 
a.  City or designated agent shall make inspections as hereinafter required and either shall approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the applicant wherein the work fails to comply with the ESCP as approved. Plans for grading, stripping, excavating, and filling work bearing the stamp of approval of the city shall be maintained at the site during the progress of the work. to obtain inspections, the applicant shall notify city at least two (2) working days before the following: 
(i)  Start of construction. 
(ii)  Installation of sediment and erosion measures. 
(iii)  Completion of site clearing. 
(iv)  Completion of rough grading. 
(v)  Completion of final grading. 
(vi)  Close of the construction season. 
(vii)  Completion of final landscaping. 
b.  The applicant or his/her agent shall make regular inspections of all control measures in accordance with the inspection schedule outlined on the approved ESCP. The purpose of such inspections will be to determine the overall effectiveness of the control plan and the need for additional control measures. All inspections shall be documented in written form and submitted to the city at the time interval specified on the approved ESCP. 
c.  The city or its designated agent shall enter the property of the applicant as deemed necessary to make regular inspections to ensure the validity of the inspection reports submitted to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1614, § 2, 8-7-12)  
Sec. 19-1714. - Post construction storm water management for new development and redevelopment. 
(a)  Regulation of land disturbing activities. 
(1)  No person shall be allowed to develop property or be granted a building permit for land disturbing activity that would require the uncovering of one (1) acre or more without the approval of a post construction storm water management plan (PCSWMP) by the city. 
(2)  No PCSWMP is required for the following activities: 
a.  Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property, or natural resources. 
b.  Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as a permitted main or accessory use. 
(3)  Each PCSWMP shall bear the name(s) and address(es) of the owner or developer of the site, and of any consulting firm retained by the applicant together with the name of the applicant's principal contact at such firm. 
(4)  Each submittal shall include a statement that any improvements installed for post construction storm water management shall be in accordance with the city approved PCSWMP for the site. 
(b)  Post construction storm water management plan. 
(1)  The post construction storm water management plan (PCSWMP) shall include the following: 
a.  An overall, to-scale site plan for the site showing all structural controls and best management practices to be utilized for maintaining the water quality of the runoff after construction is complete. 
b.  A list and complete description of all best management practices proposed for the site. 
c.  A list of those runoff items including sediment to be controlled to a level equal or better than existed prior to development or redevelopment. 
d.  A proposed long-term maintenance agreement for any structural storm water control measures installed on the property. The city will have a standard form to be used. The form should be modified to provide for the special nature of each site. 
(Ord. No. 1614, § 2, 8-7-12; Ord. No. 1636, § 2, 12-18-12)  
Sec. 19-1716. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Notice of violation. Whenever the city manager or his designee finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, he may order compliance by written notice of violation" to the responsible person. 
Such notice may require without limitation: 
(1)  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
(2)  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
(3)  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
(4)  The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
(5)  Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and 
(6)  The implementation of source control or treatment BMP's. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
(b)  Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the city manager or his designee. The "notice of appeal" must be received within ten (10) days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the city manager or his/her designee shall take place within fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the city manager or his designee shall be final. 
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within ten (10) days of the decision of the city manager or his designee upholding the determination, then representatives of the city shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the city representatives or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(c)  Injunctive relief. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, the city through its attorney may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. 
(d)  Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. The authorized enforcement agency may recover all attorneys' fees court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(e)  Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 1614, § 2, 8-7-12)  
ARTICLE XVI. - MUNICIPAL DRAINAGE UTILITY SYSTEM[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 638, §§ 1—4, adopted Nov. 20, 1990, and Ord. No. 642, §§ 1—5, adopted Jan. 15, 1991, did not provide for amendment of this Code; hence, inclusion of their provisions as §§ 19-1900 and 19-1910 herein was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Flood damage prevention, § 4-300 et seq.; improper drainage, § 8-440; protection of drainage and creek areas in subdivisions, § 16-420; approval required for runoff or groundwater connections to sewer, § 19-470; storm water and other unpolluted drainage, § 19-655. 
 
Sec. 19-1900. - Adoption of municipal drainage utility system as public utility. 
(a)  The City of Keller will provide drainage for all real property in the city, subject to a schedule of drainage charges, on payment of such drainage charges, except real property exempted herein as that owned by this state, the county, this city or a school district. The city council finds that there is not a real property owner with a wholly sufficient, complete and private drainage system that discharges into a stream. 
(b)  The City of Keller will offer drainage service on nondiscriminatory, reasonable and equitable terms. The benefited property may be charged on any basis other than the value of the property and must be directly related to drainage. 
(c)  The city council will establish a schedule of drainage charges against all real property in the city, and such income will be segregated and identifiable accounts. Such schedule of charges will be in accordance with Subchapter C, Municipal Drainage Utility Systems, Section 402.041 through Section 402.054 of the Texas Local Government Code. 
(d)  The city council by this section and its adoption declares all the drainage of the city to be a public utility. 
(Ord. No. 638, §§ 1—4, 11-20-90)  
Sec. 19-1910. - Drainage charges. 
(a)  Basis for charges. The drainage utility charges levied herein are calculated based upon a single-family residential housing unit and accompanying land. The equivalent residential unit or ERU is defined as the developed area (roof or pavement) within an average single-family residential lot. The value of one (1) ERU is calculated to be three thousand seven hundred thirty-one (3,731) square feet. The ERU is the basis for charges to all types of land uses. 
(b)  Schedule of charges. Drainage charges are hereby levied against all benefited real property lying within the corporate city limits of the City of Keller as set out in the city's fee schedule. 
(c)  Billing, penalties, interest and collection procedures. 
(1)  Except as may be otherwise provided herein, billing, penalties, interest, and collection procedures shall be consistent with that of the City's water and sewer services. Drainage utility charges shall be identified separately on the utility billing. Delinquent charges shall be collected in a manner consistent with the Texas Local Government Code, Section 402.050. 
(2)  In accordance with the Texas Local Government Code, Section 402.053, governmental drainage accounts are exempt from monthly charges. Exempt governmental accounts include accounts for the State of Texas, Tarrant County, the City of Keller, and the Keller Independent School District. 
(d)  Appeals. A property owner may appeal once per year the drainage utility fee by written application with the city's finance department upon forms provided and the payment for an application fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). A calculation will then be made by totalling the area of improvements (rooftop plus pavement) on the property in question. That total area will be divided by the square foot value of an ERU to result in the ERU on the property in question which such shall be multiplied by the charge per ERU for the monthly charge. Any additional improvement would necessitate a recalculation of the monthly charge. 
(e)  Violations; penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon final conviction thereof be fined in the amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each and every day any such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate violation hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 642, §§ 1—5, 1-15-91; Ord. No. 716, §§ 1, 2, 10-5-93; Ord. No. 985, § 2, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 1030, §§ 2, 3, 10-17-00; Ord. No. 1064, § 2, 10-2-01; Ord. No. 1167, § 2, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 1479, § 2, 10-20-09; Ord. No. 1498, § 2, 4-6-10) 
Editor's note— Charges in § 19-1910 have been updated at the request of the city.  
ARTICLE XVII. - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL 
 
Sec. 19-2000. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. If a word or term used in this article is not contained in the following list, its definition, or other technical terms used, shall have the meanings or definitions listed in the most recent edition of the Manual of Cross Connection Control published by the Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, University of Southern California. 
Air gap shall mean the vertical physical separation between the free flowing discharge end of the potable water supply line and the overflow rim of the receiving vessel. The separation must be at least twice the inside diameter of the supply line, but never less than one inch. When located near walls, the air gap separation must be increased. 
Approved backflow prevention assembly or backflow assembly or assembly means an assembly to counteract backpressures or prevent back siphonage. This assembly must appear on the list of approved assemblies issued by USC Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research. 
Atmospheric vacuum breaker means a device, which contains a flat check (poppet), a check seat, and an air inlet vent. When water pressure is reduced to a gauge pressure of zero (0) or below, air enters the device, preventing backsiphonage. It is designed to protect against backsiphonage only. 
Auxiliary supply shall mean any water source or system other than the public water system that may be available in the building or on the property. 
(1)  Approved means an auxiliary water supply which has been investigated and approved by the health authority, meets water quality regulations, and is accepted by the water purveyor. 
(2)  Unapproved means an auxiliary water supply, which is not approved by the health authority. 
Backflow shall mean the flow in the direction opposite to the normal flow or the introduction of any foreign liquids, gases, or substances into the water system of the city's water. 
Backflow prevention assembly tester shall mean a person who has met all of the requirements of TNRCC to be recognized as a certified tester in the state of Texas and is registered with the City of Keller. Only a certified tester who is employed by a state approved fireline contractor shall test fireline assemblies. 
City shall mean the City of Keller. 
Combination protection means there is an assembly installed for point-of-use isolation in addition to a premise isolation assembly. 
Contamination means the entry into or presence in a public water supply system of any substance that may be deleterious to health and/or quality of the water. 
Cross connection means any physical arrangement where a potable water supply is connected, directly or indirectly (actual or potential), with any other non-potable water system, used water system or auxiliary water supply, sewer, drain conduit, swimming pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture, swamp coolers, air conditioner units, fire protection system, or any other assembly which contains, or may contain, contaminated water, sewage, or other liquid of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of imparting contamination to the public water system as a result of backflow. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or change over assemblies, or other temporary or permanent assemblies through which, or because of which, backflow may occur are considered to be cross connections. 
Customer service inspector or CSI means an individual who has fulfilled the requirements set out in TNRCC Rules and Regulations for Public Water Systems, paragraph 290.46(j)(1), or as amended. 
Degree of hazard means the low or high hazard classification that shall be to all actual or potential cross connections. 
Designated lateral shall mean the piping, which takes water from the main service line for a stipulated purpose. For example, but not limited to, irrigation systems, fire systems, etc. 
Director means the public works director of the City of Keller or his/her designee. 
Double check detector assembly or DCDA means an approved assembly consisting of two approved double check valve assemblies, set in parallel, equipped with a meter on the bypass line to detect small amounts of water leakage or use. This unit must be purchased as a complete assembly. The assembly may be allowed on fire line water services in place of an approved double check valve assembly upon approval by the local water authority. 
Double check valve backflow prevention assembly or double check assembly or double check or DC assembly or DC means an assembly, which consists of two (2) independently operating check valves, which are spring-loaded or weighted. The assembly comes complete with a gate valve on each side of the checks, as well as test cocks to test the checks for tightness. 
Health hazard means an actual or potential threat of contamination of a physical or toxic nature to the public potable water system or the consumer's potable water system that would be a danger to health. 
High hazard means the classification assigned to an actual or potential cross connection that potentially could allow a substance that may cause illness or death to backflow into the potable water supply. 
Inspector means a person that is a cross connection inspector recognized by the City of Keller. 
Keller means the City of Keller. 
Low hazard means the classification assigned to an actual or potential cross connection that potentially could allow a substance that may be objectionable but not hazardous to one's health to backflow into the potable water supply. 
Main lateral shall mean the piping, which takes water from the main service line to the premise for potable use. 
Mobile units shall mean units connecting to the water system through a hydrant, hose bib, or other appurtenance of a permanent nature that is part of the city water system or a permanent water service to a premise. Examples can include but are not limited to the following: water trucks, pesticide applicator vehicles, chemical mixing units or tanks, waste or septage haulers trucks or units, sewer cleaning equipment, carpet or steam cleaning equipment other than homeowner use, rock quarry or asphalt/concrete batch plants, or any other mobile equipment or vessel. Uses that are excluded from this definition are recreational vehicles at assigned sites or parked in accordance with other ordinances pertaining to recreational vehicles, and homeowner devices that are used by the property owner in accordance with other provisions of this, or other, City of Keller ordinances pertaining to provision of water service to a premise. 
Person means a natural person (an individual), corporation, company, association, partnership, firm, limited liability company, joint venture stock company or association, and other such entity. 
Plumbing hazard means an internal or plumbing-type cross-connection in a consumer's potable water system that may be either pollution or a contamination-type hazard. 
Point-of-use isolation means the appropriate backflow prevention within the consumer's water system at the point at which the actual or potential cross connection exists. 
Pollution hazard means an actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or the potability of the public or the consumer's potable water system but which would not constitute a health or system hazard, as defined. The maximum degree of intensity of pollution to which the potable water system could be degraded under this definition would cause a nuisance, or be aesthetically objectionable, or could cause minor damage to the system or its appurtenances. 
Potable water supply means any water that has been tested as required by the state regulations for drinking water supplies and is considered safe for human consumption. 
Premises means any piece of property to which water is provided, including all improvements, mobile structures, and structures located on it. 
Premises isolation or containment means the appropriate backflow prevention at the service connection between the public water system and the water user. 
Pressure vacuum breaker assembly means an approved assembly consisting of a spring-loaded check valve loaded to the closed position and an independently operating air inlet valve loaded to the open position and installed as a unit with and between two (2) resilient seated shut-off valves and with suitable connections for testing. It is designed to protect against back siphonage only. 
Public water system or system means any public or privately owned water system, which supplies water for public domestic use. The system must meet all the health requirements set forth by the TNRCC. The system will include all services, reservoirs, facilities, and any equipment used in the process of producing, treating, storing, or conveying water for public consumption. 
Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or Reduced pressure principle assembly or RP assembly or RP shall mean an assembly containing two independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically-operated, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check valves and at the same time below the first check valve. The assembly shall include properly located test cocks and tightly closing shut-off valves at each end of the assembly. 
Reduced pressure detector assembly or RPDA shall mean an approved assembly consisting of two approved reduced pressure backflow assemblies, set in parallel, equipped with a meter on the bypass line to detect small amounts of water leakage or use. This unit must be purchased as a complete assembly. The assembly may be allowed on fire line water services in place of an approved reduced pressure backflow assembly, upon approval by the local water purveyor. 
Residential use shall include single-family dwellings, duplexes, multiplex housing, and apartments where the individual units are each on a separate meter; or, in cases where two (2) or more units are served by one (1) meter. 
(1)  Non-residential use shall include, but is not limited to, all uses not specifically included in residential uses defined above. 
Service connection shall mean the point-of-delivery at which the public water system ends and is connected to the private supply line or lateral. 
SOP means a standard operating procedure manual on cross connections written specifically for the City of Keller. 
Spill resistant vacuum breaker shall mean an assembly containing an independently- operating, internally loaded check valve, and an independently operating, loaded air-inlet valve, located on the discharge side of the check valve. The assembly is to be equipped with a properly located, resilient, seated test cock; a properly located bleed/vent valve, and a tightly closing, resilient, seated shut-off valve attached at each end of the assembly. This assembly is designed to protect against a non-health hazard (i.e., pollutant) or a health hazard (i.e., contaminant) under a back siphonage condition only. 
System hazard means an actual or potential threat of severe danger to the physical properties of the public or consumer's potable water supply, or of a pollution or contamination that would have a detrimental effect on the quality of the potable water in the system. 
Thermal expansion means the pressure created in piping, when water is heated. 
TNRCC means Texas Natural Resources Conservation Commission. 
Used water means water supplied by a public water system to a water user's system after it has passed through the service connection. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 2, 2-5-02)  
Sec. 19-2010. - Purpose. 
Pursuant to Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Section 290.44, 290.46, or as amended, and the Uniform Plumbing Code - 1997 Edition, or as amended, it is the responsibility of Keller to protect its drinking water supply by instituting and enforcing a cross connection program. The purpose of this article, therefore, is to comply with the above-cited regulatory requirements, and to protect the water supply of the City of Keller from contamination or pollution due to cross connections. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 2, 2-5-02)  
Sec. 19-2020. - Backflow prevention assembly requirements. 
A cross connection inspector or customer service inspector, employed by or under contract with the city, shall determine the type of backflow assembly to be installed within the area served by the city. All assemblies shall be installed at the service connection unless it is determined by the inspector to install the assembly at the point of use. An assembly will be required in each of the following circumstances, but the inspector is in no way limited to the following circumstances: 
(1)  When the nature and extent of any activity at a premise, or the materials used in connection with any activity at a premise, or materials stored at a premise, could contaminate or pollute the potable water supply. 
(2)  When a premises has one or more cross connections as that term is defined in section 19-2000. 
(3)  When internal cross connections are present that are not correctable. 
(4)  When intricate plumbing arrangements are present that make it impractical to ascertain whether cross connections exist. 
(5)  When premises has a repeated history of cross connections being established or re-established. 
(6)  When materials are being used such that, if backflow should occur, a health hazard could result. 
(7)  When installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly is deemed necessary to accomplish the purpose of these regulations. 
(8)  When an appropriate cross connection survey report form has not been filed with the director. 
(9)  Any used water-return system that has received approval from the director. 
(10)  If a point-of-use assembly has not been tested or repaired as stipulated in this article, the installation of a reduced pressure principle assembly will be required at the service connection. 
(11)  If an inspector determines that additions or rearrangements have been made to the plumbing system, without the proper permits as required by the plumbing code, premises isolation shall be required. 
(12)  All multi-story buildings, or any buildings with a booster pump or elevated storage tank. 
(13)  When entry to the premises is restricted so that inspections for cross connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency to assure that cross connections do not exist. 
(14)  On properties, which have auxiliary water supplies. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 2, 2-5-02)  
Sec. 19-2030. - Irrigation systems. 
(a)  All irrigation systems, which are on a designated lateral, shall install a approved double check assembly at the connection. This assembly must be tested upon installation and as required in Keller's SOP manual. 
(b)  All irrigation systems, which "T" off of the main lateral and currently have no backflow protection, or systems installed after the effective date of this article, shall be required to meet all specifications pertaining to irrigation systems as stipulated by the TNRCC Chapter 290.44 and 290.46 code, or as amended, or the most recent edition of Keller's SOP manual. In the event that there is a conflict between these codes and regulations, the more restrictive apply. 
(c)  All irrigation systems which do not currently meet the specifications, as stipulated in this section, will be required to meet these specifications within one (1) year of the effective date of this article. 
(d)  In the event an assembly is removed, it must be tested immediately upon re-installation. 
(e)  Any addition or new construction of any irrigation system shall meet the requirements of this article. 
(f)  All assemblies on irrigation systems regardless of installation point must meet the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 2, 2-5-02)  
Sec. 19-2040. - Fire systems. 
(a)  An approved double check detector backflow prevention assembly (DCDA) or approved equivalent shall be the minimum protection on all new fire sprinkler systems using piping material that is not approved for potable water use, and/or that does not provide for periodic flow through during each twenty-four-hour period. A reduced pressure principle detector backflow prevention assembly (RPDA) must be installed, if any solution other than the potable water can be introduced into the sprinkler system. If the inspector determines a chemical loop system can be isolated by installing an RP assembly at the point of the chemical injection, this, in conjunction with the proper installation of the DCDA in accordance with this article, will be adequate protection. 
Retrofitting on fire sprinkler systems will be required in each of the following circumstances: 
(1)  Where improper maintenance has occurred; 
(2)  On all high hazard systems; and 
(3)  Wherever an inspector deems necessary. 
(b)  All fireline assemblies will be tested by certified testers employed by a state approved fireline contractor. 
(c)  All fireline systems, which are on a designated lateral shall install the assembly on the lateral at the point of connection. The assembly must be installed in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 2, 2-5-02)  
Sec. 19-2050. - Temporary meters. 
Backflow protection required on temporary meters will be determined on a case-by-case basis. The type of assembly, which will be required, will be commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 2, 2-5-02)  
Sec. 19-2060. - Mobile units. 
(a)  A person who owns or operates any mobile unit that uses water from the city's public water system shall abide by the conditions of this article and the latest edition of the city's SOP manual. 
(b)  The failure of the owner or operator of the vehicle to comply with this article shall be grounds for Keller to revoke any permit or license, required under this article to operate the vehicle, or the business for which such vehicle is used. 
(c)  If there is a conflict between this section of the article and Keller's Code of Ordinances, the more restrictive provision will apply. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 2, 2-5-02)  
Sec. 19-2070. - Multiple service connections. 
If premises with multiple service connections require premises isolation, a backflow assembly shall be installed at each service connection. The assemblies shall be commensurate with the degree of the highest potential hazard. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 2, 2-5-02)  
Sec. 19-2080. - Plumbing code. 
As a condition of water service, customers shall install, maintain, and operate their piping and plumbing systems in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code - 1997 edition, or as amended. If there is a conflict between this article and the plumbing code, the more restrictive provision shall apply, or a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly will be required to be installed at the service connection. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 2, 2-5-02)  
Sec. 19-2090. - Thermal expansion. 
If a closed system has been created by the installation of a backflow assembly, it is the responsibility of the property owner to eliminate the potential adverse effects of thermal expansion. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 2, 2-5-02)  
Sec. 19-3000. - Pressure loss. 
Any water pressure loss caused by the installation of a backflow assembly and the correction of a pressure loss condition shall not be the responsibility of the City of Keller. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 2, 2-5-02)  
Sec. 19-3010. - Residential service connections. 
Any residential property, which has been determined to have an actual or potential cross connection and/or has violated the plumbing code or this article in any way, shall be required to install an approved backflow prevention assembly in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 2, 2-5-02)  
Sec. 19-3020. - Retrofitting. 
Approved backflow prevention assemblies, commensurate with the degree of hazard, shall be installed in accordance with this article on all actual or potential cross connections, regardless of the date the potential hazard was created. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 2, 2-5-02)  
Sec. 19-3030. - Wholesale customer. 
Every wholesale customer and other water districts that have a contract for water services with the city shall have an active, ongoing cross connection program, approved by the director. The city reserves the right to require a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly, or an air gap, at the interconnect. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 2, 2-5-02)  
Sec. 19-3040. - Customer service inspection. 
(a)  Pursuant to TNRCC Water System Regulations, a customer service inspection for cross connection control shall be completed by the City of Keller prior to providing continuous water service in each of the following circumstances: 
(1)  To a newly constructed facility, or previously existing premise, which is requesting water service; 
(2)  Where any correction or addition to the plumbing of any facility or premises has occurred; 
(3)  After any material improvement to building(s) or premises; and 
(4)  Whenever the regulatory authority deems it necessary. 
(b)  Permanent water service shall not be supplied to a new construction facility(s) until the customer service inspection is completed. 
(c)  Customer service inspections will be carried out only by a certified customer service inspector, or a plumbing inspector employed by Keller, or approved by the director. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 2, 2-5-02)  
Sec. 19-3050. - Cross connection inspectors. 
Inspectors performing cross connection control duties within the City of Keller must be approved by the director, and shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Be employed by or be an independent contractor for Keller; and 
(2)  Meet the requirements set out in Keller's SOP, or as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 2, 2-5-02)  
Sec. 19-3060. - Backflow prevention assembly testers. 
(a)  All backflow assembly testers operating within Keller shall be certified in accordance with all applicable regulations of TNRCC. No person shall operate as a backflow prevention assembly tester within Keller without first being annually registered with the director. 
(b)  At the time of registration, re-registration, re-certification and upon the director's request, each person certified as a backflow prevention assembly tester shall furnish evidence to show that he/she is insured and bonded to perform services on private property, and has all required current licenses as required by the State of Texas and the City of Keller to perform the contemplated services. 
(c)  Persons, certified as backflow prevention assembly testers, shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Hold a TNRCC-approved backflow prevention assembly certification; 
(2)  Maintain general commercial liability insurance with the following minimum limits: five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) bodily injury each occurrence, five hundred thousand ($500,000.00) property damage each occurrence, five hundred thousand ($500,000.00) personal injury each occurrence, and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) general aggregate; 
(3)  Successfully completed and has a confined-space entry course certification; 
(4)  Agree to abide by all requirements of the United States Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA); and 
(5)  Attend a update class every three (3) years. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 2, 2-5-02; Ord. No. 1762, § 2, 10-7-15 )  
Sec. 19-3070. - Certified backflow prevention assembly tester responsibilities. 
(a)  No certified backflow assembly tester shall operate within the City of Keller, without first registering with the director and paying all appropriate fees. 
(b)  A registration shall remain in effect, provided: 
(1)  The tester maintains eligibility for registration and certification as defined in this article; 
(2)  The tester attends and successfully completes a recertification training course approved by the director every three (3) years; and 
(3)  The backflow prevention assembly tester's registration is not revoked by the director. 
(c)  A backflow prevention assembly tester shall renew his/her registration with the director every year. If a TNRCC certification expires for a period of one (1) year or more, the backflow prevention assembly tester may re-establish registration eligibility by showing proof that he/she has retaken the TNRCC-approved backflow prevention tester certification course. 
(d)  Each applicant for registration shall: 
(1)  Provide evidence to the director to establish that the applicant has available the necessary tools and equipment to properly test backflow prevention assemblies; 
(2)  Provide evidence to the director that the applicant has successfully completed permit confined-space entry training as specified by OSHA in 29 CFR 1910.146, or as amended; and 
(3)  Identify all test gauges the applicant will use in testing backflow prevention assemblies. 
(e)  A registered backflow prevention assembly tester shall: 
(1)  File the serial number of each of their test gauges with the director; 
(2)  Annually, have each recorded test kit tested for accuracy and calibrated by a company or individual approved by the director to maintain a two (2) percent accuracy factor; 
(3)  Perform a competent and accurate test on each backflow prevention assembly, as established by the TNRCC regulations; 
(4)  Submit completed test forms to the director with ten (10) days after the test is completed; 
(5)  List registered serial numbers of test gauges on tests and maintenance reports prior to submitting the reports to the director; and 
(6)  Not change the design or operation characteristics of a backflow prevention assembly. 
(f)  The director may revoke a registration if he/she determines that the tester: 
(1)  Has made false, incomplete, or inaccurate assembly testing reports; 
(2)  Has used inaccurate gauges; 
(3)  Has used improper testing procedures; 
(4)  Has expired insurance; 
(5)  Is not in compliance with safety regulations; 
(6)  Has failed to register the serial numbers of his/her test kits, or failed to calibrate gauges annually as required by this article; 
(7)  Has failed to maintain a current certification from TNRCC; or 
(8)  Has violated any other provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 2, 2-5-02)  
Sec. 19-3080. - Cost of compliance. 
The cost and expense of complying with this article shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner, their lessees and/or agent. These costs and expenses include, but are not limited to, purchasing, installation, testing, and/or repair of the assembly. These costs and expenses shall also include, but are not limited to, point-of-use and premises isolation assemblies. The property owner, their lessees, and/or agent shall reimburse the city for any and all costs and expenses incurred by the city in enforcing this article (the reimbursement costs). The reimbursement costs shall be assessed in the property owner's and/or lessee's current water bill and collected in accordance with the city's current procedures, or as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 2, 2-5-02)  
Sec. 19-3090. - Assembly requirements. 
(a)  Testing of assemblies. Backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested in accordance with the requirements set out in the most recent edition of the city's standard operating procedures manual. 
(b)  Maintenance of assemblies. Backflow prevention assemblies shall be maintained in accordance with the requirements set out in the most recent edition of the city's standard operating procedures manual. 
(c)  Installation requirements and specifications. Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance with the requirements set out in the most recent edition of the city's standard operating procedures manual. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 2, 2-5-02)  
Sec. 19-3100. - Responsibilities of property owners and/or lessees. 
It is the responsibility of all property owners, their agents and/or lessees to abide by the conditions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 2, 2-5-02)  
Sec. 19-3110. - Access to premises. 
(a)  Every person provided water service by the city directly or indirectly shall permit the director to enter their premises and buildings for the purpose of inspecting pipes and fixtures and the manner in which the water is used to determine compliance with this article. 
(b)  If access is denied to premises for inspection by the director, a reduced pressure principle assembly will be required at the service connection to the premises. 
(c)  Any temporary, or permanent, obstruction to safe and easy access to the premises for the purposes of this article shall be promptly removed. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the property owner, their lessees, and/or agent. 
(d)  Any and all costs associated with premises isolation or containment protection shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner, lessee, and/or agent. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 2, 2-5-02)  
Sec. 19-3120. - Right-of-way encroachment. 
(a)  No person shall install or maintain a backflow prevention assembly upon a right-of-way belonging to the city except as provided by this section. 
(b)  A backflow prevention assembly required by this article may be installed upon or within any city right-of-way only if the owner proves to Keller that there is no other feasible location for installing the assembly, and installing it in the right-of-way will not interfere with traffic or utilities. Keller retains the right to review and approve the location, height, depth, enclosure, and other requisites of the assembly prior to its installation. 
(c)  Any assembly or portion of an assembly that extends aboveground shall be located no closer than twenty-four (24) inches to the back of the curb. 
(d)  A property owner shall, at the owner's sole expense, relocate a backflow prevention assembly, which encroaches upon any city right-of-way when such relocation is necessary for street or utility construction or repairs or for purposes of public safety. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 2, 2-5-02)  
Sec. 19-3130. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  The city and their attorney, and each of them, are hereby authorized to enforce the provision of this article by any one or more of the enforcement mechanisms set forth in this article. 
(b)  The inspectors, agents, or representatives of Keller charged with enforcement of this article, shall be deemed to be performing a governmental function for the benefit of the general public, and neither the city, the director, nor the individual inspector, agent, or representative of Keller engaged in inspection, or endorsement activities under this article, when acting in good faith and without malice, shall ever be held liable for any loss or damage, whether real or asserted, caused, or alleged to have been caused, as a result of the performance of such governmental function. 
(c)  Failure on the part of any persons to discontinue the use of all cross connections, and to physically separate cross connections, is sufficient cause for the immediate discontinuance of public water service to the premises. 
(d)  Failure to comply with this article is a fine up to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per day, with each day being a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 2, 2-5-02)  
Sec. 19-3140. - Emergency suspension of utility service. 
(a)  The director may, without prior notice, suspend water service to any premises when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or potential cross connection which: 
(1)  Presents or may present imminent, and substantial, danger to the environment or to the health or welfare of persons; or 
(2)  Presents, or may present, imminent and substantial danger to the city's public water supply. 
(b)  As soon as is practicable after the suspension of service, the director shall notify the owner or person in charge of the premises of the suspension in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall order such person to correct the actual or potential cross connection which could allow the backflow to occur. When time permits, and if the owner or person in charge is readily available, the director will give notice about the immediate suspension of services. 
(c)  If the person fails to comply with an order issued under this article, the director may take such steps, as deemed necessary, to prevent, or minimize, damage to the public water supply, or to minimize danger to persons. 
(d)  The director shall not reinstate suspended services until the person: 
(1)  Presents proof, satisfactory to the director, that the actual or potential cross connection has been eliminated, and its cause determined and corrected; 
(2)  Pays Keller for all costs incurred by the City of Keller, in responding to the backflow or threatened backflow; and 
(3)  Pays Keller for all costs incurred in reinstating service. 
(e)  A person commits an offense if the person reinstates water service to premises suspended pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the director. 
(f)  The City of Keller may obtain a lien against the property to recover its response, abatement, and remediation costs. 
(g)  The remedies provided by this section are in addition to any other remedies set out in this article. Exercise of this remedy shall not be a bar against, nor a prerequisite for, taking other action against a violator. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 2, 2-5-02)  
Sec. 19-3150. - Non-emergency termination of water supply. 
(a)  The director may suspend, with twenty-four (24) hours notice, the water supply to any premises where the following conditions have been violated: 
(1)  Refusing the director's reasonable access to the premises for the purpose of inspection; 
(2)  Hindering or denying the director's access to backflow prevention assemblies; 
(3)  Failing to immediately eliminate, or protect against, an actual or potential cross connection; 
(4)  Failing to install and maintain backflow prevention assemblies in compliance with this article; or 
(5)  Failing to install, maintain, and operate their piping and plumbing systems in accordance with the plumbing code. 
(b)  The director will notify a water user of the proposed termination of its water supply. The water user may petition the director in writing for a reconsideration. 
(c)  Exercise of this enforcement option by the director shall not be a bar to, nor a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the water user. 
(d)  The director shall not reinstate suspended services until: 
(1)  The premises has been inspected by the City of Keller cross connection control inspector or a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly is installed and tested at the service connection; or 
(2)  The person presents proof, satisfactory to the director, that the cross connection has been eliminated and its cause determined and corrected; and 
(3)  The person pays the City of Keller for all costs Keller will incur in reinstating service. 
(Ord. No. 1090, § 2, 2-5-02)  
PART III - UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE  
Article One - INTRODUCTION 
 
Section 1.01 - Title 
The following rules and regulations are hereby adopted as the Unified Development Code of the City of Keller, Texas, also known and cited as the "Keller Development Code".  
Section 1.02 - Use of the Unified Development Code (UDC) 
A.  This Code has been created to provide for comprehensive land development in the City of Keller. Each section describes one of the basic processes and requirements involved in land development. 
B.  Words and terms used in this document shall be given the meanings set forth in this Code. For the purpose of this Code, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. Definitions not expressly prescribed herein are to be determined in accordance with customary usage in municipal planning and engineering practices. The word "shall" is always mandatory, while the word "may" is merely directory.  
Section 1.03 - Relationship to the Master Plan for the City of Keller 
Long term plans and the resultant development policies are designed to promote the health, safety, morals and welfare of the general public and protecting and preserving places and areas of historical, cultural, or architectural importance and significance. The Master Plan for Keller is a set of documents including this document and others listed in this Code with this heading: "Other Documents Needed for Land Development" (see Section 1.04). These plans and policies have been designed to coordinate development with the provision for city services; prevent street congestion; secure buildings and people from unnecessary risk of fire; ensure adequate light, promote air quality; contribute to noise and glare reduction; facilitate the provision of water, sanitary sewer, drainage, parks, and other public structures; and preserve property values for its citizens. Because the needs of the city are continually evolving, the documents composing the Master Plan shall be reviewed and amended as appropriate.  
Section 1.04 - Other Documents Needed for Land Development 
A.  Land Use Plan. Lists the goals and objectives that govern community development decisions in Keller; describes the future land use plan; and contains analyses of demographics and physical factors that can influence development. 
B.  Thoroughfare Plan. Shows existing and future roadways, sized in accordance with the City's Master Plan. 
C.  Parks and Open Space Master Plan. Directs the development of the park and open space system for the City of Keller. It shows general locations where parks are desired and provides guidelines for specific park acquisition and development. 
D.  Citywide Trail System Master Plan. Identifies existing and proposed trail routes for both recreational and transportation purposes. This plan depicts hike/bike and equestrian trails throughout the city and includes standards and specifications for construction. 
E.  Drainage Master Plan. Serves as a guide to the prevention of flooding in Keller through a detailed analysis of the City's topography. 
F.  Flood Plain Regulations. Adopted to promote public health, safety, and welfare by minimizing flood losses. It restricts uses that might contribute to floods, requires that buildings in a location susceptible to flooding be constructed with flood protection elements, and controls alterations of natural features that protect against flooding. 
G.  Impact Fee Ordinance. Describes the City's reasons for requiring impact fees, sets the fee levels and methods of calculations, and states the conditions under which impact fees may be credited. 
H.  Pro Rata Ordinance. Describes the City's reasons for collecting pro rata fees, sets the fee levels and methods of calculations, and states the conditions under which pro rata fees may be credited. 
I.  Standard Specifications for Public Works Constructions. Prepared by the North Central Texas Council of Governments (NCTCOG), has been adopted by cites in the region to standardize specifications for public works projects. (Avail. at NCTCOG) 
J.  Water and Waste Water Master Plan. Shows existing and future water and waste water lines, sized in accordance with the City's Master Plan.  
Section 1.05 - Departments and Boards Involved in Land Development 
A.  Development Review Committee (DRC). Group composed of staff members who are involved in the development process, representing but not limited to Planning, Building Services, Engineering, Code Compliance, Finance, Environmental Services, Fire, Parks and Recreation, Public Works, and Economic Development. 
Each member of the Development Review Committee reviews all new development plans based on his/her area of expertise. The Development Review Committee then meets weekly to review projects and discuss recommended changes or improvements. The Development Review Committee meets with developers and property owners weekly by appointment to discuss special concerns (see Section 4.02 - Pre-Application Meeting). 
B.  Public Services Department. Composed of Planning, Building Services, Code Enforcement, Engineering, Public Works, and Economic Development. Coordinates all new development in the City of Keller, and therefore coordinates the meeting of the Development Review Committee (DRC). 
C.  Keller Economic Development Board (KEDB). Seven members and two advisory members who are selected by the City Council. The Keller Economic Development Board's mission is to promote the development of a well-balanced local economy. Keller Economic Development Board members interact with Keller business prospects. 
D.  Planning and Zoning Commission (P & Z). Seven members who are Keller resident volunteers appointed by the City Council. The Planning and Zoning Commission makes recommendations to the City Council on cases relating to land use and development, such as platting; site plans; rezoning; specific use permits (SUP); tree preservation; and amendments to this Code, Land Use Plan, Parks Plan, and Thoroughfare Plan. This commission also acts as the Capital Improvement Advisory Committee and makes recommendations on Capital Improvement Projects and Impact Fees. This commission also hears requests to deviate from tree preservation requirements and makes recommendations to the City Council. Planning and Zoning Commission meetings are held as needed. 
E.  Parks and Recreation Board. Seven members who are Keller resident volunteers appointed by the City Council. The Board advises the City Council on the needs of City parks, recreational programs, and park facilities. It is responsible for implementing the Master Plans for City park and trail systems, and recommends to the City Council the policies by which the Parks and Recreation Programs are administered. Any variation from these plans must be formally approved by the Board. This Board may also enter the development process to encourage the establishment of new parks. The Board meets as needed. 
F.  Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA). Five Keller resident volunteer members and two alternates are appointed to the Zoning Board of Adjustment by the City Council. The Board hears variance requests and may grant variances and special exceptions to the specific requirements of the Zoning section as outlined within this Code for cases of hardship. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may not grant variances to the requirements within the Zoning section if a Zoning Change, Site Plan, or plat is required for a project. Variances are granted only when the resulting development will still be in harmony with the purpose of the regulations, and literal enforcement of the regulations will cause the property owner unnecessary hardship, as defined by State law, when developing the property. Decisions of the Board are final and may only be appealed through the court system. The Board meets every first Monday of the month on an as-needed-basis. 
G.  City Council. Consists of six members and a mayor, all elected at large. The City Council is involved in every phase of the development process. It approves ordinances, policies, and procedures, including all zoning requests, specific use permits, and changes in any portion of the Master Plan. Any variance from this Development Code, unless otherwise stated, is considered by the City Council. Decisions made by the City Council are final. City Council meetings are held the first and third Tuesdays of every month.  
Article Two - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Section 2.01 - Policy and Purpose 
These regulations are adopted for the following purposes: 
A.  To protect and provide for the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the city. 
B.  To guide the future growth and development of the city in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan. 
C.  To ensure safety from fire, flood, and other dangers, and to prevent overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of population. 
D.  To guide public and private development in order to provide adequate and efficient transportation, water, sewerage, drainage, and other public requirements and facilities. 
E.  To provide for the circulation of traffic and pedestrians required for the beneficial use of land and buildings and to avoid congestion throughout the city. 
F.  To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for platting and replatting to further the orderly layout and use of land, and to ensure proper legal descriptions and monumenting of platted land. 
G.  To ensure that adequate public facilities and services are available and will have sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision or addition and that the community will be required to bear no more than its fair share of the cost of providing the facilities and services. Fair share will be based on impact analyses. 
H.  To prevent the pollution of streams and ponds; to ensure the adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table; and to encourage the wise use and management of natural resources and enhance the stability and beauty of the community and the value of the land. 
I.  To provide for open spaces through the most efficient design and layout of the land. 
J.  To protect the natural resources that contribute to noise reduction, air quality, glare reduction, and promote the natural ecological, environmental, and aesthetic qualities of the City. 
K.  To remedy the problems associated with inappropriately platted lands, including premature subdivision, incomplete subdivision, and scattered subdivision.  
Section 2.02 - Authority 
A.  The City Council is the final authority in approving changes or variances to this Code except in instances specifically described otherwise, in accordance with State law. 
B.  The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Keller is vested with the authority to review, approve, conditionally approve certain applications for the platting or subdivision of land, including Preliminary Site Evaluations, Minor Subdivision Final Plats, Major Subdivision Final Plats, Amended Plats, Replats, and Vacations of Plats as specifically noted in various sections of this Code. 
(Amended by Ord. No. 1761 on October 6, 2015) 
C.  The City Manager or his/her designee is vested with the approval of Minor Subdivision Final Plats, Amended Plats, and some Site Plans as specifically noted in various sections of this Code.  
Section 2.03 - Jurisdiction 
A.  The Keller Development Code shall be applicable to the filing of plats and the subdivision of land, as that term is defined herein and in Texas Local Government Code, and to related development requirements within the corporate city limits of the City of Keller as they may be from time to time adjusted by annexation or de-annexation and within all the areas of the Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) of the City of Keller as that area may exist from time to time as provided by Chapter 42, Texas Local Government Code. The City shall have all remedies and rights provided by said Chapter 212 with regard to the control and approval of subdivisions and plats both within the City and within its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
B.  Land in the City's Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) is subject to platting, as provided by state law. The approval of a Preliminary Site Evaluation, Minor, or Major Subdivision Final Plat does not constitute approval of land use. Properties incorporated subsequent to platting are subject to City's zoning authority. 
(Amended by Ord. No. 1761 on October 6, 2015)  
Section 2.04 - Interpretation 
A.  Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, morals, safety, and general welfare. These regulations shall be construed broadly to promote the purposes for which they are adopted. 
B.  Conflict with Other Laws. These regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law except as provided in these regulations. Where any provision of these regulations imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other provision of these regulations, or other provision of law, the provision which is more restrictive or imposes higher standards shall control. 
C.  Conflict with Other Regulations. When the provisions of this Development Code are inconsistent with one another or when the provisions of this Development Code conflict with provisions found in other adopted ordinances or regulations, the more restrictive provision shall govern. 
D.  Conflict with Private Agreements. These regulations are not intended to abrogate, annul, or otherwise interfere with any easement, covenant, or any other private agreement or legal relationship, provided that when the provisions of this Code impose a greater restriction than imposed by such private agreement, the provisions of this Code shall control.  
Section 2.05 - Superceding Regulations 
All applications for approval of plats and site plans, pending on the effective date of these regulations and which have not lapsed, shall be reviewed based on regulations in effect immediately preceding the date of adoption of these regulations.  
Section 2.06 - Amendments to Text of the Unified Development Code 
This section sets out the required review and approval procedures for amendments to the text of this Code. 
A.  Initiation of Application. An amendment to the text of this Development Code may be proposed by any individual, the Planning and Zoning Commission, the City Council, or any department head with responsibility for reviewing development applications. Please note that, pursuant to the City Charter, this process does not preclude an amendment to the text of this Development Code proposed by initiative or referendum. 
1.  Amendments Initiated by City Council - The Mayor or two Council Members may direct the City Manager in writing to place a potential amendment on an agenda for a discussion at a regular City Council meeting, special meeting, or work session. If, after discussion, Council decides to further pursue the amendment, the amendment process for consideration will be as per Subsections 2.06.B., 2.06.C., and 2.06.D. below. 
2.  Amendments Initiated by Planning and Zoning Commission - The Chairman or two Commission Members may direct the Director of Community Development in writing to place a potential amendment on an agenda for a discussion at a regular Planning and Zoning Commission meeting, special meeting, or work session. The Commission, after discussion, may recommend by majority vote to forward to the City Council to discuss the potential amendment per Subsection 2.06.A. above, and provided Council concurs with the Commission recommendation, the amendment process for consideration will be as per Subsections 2.06.B., 2.06.C., and 2.06.D. below. 
3.  Amendments Initiated by Individuals - An individual desiring to amend the text of this Development Code shall make their request known at the "Persons to be Heard" section of a Planning and Zoning Commission meeting. After hearing the petition from an individual, the Commission could iniate consideration of the potential amendment pursuant to Subsections 2.06.A.2. above. 
4.  Amendments Initiated by Staff - A department head desiring to amend the text of this Development Code may place the item on an agenda for discussion at a regular meeting, special meeting or work session of the City Council or the Planning and Zoning Commission. After hearing the petition from the department head, the Council or the Commission could iniate consideration of the potential amendment pursuant to Subsections 2.06.A.1. or 2.06.A.2. above. 
B.  Review and Report - City Manager or his/her designee. At the direction of City Council, the City Manager or his/her designee shall prepare a staff report that reviews the proposed amendment in light of the Comprehensive Plan, the general requirements of this Code. The City Manager or his/her designee shall forward the report to the Planning and Zoning Commission for their review and consideration. 
C.  Review and Recommendation - Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment. At the close of the public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall recommend approval, modified approval, or denial of the amendment, and transmit a written summary of its action and proceedings to the City Council. The recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall contain a statement describing the nature and effect of the proposed amendment and explaining: 
1.  Whether such change is consistent with the intent and purpose of this Development Code. 
2.  The areas that are most likely to be directly affected by the amendment and in what way they will be affected. 
3.  Whether the proposed amendment is made necessary because of changed or changing social values, new planning concepts, or other social or economic conditions in the areas and zoning districts affected. 
D.  Review and Action - City Council. The City Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed Development Code amendment. The City Council shall act to approve, approve with modifications, or deny the proposed amendment.  
Section 2.07 - Procedures for Variances from the Regulations of the Code 
The Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council may authorize a variance or deviation from these regulations when special conditions exist that prevent strict compliance of this Code. In granting a variance, the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary or desirable to the public interest and making the findings herein below required. 
A.  Development-Related Variance Process. 
1.  Development-related variances that include exceptions to the Design and Improvement regulations in Article Five and to the Development Standards within Article Eight, if allowed within the guidelines, may be requested. Such variances shall be noted on Plats and Site Plans, where applicable. Where the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council finds that hardship or practical difficulties will result, it may approve the requested exceptions, provided that the exceptions will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations. In approving variances, the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council may require conditions and stipulations that will, in its judgment, substantially secure the objectives of the City's standards and regulations. Variances will not be granted to relieve a self-created or personal hardship, and they will not be granted based solely on economic gain or loss. The application shall include all pertinent information and supporting documents (see Article Nine - Variance to the UDC Application for requirements). An additional fee is required for applications requesting variances (see Article Nine - Fees). 
2.  The Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of land involved and existing uses of the land in the vicinity, the number of persons who will reside or work in the proposed subdivision, and the probable effect of such variance upon traffic conditions and upon the public health, safety, convenience, and welfare in the vicinity. No variance shall be granted unless the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council finds: 
a.  That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land involved such that the strict application of the provisions of this Code would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land. 
b.  That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to other properties in the area. 
c.  That the granting of the variance will not have the effect of preventing the orderly subdivision of other lands in the area in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
d.  That the granting of the variance will not constitute a violation of any other valid ordinance of the City of Keller. 
e.  That strict compliance with the regulations, and/or that the purpose of the regulations will be served to a greater extent by the alternative proposal. 
B.  Zoning Board of Adjustment Variance Process. The Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA) may grant variances and special exceptions to the specific requirements of the Zoning section as outlined within this Code. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may not grant variances to the requirements within the Zoning section if a Zoning Change, Site Plan, or Plat is required for a project. By State law, for approval of a Zoning Board of Adjustment variance, the applicant must demonstrate hardship other than economic. Applicants must submit an application form (see Article Nine - Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA) Application), written description of the hardship created and the proposed solution, and a scale drawing of the property and requested variance. Four affirmative votes of the Zoning Board of Adjustment membership are required to approve a variance or exception, and the decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment is final. The Zoning Board of Adjustment variance process and guidelines are further explained in the Zoning section of this Code (see Section 8.02 (C) of Article Eight).  
Section 2.08 - Severability 
If any section or part of any section, paragraph, or clause of this Code is declared invalid or unconstitutional for any reason, such declaration shall not be held to invalidate or impair the validity, force, or effect of any other section or sections, part of section, paragraph, or clause of this Code.  
Section 2.09 - Saving Provision 
These regulations shall not be construed as abating any action now pending under, or by virtue of, prior existing subdivision regulations, or as discontinuing, abating, modifying, or altering any penalty accruing or about to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm, or corporation, or as waiving any right of the City under any section or provision existing at the time of adoption of these regulations, or as vacating or annulling any rights obtained by any person, firm, or corporation, by lawful action of the City except as shall be expressly provided for in these regulations.  
Section 2.10 - Enforcement, Violations, and Penalties 
A.  Compliance with these regulations is the sole responsibility of the applicant/land owner/developer and any inadvertent error on the part of the City does not invalidate the provisions of this Code. 
B.  Violations and Penalties. Any person who violates any of these regulations for lands within the corporate boundaries of the City shall be subject to a fine of not more than $2,000.00 per day per violation, pursuant to the Texas Local Government Code. 
C.  Civil Enforcement. Appropriate civil actions and proceedings may be maintained in law or in equity to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages, to impose additional penalties, to restrain, correct, or abate a violation of these regulations, whether such violation occurs with respect to lands within the corporate boundaries of the City or within the City's Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ). These remedies shall be in addition to the penalties described above.  
Article Three - DEFINITIONS 
 
Section 3.01 - Definitions 
Words and terms used in this section shall be given the meanings set forth in this Code. For the purpose of this Code, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. Definitions not expressly prescribed herein are to be determined in accordance with customary usage in municipal planning and engineering practices. The word "shall" is always mandatory, while the word "may" is merely directory. 
A 
1.  Abandoned Structure - Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy which is discontinued for, or which remains vacant for a period of six (6) months. Abandonment shall involve the intent of the user or owner to discontinue a nonconforming operation and the actual act of discontinuance. 
2.  Access Easement (Public) - An easement designated on the Final Plat or by separate document, which provides access to lots or between lots. The City of Keller or utility companies shall at all times have the right of ingress and egress to and from and upon their designated easements for the purpose of constructing, reconstructing, inspecting, patrolling, maintaining, and adding to or removing all or part of its respective systems without the necessity at any time of procuring the permission of anyone. The easement shall meet all of the requirements set forth by the City (i.e., construction standards, width, and function) but is privately maintained. 
3.  Access Easement (Private) - An easement designated on the Final Plat or by separate document, which provides access to lots or between lots. The easement shall meet all of the requirements set forth by the City (i.e., construction standards, width, and function) but is privately maintained. 
4.  Accessory Building - A subordinate building, either attached or detached, located on the same lot as the main building, the use of which is secondary or supportive to that of the dominant use of the building or premises. Accessory buildings may include parking garages, adjacent farm structures, home workshops and tool houses, storage sheds, home greenhouses, etc. An accessory dwelling or garage apartment shall mean the same as accessory building except it may be used for residential purposes but not leased or rented. 
5.  Accessory Dwelling Unit - A second single-family residential living unit located on the same lot as the primary living unit, which provides independent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. The secondary living unit is only for use by family members, relatives, or domestic worker hired by the homeowner and shall not be rented or leased. This unit may either be attached or detached from the primary unit. A mobile home or HUD-Code manufactured home shall not be considered an accessory dwelling unit. 
6.  Accessory Use - A use customarily incidental, appropriate and subordinate to the principal use of land or building(s) and located upon the same lot. 
7.  Administrative Officers - Any office referred to in this Article or Code, by title, i.e., City Manager, City Attorney, City Secretary, City Planner, Director of Community Development, City Engineer, Director of Public Works, etc., shall be the person so retained in this position by the City, or his duly authorized representative. 
8.  Administrative or corporate headquarters - See Office, Professional and General Administrative 
9.  Advertising Sign or Structure - See Signs. 
10.  Agricultural Use - The use of land to produce plant or animal products, such as the growing of crops, raising and pasturing of livestock, or farming. It does not include the processing of plant or animal products after harvesting or the production of timber or forest products. 
11.  Agricultural Vehicles and Equipment - Any self-propelled or towed vehicle or equipment designed to be operated primarily in a farm field or farm premises or in the transportation of feed, fertilizer, produce, livestock, and related agricultural goods, regardless of manufacturer's Gross Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR) or Maximum Loaded Trailer Weight (MLTW). Agricultural Vehicles and Equipment include farm tractors and implements; utility, livestock, and horse trailers; trucks; and other similar agricultural light load and heavy load vehicles. 
12.  Airport - A place where an aircraft can land and take off, usually equipped with hangars, facilities for refueling and repair and various accommodations for passengers. 
13.  Alley - A minor public right-or-way not intended to provide the primary means of access to abutting lots, which is primarily for vehicular service access to the back or sides of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
14.  Antenna - Any structure or device used to collect or radiate any portion of the radio, microwave, or electromagnetic waves, including both directional antennas, such as panels, and dishes, and omnidirectional antennas, such as whips, but not including satellite earth stations. 
15.  Antique Shop, Sales in Building - A retail establishment engaged in the selling of works of art, furniture or other artifacts of an earlier period, with all sales and storage occurring inside a building. 
16.  Apartment complex - A group of three or more multi-family structures under singular ownership. 
17.  Architect - A person who is trained and certified to design buildings and in many cases also supervises their construction. 
18.  Architectural Metal - Architectural sheet metal is a specialized type of metal roofing, typically involving steep slopes. These roofs feature custom fabricated sheet metal flashing and trim. Architectural metal may involve various gauge metals and various types of metals, ranging from pre-finished galvanized steel and aluminum to copper, stainless steel, lead and coated copper. 
19.  Artwork - A specific piece of art, including, but not limited to, a sculpture, monument, mural, painting, fountain, or stained glass. 
(Amended by Ord. No. 1763 on October 20, 2015) 
20.  Articulation - The use of varying depth of wall planes in the vertical and horizontal dimension, varied roof planes, different materials, and other design features to create an aesthetically pleasing building facade. 
21.  Arcade (architectural feature) - A covered passageway or gallery that is integral to the building with arches or other regular and decorative openings along one or both sides. 
22.  Assembly of light electronic instruments and devices (enclosed building) - A light manufacturing use where electrical and electronic equipment are, processed, assembled, treated and packaged, predominantly from previously prepared materials, finished products or parts, including incidental storage and sales. 
23.  Assembly of products including packaging - A light manufacturing use where general products are, processed, assembled, treated and packaged, predominantly from previously prepared materials, finished products or parts, including incidental storage and sales. 
24.  Assembly of radios/audio/visual equipment/communication equipment - A light manufacturing use where radios, audio equipment, visual equipment and other similar products are, processed, assembled, treated and packaged, predominantly from previously prepared materials, finished products or parts, including incidental storage and sales. 
25.  Assisted Living Facilities - A housing facility for people with disabilities. These facilities provide supervision or assistance with activities of daily living (ADLs); coordination of services by outside health care providers; and monitoring of resident activities to help to ensure their health, safety, and well-being. Facilities may be large apartment-like settings or private residences. (Refer to Texas Health & Safety Code and Texas Department of Aging and Disability Services for Assisted Living Facilities for most current regulations). 
(Amended by Ord. No. 1809 on September 6, 2016) 
26.  Athletic Stadium or field operated by the city or a school district - An open-air facility designed for athletic events and competition with space for spectators. Accessory uses and structures include bleachers, stands, concession stands 
27.  Automobile - A self-propelled passenger vehicle designed for use on streets and highways for the conveyance of people and goods. 
28.  Automobile Electric Recharging Station - An electric vehicle charging station, also called EV charging station, electric recharging point, charging point, charge point and EVSE (Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment), is an element of infrastructure, either public or private, that supplies electric energy for the recharging of plug-in electric vehicles, including all-electric cars, neighborhood electric vehicles and plug-in hybrids. 
29.  Automobile Fueling Station - Any building, land area, or other premises (or portion thereof) used or intended to be used for the retail dispensing or sales of automobile fuels. Lubricants, and automobile accessories. 
30.  Automobile Garage - A structure designed for the parking of automobiles, motorcycles, and light load vehicles. 
31.  Automobile Parking Lot - An area designed for the parking of automobiles, motorcycles, and light load vehicles. 
32.  Automobile Parts and Sales - The use of any building or other premise for the primary inside display and sale of new or used parts for automobiles, boats, motorcycles, and light load vehicles. 
33.  Automobile, Rental - Renting of automobiles, motorcycles, and light load vehicles. 
34.  Automobile Repair, Heavy Load Vehicles - Repair or reconditioning of engines, air conditioning systems and transmissions for heavy load vehicles, including wrecker services; collision services, including body, frame or fender straightening or repair; customizing; painting; vehicle steam cleaning; undercoating and rust-proofing. 
35.  Automobile Repair, Major - Automotive repair uses (including Auto Repair, moderate uses) for automobiles, boats, motorcycles, and light load vehicles that require heavy machinery and/or can be expected to generate noises and vapors not compatible with adjacent residential or retail uses. Examples include general repair or reconditioning of engines, air conditioning systems and transmissions for automobiles, boats, motorcycles, and light load vehicles (but not for heavy load vehicles), wrecker services; collision services, including body, frame or fender straightening or repair; customizing; painting; vehicle steam cleaning; upholstery; undercoating and rust-proofing. 
(Amended by Ord. No. 1828 on January 17, 2017) 
36.  Automobile Repair, Minor - Those automotive repair uses (including Auto Repair, sales and service uses) for automobiles, boats, motorcycles, and light load vehicles that generate mild noise and some vapors but generally support regularly required vehicle maintenance. Examples include tires and tubes; diagnostic services; minor motor services such as grease; tune-ups; emergency road service; oil and filter changes; replacement of starters, alternators, hoses, brake parts; automobile washing and polishing; performing state inspections and making minor repairs necessary to pass said inspection; and normal servicing of air-conditioning systems. 
(Amended by Ord. No. 1828 on January 17, 2017) 
37.  Automobile Repair, Sales and Service - Automobile repair uses that include light servicing or repair of automobiles, boats, motorcycles, and light load vehicles that does not generate noise or excess vapors and where services could be performed within a completely enclosed structure. These uses may incorporate retail sales. Examples include technology upgrades, windshield repairs and replacement, radio and electronic repairs and replacement, some customization or adding or accessories, battery replacement, spark plug replacement, some diagnostic services, and adding of fluids. 
(Amended by Ord. No. 1828 on January 17, 2017) 
38.  Automobile Sales - The display, sale and servicing, including repair work, of automobiles (including motorcycles). 
39.  Automobile Salvage - See Wrecking Yard 
40.  Automobile Storage - The storage or impoundment, on a lot or tract, of operable automobiles, motorcycles, and light load vehicles for the purpose of holding such vehicles for sale or distribution. 
41.  Awning - A roof-like structure, usually made of canvas that provides an architectural projection and weather protection, usually over a storefront, window, door or deck, and is supported by the building to which it is attached. 
B 
42.  Back Haul - As it pertains to the telecommunication industry - the obligation to carry packets to and from that global network. A non-technical business definition of backhaul is the commercial wholesale bandwidth provider who offers Quality of Service (QOS) guarantees to the retailer. It appears most often in telecommunications trade literature in this sense, whereby the backhaul connection is defined not technically but by who operates and manages it, and who takes legal responsibility for the connection or uptime to the Internet or 3G/4G network. 
43.  Back-lighting - The light source is behind the sign to illuminate the letters with a glowing effects. 
44.  Bakery (retail) - A place for baking or selling baked goods directly to consumers, including donut shops. 
45.  Bakery and Confectionery Works (Commercial) - A manufacturing facility for the production and distribution of baked goods and confectioneries to retail outlets. 
46.  Balcony - A projection from a second story or higher on a building where occupancy can go outside. 
47.  Bank, Savings and Loan, or Credit Union - An establishment for the retail custody, loan, exchange or issue of money, the extension of credit, and/or facilitating the transmission of funds. This classification does not include those institutions engaged in the on-site circulation of cash money and check-cashing facilities, bail bond brokers or pawn shops. Accessory uses may include automatic teller machines, drive-thru services, offices, and parking. 
48.  Bar - Any establishment which derives seventy-five percent (75%) or more of the establishment's gross revenue from the on premise sale of alcoholic beverages. It may or may not include a dance hall. 
49.  Barbed Wire - Wire fencing material with sharp barbs that is used primarily to secure livestock. 
50.  Barber Shop or Beauty Salon - An establishment that performs personal grooming services such as haircuts, nail, facial treatments, etc. 
51.  Base Zoning District - Within a Planned Development the base zoning district is the district to which all regulations default if not specifically addressed in the Planned Development Ordinance. 
52.  Basement (or Cellar) - A story partly or wholly underground. This definition of "Basement" does not apply to the provisions of Section 1612 IBC for flood loads. 
53.  Batching Plant (temporary) - A facility for the production or concrete, asphalt or similar materials needed for a single construction project and intended to be removed on the completion of said project. 
54.  Bed & breakfast (also Tourist Home) - A dwelling occupied as a permanent residence by an owner or renter which serves breakfast and in which sleeping accommodations is not more than five (5) rooms are provided or offered for transient guests for compensation. 
55.  Block - A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets, other than alleys. In cases where the platting is incomplete or disconnected, the Director of Community Development shall determine the outline of the block. 
56.  Block Length - For a residential subdivision, that distance of a block face measured along the centerline of a right-of-way from one street intersection to another or to the midpoint of a cul-de-sac or to a ninety-degree (90?) turn. 
57.  Boarding House - A dwelling other than a hotel, where for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals, or lodging and meals are provided. 
58.  Boat, rental - An establishment where boats and other watercraft may be leased or rented. 
59.  Boat, sales - An establishment where boats and other watercraft are sold. This will include new and used boats. 
60.  Boat, repair and service - An establishment that provides maintenance and repair to boats and watercraft that is comparable to the types of repairs in Automobile Repair, Minor. 
61.  Bookbindery - An establishment where books are bound for wholesale distribution including the printing, embossing and other binding processes. 
62.  Brick Material - Brick material used for masonry construction shall be hard fired (kiln fired) clay or slate material that meets the latest version of ASTM standard C216, Standard Specification for Facing Brick (Solid Masonry Unit Made of Clay or Shale), and shall be Severe Weather (SW) grade, and Type FBA or FBS or better. Unfired or under fired clay, sand, or shale brick are not allowed. 
63.  Buildable Area - That portion of a building site exclusive of the required yard areas on which a structure or building improvements may be erected and including the actual structure and driveway. 
64.  Building - Any structure intended for shelter, occupancy, housing or enclosure for persons, animals or chattel. 
65.  Building Bay - The space between architectural elements, or a recess or compartment. 
66.  Building Elevation - A two-dimensional representation of the façade of a building or structure. 
67.  Building Footprint - The area of the site covered by the building including area and dimensions. 
68.  Building Height - The vertical distance from the average line of the highest and lowest points of that portion of the lot covered by the building to the highest point of coping of a flat roof, or a deck line of a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof (see Section 8.17 - Figure 9). 
69.  Building, Main - A building in which the principal use of the lot on which it is situated is conducted. In a residential district any dwelling shall be deemed to be a main building on the lot on which it is situated. 
70.  Building Materials and Hardware Sales - Materials, tools, and hardware customarily used in the construction of buildings and other structures, including facilities for storage of materials for retail sales. Sometimes referenced as a home improvement center. 
71.  Building Pad - The actual foundation area of a building area and the area within eight feet (8') of the foundation that is used for construction and grade transition. 
72.  Building Setback Line - The line within a property defining the minimum horizontal distance between a building or other structures and the property line and/or adjacent street line (measured from right-of-way line). (see Section 8.18 - Figure 1). 
C 
73.  Caliper - The diameter of a tree, measured at a point six (6) inches above the ground line. If the resulting measurement is no more than four (4) inches, the measurement is made at a point twelve (12) inches above the ground line. 
74.  Canopy - A roof-like structure that shelters a use such as, but not restricted to, a gasoline pump island, and is supported by either one or more columns or by the building to which it is accessory and is open on two or more sides. 
75.  Canopy Tree - Same as a Large Tree. 
76.  Carnival or Circus - A temporary event that is characterized by mechanical rides, games of skill or chance, entertainment, and/or food. 
77.  Carport - A structure open on a minimum of two sides designed or used to shelter vehicles. 
78.  Car Wash - Structure used to wash motorcycles, automobiles and light load vehicles. 
79.  Cemetery Property used for the interring of the human dead. 
80.  Certificate of Occupancy - An official certificate issued by the City through the Building Official which indicates conformance with the zoning regulations and authorizes legal use of the premises for which it is issued; may be referred to as an Occupancy Permit. 
81.  Child Care (refer to Texas DFPS - Child Care Minimum Standards for most current regulations) - Any establishment whose sole purpose is to provide regular care for children in the absence of their parents for less than 24 hours per day, at a location other than the child's home, except as otherwise provided by DPFS. 
82.  City - The City of Keller, Texas, together with all its governing and operating bodies. References to the "City" shall mean the City of Keller. 
83.  City Council - The governing body of the City of Keller, Texas. 
84.  City Engineer - "City Engineer" shall apply only to such registered professional engineer who has been specifically employed by the City. 
85.  City Manager - The person holding the position of City Manager as appointed by the City Council according to the City Charter. 
86.  Clear-Cutting - The removal of all of the trees or a significant majority of the trees within an area. 
87.  College or University - An institution for higher, post-secondary, learning whether private or public and where students may reside on-campus. 
88.  Co-location (of cellular towers) - Placement of an antenna on an existing Telecommunication Tower, Stealth Telecommunication Tower, transmission tower, building, light or utility pole or water tower or other structure, where the antenna are located on the existing structure. 
89.  Columns - An upright pillar, typically cylindrical and made of stone or concrete, supporting or appearing to provide structural support to an entablature, arch, or other structure. 
90.  Commercial Wedding/Corporate Event Venue - A commercial establishment that rents out its facilities for weddings, special occasions or for a gathering that is sponsored by a business for its employees, business partners, clients and/or prospective clients. 
91.  Commission - The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Keller, Texas. 
92.  Community Center - A building or complex of buildings that house cultural, recreational, athletic or entertainment facilities owned and/or operated by a governmental agency or private non-profit agency. 
93.  Compatibility, Architectural and Design - Compatibility as used in defining architectural character can be achieved by usage or coordinated and complementary attributes such as building materials, colors, building forms, architectural detailing, landscaping, lighting, outdoor furnishings and other amenities. 
94.  Compatibility, Land use - Compatibility as used in defining land uses that are complimentary with regard to the impact generated on the physical environment (i.e. noise, light, traffic, parking, odors, etc.). 
95.  Composite Decking- "Wood-plastic polymer products (such as Trex) typically used for fencing and decking. These products are made out of a mix of recycled wood fibers and recycled plastic. 
96.  Concrete Block - A concrete masonry unit (CMU) - also called concrete brick, concrete block, cement block, besser block, breeze block and cinder block - is a large rectangular brick used in construction. 
97.  Concrete Masonry Units (CMUs) - Concrete masonry units used for masonry construction shall meet the latest version of the following applicable specifications: ASTM C90, Standard Specification for Hollow Load Bearing Concrete Masonry Units; ASTM C145, Standard Specification for Solid Non-load Bearing Masonry Units; ASTM C129, Standard Specification for Hollow and Solid Non-load Bearing Units. Concrete masonry units shall have an indented, hammered, split face, or other similar approved architectural finish as approved by the City Council. Lightweight concrete block or cinder block construction is not acceptable as an exterior finish. 
98.  Concrete Panel Construction - Concrete finish or pre-cast (tilt wall) construction shall be painted, fluted, exposed aggregate, or other approved architectural concrete finish. Smooth or untextured concrete finishes are not acceptable. 
99.  Construction Yard (Temporary) - A storage yard or assembly yard for building materials and equipment directly related to a specific construction project and subject to removal at completion of construction. 
100.  Contractor's Shop - A building, part of a building, for storage of materials, equipment, tools, products, and vehicles that are used on a regular basis for various types of contract work including accessory office. 
101.  Contractor's Yard - An outside area for storage of materials, equipment, tools, products, and vehicles that are used on a regular basis for various types of contract work including accessory office. 
102.  Convenience store with gas pumps - Any building, land area or other premises, or portion thereof, used or intended to be used for the retail sales of goods in combination with the sales of automobile fuels, lubricants, and automotive accessories. 
103.  Copy shop or printing shop - See Printing or Copy Shop. 
104.  Cornices - A projecting shelf along the top of a wall, along the exterior trim at the meeting of a roof and wall, or at the uppermost division of an entablature. 
105.  Council - Same as City Council. 
106.  Country Club (Private) - A land area and buildings which may include a golf course, clubhouse, dining room, swimming pool, tennis courts and similar recreational or service uses available only to members and their guests. 
107.  County - Tarrant County, Texas, together with all its governing and operating bodies. References to the "County" shall mean Tarrant County unless expressly stated otherwise. 
108.  Court - An open, unobstructed space, bounded on more than two sides by the walls of a building. An inner court is entirely surrounded by the exterior walls of a building. An outer court has one side open to a street, alley, yard, or other permanent open space. 
109.  Critical Root Zone (CRZ) - The area of undisturbed natural soil around a tree defined by a concentric circle with a radius equal to the distance from the trunk to the outermost portion of the drip line (see Section 8.20 - Exhibit D). 
110.  Cul-de-Sac - A street having but one outlet to another street, and terminated on the opposite end by a vehicular turnaround. 
111.  Cut/Fill - Areas where the natural ground level has been excavated (cut) or fill brought in. 
D 
112.  Dance Hall - An establishment open to the general public for dancing. 
113.  Dead End Street - A street, other than a cul-de-sac, with only one outlet. 
114.  Dedication - Intentional transfer by a property owner to the public of ownership of, or an interest in, land for a public purpose. Dedication may be effected by compliance with statues relating to dedication of land, by formal deed of conveyance, or by any other method recognized by the laws of the State of Texas. 
115.  Density - The total number of residential buildings allowed upon a given tract of land usually expressed in total number of units per gross acres or net acre. 
116.  Detached - Having no physical connection above the top of the floor line of the first floor with any other building or structure. 
117.  Developer/Builder - Any person, business, corporation, association, or entity responsible for or involved in the land development of the subdivision or addition, including the construction of infrastructure or building of structures for residential or non-residential occupancy. In most contexts the term Developer, Subdivider, and Property Owner are used interchangeably in these regulations. 
118.  Development - Any subdivision of land; any consolidation or accumulation of tracts of land; any material change in the use or appearance of any parcel of land; any activity that affects lot lines, easement locations, number of lots, setbacks, locations of structures, dedications of streets or utilities; or the act of building structures or improvements on land. 
119.  Development Review Committee (DRC) - A committee comprised of staff members, but not limited to from the departments of Community Development, Economic Development, Development Services, Fire, Parks & Recreation, and Public Works to review development applications and tree removal permits for compliance with this Code (see Article Nine- Development Review Committee Members (DRC). 
120.  Director of Public Works - The individual hired for "Director of Public Works" position by the City Manager. 
121.  Distillery - a facility that manufactures, purifies, and refines distilled spirits. 
122.  Donation Center - A center for the donation of new and used clothing, wearing apparel, small appliances and furniture. 
123.  Drainage Way-A natural or man-made drainage pathway located on or adjacent to property. The drainage way may or may not be deemed "floodplain" or "floodway" by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). A drainage way may be located on any property in the City of Keller, regardless whether said property has been secured within the confines of a legal Plat. 
124.  Drilling - The process of construction of a mining installation of cylindrical shaped reservoir, such as a hole, blasthole, or mineshaft, by crushing the rock at the mine face. As a rule, drilling is carried on within the earth's crust (less frequently, within artificial materials such as concrete, asphalt, and others) that allow the extraction of minerals from those reservoirs. In a number of cases drilling involves the shoring-up of hole walls (mainly for deep holes) by means of tubular casings, with the injection of cement suspension into the annular gap between the casings and the hole walls. The field of application of drilling is varied: it includes searching and prospecting for minerals; the study of rock characteristics; the extraction of liquid, gaseous, and solid (by leaching and melting) minerals through working holes; the conducting of blasting operations; the excavation of solid minerals; the artificial securing of rock (by freezing, bituminizing, cementing, and other methods); the draining of flooded mineral deposits and swampy areas; the exposure of deposits; the laying of underground communications equipment; and the construction of pile foundations. 
125.  Drip Line - A vertical line run through the outermost portion of the canopy of a tree and extending to the ground (see Section 8.20 - Exhibit D). 
126.  Driveway - An area usually paved with asphalt or concrete to allow access of automobiles to a property from a road or Public Right-of-Way. 
127.  Driveway Approach - The portion of the driveway that falls within the public right-of-way. 
128.  Driving school - A facility for the instruction of driving light load vehicles. Facilities may include offices, classrooms, and storage of vehicles. 
129.  Dry Cleaning Plant - An industrial facility, including commercial laundry, where fabrics are cleaned with substantially non-aqueous organic solvents on a commercial or wholesale basis. 
130.  Dry Cleaning, Retail - A retail center customers drop-off and pick-up laundry to be dry cleaned, where chemical cleaning is not performed on-site but is shipped out for the cleaning process.. 
131.  Dwelling - Any building or portion thereof, which is designed or used as living quarters 
E 
132.  Earth tone colors - Warm, muted colors inspired by the colors of the earth, soil, and certain minerals and containing some brown. Earth tones have flat finishes to increase the natural appearance of the colors. 
133.  Easement - The word "easement" shall mean a designated area, conveyed by plat or separate instrument, for restricted use on private or public property upon which the grantee shall have the right to remove and keep removed all or part of any buildings, fences, trees, shrubs, or other improvements or growths that may endanger or interfere with the construction, maintenance, or efficiency of its respective systems on any of these easements. 
134.  Eave - The portion of the roof that projects past the outer wall. 
135.  EIFS (Exterior Insulating Finishing System) - a non-load bearing, exterior wall cladding system that consists of an insulation board attached either adhesively or mechanically, or both, to the substrate; an integrally reinforced base coat; and a textured protective finish coat. 
136.  EIA-222 - Electronics Industries Association Standard 222, "Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Support Structures". 
137.  Electrical Fencing - A fence constructed of wire or other materials that conduct electricity that is designed to provide an electric shock to any humans or animals that touch the fence. 
138.  Electrical Substation - A subsidiary station in which electric current is transformed. 
139.  Elevations - Drawings that depict one vertical planes of a structure. 
140.  Emergency Access Easement - An area created by plat or separate instrument filed with the office of the county clerk other than a dedicated street or place, or an alley, which is maintained free and clear of buildings, structures and other obstructions for the purpose of providing free passage of service and emergency vehicles. 
141.  Engineer - A person duly licensed by the Texas Board of Professional Engineers as a Professional Engineers, as heretofore or hereafter amended, to practice the profession of engineering and who is specifically qualified to design and prepare construction plans and specifications.. 
142.  Entertainment Facility, Indoor - Any building, room, place or establishment of any nature or kind and by whatever name called, where amusement devices are operated for a profit, whether the same be operated in conjunction with any other business or not, including but not limited to such amusement devices as bowling, skating, laser tag, miniature golf, coin operated pinball machines, video games, electronic games, shuffle boards, pool tables or other similar amusement devices. Provided, however, the term "amusement device", as used herein, shall not include sexually oriented businesses, musical devices and devices designed to train persons in athletic skills or golf, tennis, baseball, archery or other similar sports. 
143.  Entertainment Facility, Outdoor - Any place or establishment of any nature or kind and by whatever name called, where amusement activities are provided for a profit, whether the same be operated in conjunction with any other business or not, including but not limited to such amusement devices as paint ball, miniature golf, driving range, skating, laser tag, or other similar amusement activities. Provided, however, the term "amusement device", as used herein, shall not include sexually oriented businesses, musical devices and/or devices designed to train persons in athletic skills or golf, tennis, baseball, archery or other similar sports. 
144.  Equestrian Trail - A path or walkway designed for the riding of horses. 
145.  Erosion - The wearing a way of dirt and sediments over time. 
146.  Escrow - Most commonly money held in trust by a third party to be turned over to the grantee only upon fulfillment of a condition. 
147.  Excavation or Gravel Pit - An area were minerals, gravel, or other similar materials are excavated or quarried below the natural grade of the surface. 
148.  Exhibition Area - An area or space either outside or within a building for the display of topic-specific goods or information. 
149.  Exposed Concrete - A building material that is a mix of cement and aggregate where the aggregate is exposed and visible. 
150.  Exposed Metal - A building material made from any number of metals that is visible and not coated in some other way. 
F 
151.  Facade - The faces or elevations of a building visible from a public way or space; usually limited to the front face of a building in an urban environment. 
152.  Family - One or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption; or a group not to exceed four (4) persons not all related by blood or marriage, adoption or guardianship, occupying a dwelling unit. 
153.  Family Home - See Child Care 
154.  Farm, Ranch, Livestock, Garden or Orchard* - An area used for growing usual farm products, vegetables, fruits, trees, and grain and for the raising thereon of the usual farm poultry and farm animals such as cattle, and sheep and including the necessary accessory uses for raising, treating, and storing products raised on the premises, but not including the commercial feeding of offal or garbage to swine or other animals and not including any type of agriculture or husbandry specifically prohibited by Code or law. 
*(This definition does not pertain to horses. Horses are defined under Private Stables and Commercial Stables within this Article.) 
155.  Feed Store - An establishment for the selling of corn, grain and other food stuffs for animals and livestock, and including implements and goods related to agricultural processes, but not including farm machinery. 
156.  Feeder or Transmission Line - Those high voltage electric supply lines that emanate from substations used to distribute power through an area to an unspecified number of customers. 
157.  Fence - A barrier for the purpose of enclosing space or separating parcels of land. The term "fence" does include retaining walls. 
a.  Barbed wire - A fence that utilizing wire and barbs to provide an enclosure for agricultural purposes. 
b.  Chain Link - A fence of heavy steel wire that is woven to form a pattern of large diamond-shaped spaces. 
c.  Electric - An electric fence is a barrier that uses electric shocks to deter animals or people from crossing a boundary. The voltage of the shock may have effects ranging from discomfort to death. 
d.  Masonry - A fence constructed or stone, brick, cement based stucco or other masonry material. 
e.  Picket - A fence made of wooden pickets so that there are gaps between boards. This fence is usually four (4) feet in height or less and used for ornamental as well as security and privacy purposes. 
f.  Tubular Steel - A manufactured metal fencing. 
g.  Wrought Iron - A fence built of iron or tubular steel that has been fabricated into ornamental posts. 
h.  Wood - A fence made of wood pickets so there are no gaps between the boards. These fences are usually between 6 and 8 feet in height and used for privacy purposes. 
158.  Field Construction Office - A building or structure, of temporary construction, used in connection with a development or construction project for housing temporary supervisory or administrative functions related to development, construction or the sale of real estate properties within the active development or construction project. 
159.  Filing Date - The filing date is when the city verifies that application is complete from an ordinance compliance point of view. Meaning that a complete application has been filed, reviewed by the Development Review Committee (DRC), received corrections to any deficiencies found by the DRC, and the plat is ready to forward to the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
160.  Final Plat (also record plat or filing plat) - The one official and authentic map of any given subdivision of land prepared from actual field measurement and staking of all identifiable points by a surveyor with the subdivision location referenced to a survey corner and all boundaries, corners, and curves of the land division sufficiently described so that they can be reproduced without additional references. The final plat of any lot, tract, or parcel of land shall be recorded in the records of Tarrant County, Texas. An amended plat is also a final plat. 
161.  Fitness Center - Any recreational facility where all activities are contained within an enclosed building which is open to the general public for a fee or charge. Such facilities may include, but are not limited to, aerobic exercise, tennis, swimming or racquet facilities, gymnasium, weight room, sauna or other associated recreational activities; to include dance studio, gymnastics and aerobic center; A space in which people learn or rehearse dance routines or aerobic exercise. The term is typically used to describe a space that has either been built or equipped for the purpose. A dance studio or aerobic center normally includes a smooth floor covering or, if used for tap dancing, by a hardwood floor. 
162.  Flat Roof - A roof with no or minimal slope. A mansard or parapet wall is used with a flat roof to screen rooftop equipment from public view. 
163.  *Flea Market - An outdoor, or partially indoor premise where the main use is the sale of new and used household goods, personal effects, tools, art work, small household appliances, and similar merchandise, objects, or equipment, in small quantities, in broken stalls, lots or parcels, not in bulk, for the use or consumption by the immediate purchaser in a building, open air, or partly enclosed booths or stalls not within a wholly enclosed building. The term flea market shall not be deemed to include wholesale sales establishments or rental services establishments, but shall be deemed to include personal service establishments, food services establishments, retail services establishments, and auction establishments. 
*(This definition does not pertain to retail sidewalk sales or garage sales. Arts and crafts shows or sales held by non-profit organizations are also not included under this definition.) 
164.  Flood Plain - Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source, as defined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.. 
165.  Floodway - The channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
166.  Floor Area - The total gross square feet of floor space within the outside dimensions of a building including each floor level, but excluding carports, residential garages, and breezeways. 
167.  Florescent colors - Colors which absorb and convert visible spectrum light along with wavelengths of ultraviolet rays and other colors lower in the visible spectrum and colors designed to resemble florescence. 
168.  Florist Shop - A retail establishment for the display and retail sale of flowers, small plants and accessories. 
169.  Foot-candle - Unit of light density incident on a plane (assumed to be horizontal unless otherwise specified), and measurable with an illuminance meter, a.k.a. light meter. 
170.  Franchise utilities - Utilities traditionally franchised (whether or not a franchise is currently required) including, but not limited to electric, gas, telecommunications and cable 
171.  Fraternal Club, Lodge, or Civic Club - An organized group having a restricted membership and specific purpose related to the welfare of the members such as Elks, Masons, Knights of Columbus, or a labor union. 
172.  Freeboard - The vertical distance between the upstream design water surface and the proposed improvements. 
173.  Freight, rail or truck terminal yard - Use of property or buildings for the temporary parking of motor freight vehicles, rail cars, or trucks of common carriers, during loading and unloading and between trips, including necessary warehouse space or outdoor storage space for storage of transitory freight 
174.  Front Yard - See Yard, Front. 
175.  Fuel Pumps/Sales - Any building, land area or other premises, or portion thereof, used or intended to be used for the retail dispensing or sales of automobile fuels, electric vehicle (EV) recharging station, lubricants, and automotive accessories. 
176.  Funeral Home or Mortuary - A place for the storage of human bodies prior to their burial or cremation, or a building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial and the display of the deceased and ceremonies connected therewith before burial or cremation. 
177.  Furniture, Home Furnishings, and Equipment Stores - This group includes selling new goods for furnishing the home including, but not limited to furniture, floor coverings, draperies, and room decor. 
178.  Furniture restoration, wholly enclosed in a building - Repairs damage on all types and styles of wood furniture, surfaces and cabinets. Often uses chemical products that have odor and require adequate ventilation. 
G 
179.  Gable Roof - A roof with two sloping sides and a gable at each end. 
180.  Gambrel Roof - A roof with two sides, each of which has a shallower slope above a steeper one. 
181.  Garage, Parking - Any building, or portion thereof, not related to single family, used for the storage of four (4) or more automobiles in which any servicing provided is incidental to the primary storage use, and where repair facilities are not provided. 
182.  Garage, Private - An enclosed (on at least three (3) sides) accessory building, or a part of a main building, used for storage of automobiles and used solely by the occupants and their guests. 
183.  Gasoline Service or Filling Station - See Fuel Pumps/Sales. 
184.  General Manufacturing - (see Industrial, Manufacturing). 
185.  General Retail Stores - This major group includes retail stores which sell a number of lines of primarily new merchandise including but not limited to dry goods, grocery, apparel and accessories, furniture and home furnishings, small wares, small appliances (including minor repairs of those appliances), hardware, and food; and has no more than 10% on-site manufacturing The stores included in this group are known as department stores, variety stores, general merchandise stores, general stores, etc. (also see Retail Stores and Shops). 
186.  Glass Walls - Glass walls shall include glass curtain walls or glass blocks construction. Glass curtain wall shall be defined as an exterior wall that carries no structural loads, and which may consist of the combination of metal, glass, or other surfacing material supported in a metal framework. 
187.  Golf Course - An area of twenty (20) acres or more improved with trees, greens, fairways, hazards, and which may include clubhouses. 
188.  Government - The legally recognized governing body the United States of America, the State of Texas, Tarrant County and/or the City of Keller. 
189.  Grade -A gradient or slope. 
190.  Greenhouses and nurseries - A wholesale establishment, including a building, part of a building or open space, for the growth, display and/or sale of large plants, shrubs, and trees, and other materials used in indoor or outdoor planting. 
191.  Grocery store or food market A retail establishment selling meats, fruits, vegetables, bakery products, dairy items and similar products for human consumption off-premises. 
192.  Gross Vehicle Weight Rating - The actual weight of a vehicle plus the manufacturer's maximum allowable weight of passengers, fluids, cargo, and optional equipment that may be carried by the vehicle. 
193.  Group Home - A place where not more than six (6) physically or mentally impaired or handicapped persons are provided room and board, as well as supervised care and rehabilitation by not more than two (2) persons as licensed by the Texas Department of Mental Health and Mental Retardation. 
194.  Gunsmith (repair only) - A facility licensed by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, for the repair or maintenance of firearms. 
H 
195.  Habitable Structure - A structure designed for human residence or conduct of business. A habitable structure shall not include a barn, shed, or detached garage. 
196.  Half Story - See Story, Half. 
197.  Halfway House - A facility for the housing, rehabilitation and/or training of six (6) or more persons, who are on probation or parole or are pre-released inmates from correctional institutions or other persons found guilty of criminal offenses; or for the housing, rehabilitation, training, counseling or treatment of six (6) or more persons for alcohol chemical or drug abuse and/or dependencies. "Halfway house" shall not include a hospital licensed by the State of Texas or a state licensed physician's office which office does not have facilities for patients to stay overnight. 
198.  Heavy Load Vehicle - A pickup truck having a manufacturer's Gross Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR) of greater than fourteen thousand (14,000) pounds; any other self-propelled vehicle having a manufacturer's Gross Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR) of greater than eleven thousand (11,000) pounds, such as tractor-trailers, buses, box vans, and other similar vehicles; or any towed vehicle with a manufacturer's Maximum Loaded Trailer Weight (MLTW) greater than eleven thousand (11,000) pounds or more than two (2) axles, such as flatbed trailers, utility trailers, and cargo trailers. Heavy Load Vehicle does not include Recreational Vehicles or Agricultural Vehicles and Equipment. The term "truck" shall be construed to mean "Heavy Load Vehicle" unless specifically stated otherwise. For dispute resolution, the owner shall provide proof of the weight of vehicle. 
199.  Heavy Machinery Sales, Service, and Storage - A building or open area used for the display, sale, rental or storage of heavy machinery, either machines in general or a group of machines which function together as a unit. 
200.  Heliport - An area of land or water or a structural surface which is used, or intended for use, for the landing and taking off of helicopters, and any appurtenant areas which are used, or intended for use for heliport buildings and other heliport facilities. 
201.  Helistop - The same as a heliport, except that no refueling, maintenance, repairs or storage of helicopters is permitted. 
202.  High Risk or Hazardous Industrial Use - Facility or area for activities or products that have the potential to be dangerous, extremely obnoxious, or cause substantial environmental impacts on or beyond the boundaries of the property on which the activity or use is conducted. High-impact uses include but are not limited to the following activities: 
a.  Manufacture and/or bulk storage and testing of explosives, fireworks, or munitions. 
b.  Refining petroleum and the storage and distribution of natural and liquid gas or other petroleum derivatives in bulk including terminals, tank farms, or other similar facilities. 
c.  Manufacture, storage, compounding, or handling of radioactive materials or wastes. 
d.  Manufacture, blending, or mixture of pesticides, certain acids, and fertilizer. 
e.  Stockyards, feed pens, livestock sales with barns, and/or shipping facilities. Rendering of animal fats, slaughtering or processing of animals, and industrial manufacturing processes using the following raw materials: bones, garbage, offal, and dead animals. 
f.  Refining of raw materials, such as, but not limited to chemicals, rubber, wood, or wood pulp, into other products. 
203.  Hike and Bike Trail - A smooth path designated for pedestrians and cyclists. 
204.  Hip Roof - A roof having sloping sides on all ends. 
205.  Home Occupation - Any occupation or activity carried on principally by the inhabitants of a dwelling which is clearly secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes, provided that: the existence of the occupation or activity does not change neighborhood character or substantially increase traffic to and from the dwelling; no trading in merchandise or selling of goods or services is carried out on a regular basis; no merchandise is displayed; and no mechanical equipment is used except types that are customary for purely domestic or household purposes and which do not create obnoxious conditions such as noise, odor, smoke or electrical interference. Uses that are not considered Home Occupations include beauty and barber shops, tearooms or restaurants, rest homes or clinics, bed and breakfast facilities, cabinet repair shops, metalworking shops, and auto repair shops. 
206.  Home Owners Association (HOA) - Means an incorporated or unincorporated association that: 
a.  is designated as the representative of the owners of property in a residential subdivision; 
b.  has a membership primarily consisting of the owners of the property covered by the dedicatory instrument for the residential subdivision; and 
c.  manages or regulates the residential subdivision for the benefit of the owners of property in the residential subdivision. 
207.  Homestead property - An individual residential property that has been declared as a homestead in accordance with the Texas State Law. 
208.  Hospitals - A facility for providing health services primarily for in-patient medical or surgical care for the sick and injured and including facilities such as laboratories, out-patient departments, training facilities, central services facilities, and staff offices that are an integral part of the facilities. 
209.  Hotel - A building or group of buildings designed for and occupied as a temporary place of dwelling place of individuals and providing four or more room units where linen and housekeeping services are provided. Non-emergency access to rooms shall be provided through interior, space-conditioned corridors. 
210.  HUD-Code Manufactured Home - A structure constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development for code manufactured homes. 
211.  Human Scale (also Pedestrian Scale) - The proportional relationship of the physical environment (buildings, trees, parking lots, streets, etc.) to human dimensions. 
I - J 
212.  Illumination - Quantity of light, measured in foot-candles. 
213.  Improvements (public and private) - Any structural, material, or physical change incident to servicing or furnishing facilities for a subdivision such as, but not limited to, grading, street pavements, curb and gutter, driveway approaches, sidewalks and pedestrian ways, water mains and lines, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, culverts, bridges, utilities, lakes, waterways, canals, permanent street monuments, and other appurtenant construction; demolition of structures, planting and landscaping; removal of trees and other vegetative cover. 
214.  Impervious: Not allowing entrance or passage. Often referring to a surface that will not allow rain water to pass through. 
215.  Indoor Gun Range - Any indoor facility open to the public and occupying all or a portion of a building where firearms are discharged for testing or recreation purposes. 
216.  Industrial, Manufacturing - Establishments engaged in the manufacturing or transformation of materials into new products. These establishments are usually described as plants and factories, and characteristically use power driven machines and materials handling equipment. Manufacturing production is usually carried on for the wholesale market, rather than for direct sale to the domestic consumer. 
217.  Ingress and Egress - A place or means of access; an entrance and exit, respectively. 
218.  Installation - When used in reference to manufactured housing, installation means the construction of the foundation systems, whether temporary or permanent, and the placement and erection of a manufactured home or manufactured home components on the foundation system and includes supporting, blocking, leveling, securing, anchoring, and proper connection of multiple or expandable sections or components, and minor adjustments. 
219.  Intersection - The point at which two paths cross, primarily streets, alleys, or sidewalks. 
220.  J-Swing Garage - Garages upon which the entry point from the street is located in front of the house and the garage door is perpendicular to the front of the house. See Section 8.17 for illustration. 
221.  Junkyard - See salvage yard or wrecking yard 
K 
222.  Kennels (Indoor Pens) - An establishment with indoor pens in which more than four (4) dogs or domesticated animals more than one year old are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained or sold for commercial purposes. 
223.  Kennels (Outdoor Pens) - An establishment with outdoor pens in which more than four (4) dogs or domesticated animals more than one year old are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained or sold for commercial purposes. 
224.  Kiosks - A small, free-standing, one-story structure having a maximum floor area of three hundred fifty (350) square feet and used for commercial purposes, such as automatic teller machines or the posting of temporary information and/or posters, notices and announcements. If a kiosk is to be occupied, it shall have a minimum floor area of twenty-five (25) square feet. 
225.  KISD - Keller Independent School District 
L 
226.  Land Planner - Persons other than surveyors or engineers who also possess and can demonstrate a valid proficiency in the planning of residential, commercial, industrial, and other related developments. Such proficiency often has been acquired by education in the field of landscape architecture or other specialized planning curriculum and/or by actual experience and practice in the field of land planning, and who may be a member of the American Institute of Certified Planners (AICP). 
227.  Landscape Architect - A professional registered with the State of Texas as a Landscape Architect and who plans and designs environments through effective placement of structures, vehicular and pedestrian ways, and plantings. 
228.  Landscaping - Material such as, but not limited to, grass, ground covers, shrubs, vines, hedges, trees or palms, and non-living durable material commonly used in landscaping, such as, but not limited to, rocks, pebbles, sand, walls or fences, but excluding paving. 
229.  Lateral/distribution lines (Section 5.22) - Those electric or telephone lines used to distribute power from a feeder line to a single subdivision. These electric lines are normally connected to a feeder line through a sectionalizing device such as a fuse. 
230.  Laundromat (or Self-Serve Washateria) - A facility where patrons wash, dry or dry clean clothing and other fabrics in machines operated by the patron. 
231.  Leasehold - A property held by lease. A leasehold property is a piece of real property (including either land or buildings) owned by one party, the lessor, who then legally grants another party, the lessee, the right to use the property for a period of time. The lessor does not give the lessee any actual ownership rights in the property, only possessive rights. There are several different types of leaseholds, each with its own rules. 
232.  Letter of Credit (Section 6.01) - A document from a bank guaranteeing that a seller will receive payment in full as long as certain delivery conditions have been met. In the event that the buyer is unable to make payment on the purchase, the bank will cover the outstanding amount. 
233.  Library - an organized collection of sources of information and similar resources, made accessible to a defined community for reference or borrowing. 
234.  Light Load Vehicle - A pickup truck having a manufacturer's Gross Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR) of fourteen thousand (14,000) pounds or less; or any other self-propelled vehicle having a manufacturer's Gross Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR) of eleven thousand (11,000) pounds or less. Light Load Vehicle also includes any towed vehicle with a manufacturer's Maximum Loaded Trailer Weight (MLTW) of eleven thousand (11,000) pounds or less, and/or having no more than two axles, such as boat trailers, motorcycle trailers, utility trailers, and cargo trailers. A Light Load Vehicle may not have more than two (2) axles. Light Load Vehicle includes Automobiles and Motorcycles, but not Recreational Vehicles or Agricultural Vehicles and Equipment. 
235.  Light Manufacturing - Manufacturing of finished products or parts (20% or more of the predominant business), predominantly from previously prepared materials, including fabrication, assembly, and packaging of such products, and incidental storage, sales and distribution of such products, but excluding basic industrial processing. 
236.  Lightweight Masonry Siding - See Siding, Lightweight Masonry. 
237.  Limits of Construction - Delineation on the graphic exhibit, which shows the boundary of the area within which all construction activity will occur. 
238.  Loading Space - An off-street space or berth used for the delivery and loading or unloading of vehicles. 
239.  Loading Dock - A platform for loading or unloading trucks or freight trains. 
240.  Logo - A symbol or other design adopted by an organization to identify its products, uniform, vehicles, etc. 
241.  Lot - Any tract, plot of land, portion of a subdivision, or other parcel of land intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership, or possession, or for building development, or intended to be occupied by one main building and the required parking, or a group of main buildings, and accessory building and uses, including such open spaces as are required by the Code, and other laws or Ordinances, and having its principal frontage on a public street or officially approved place. Lots or tracts under one ownership shall be considered as one lot for the purpose of development. (see Section 8.18 - Figure 1). 
242.  Lot Area - The total area, measured on a horizontal plane, included within lot lines (see Section 8.18 - Figure 2). 
243.  Lot, Corner - A lot which has at least two adjacent sides abutting for their full lengths on a street, provided that the interior angle at the intersection of such two sides is less than one hundred thirty-five degrees (135°) (see Section 8.18 - Figure 4). 
244.  Lot Coverage - The lot area covered by all buildings located thereon, including the area covered by all overhanging roofs. Lot coverage may include other impervious surfaces as called out in this Code. 
245.  Lot Depth - The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines (see Section 8.18 - Figure 2). 
246.  Lot, Double Frontage - A lot having a frontage on two (2) non-intersecting streets, as distinguished from a corner lot (see Section 8.18 - Figure 6). 
247.  Lot, Flag - A lot having access to a street by means of a parcel of land generally having a depth greater than its frontage, but not less than fifty feet (50'). 
248.  Lot, Interior - A lot other than a corner lot. 
249.  Lot Frontage - The dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting on a street, excluding the side dimension of a corner lot. 
250.  Lot Line, Front - The narrower side of the lot abutting a street. Where two lot lines abutting streets are of equal length, the owner shall have a choice in designating which shall be the lot frontage. For a lot which has a boundary line which does not abut the front street line, is not a rear lot line and lies along the same general directional orientation as the front and rear lot lines, said line shall be considered a front lot line in establishing minimum setback lines (see Section 8.18 - Figure 3). 
251.  Lot Line, Rear - The lot line farthest from and most parallel to the front lot line. For triangular lots, the point opposite the front lot line shall be considered the rear lot line and have a value of zero (see Section 8.18 - Figure 3). 
252.  Lot, Reverse Frontage - A corner lot, the rear of which abuts the side of another lot. 
253.  Lot Line, Side - Any lot line not the front or rear lot line. 
254.  Lot Lines or Property Lines - The lines bounding a lot as defined herein. 
255.  Lot of Record - A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the County Clerk of Tarrant County or a lot subdivided by metes and bounds description prior to its date of annexation. 
256.  Lot Width - The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured along a line that is parallel to the front lot line, and measured from the point on the building line that is closest to the front lot line (see Section 8.18 - Figure 1). For irregular-shaped lots, the distance at front and rear setbacks can be averaged. 
257.  Luminaries - An artificial light. 
M 
258.  Main Building - The building or buildings on a lot that is occupied by the primary use. 
259.  Maintenance Bond - A bond that basically functions as an insurance policy on a construction project to make sure a contractor will either correct any defects that arise or that the owner is compensated for those defects. 
260.  Mansard Roof - (Also called a French roof or curb roof) is a four-sided gambrel-style hip roof characterized by two slopes on each of its sides with the lower slope, punctured by dormer windows, at a steeper angle than the upper. 
261.  Masonry, Masonry Façade - Exterior masonry application to include natural and manufactured stone material, fibrous cement products, stucco, brick material, granite, or marble. 
262.  Master Plan or Comprehensive Plan - The term "Master Plan" shall mean the comprehensive plan of the City and adjoining areas adopted by the City Council and the Planning and Zoning Commission, including all its revision. This plan consists of graphic and textual policies which govern the future development of the City and indicates the general location and specific geographic areas recommended for various land uses, transportation routes, public and private buildings, streets, parks, water, sewer, and other public and private developments and improvements. 
263.  Maximum Loaded Trailer Weight - The actual weight of a trailer plus the manufacturer's maximum allowable weight of cargo and equipment that may be carried by the trailer. 
264.  Mausoleum - Property used for the interring of the dead and where bodies are interred above ground in staked vaults. 
265.  Medical Facilities 
a.  Convalescent, Rest or Nursing Home - A health facility used for or customarily occupied by persons recovering from illness or suffering from infirmities of age, and furnished meals or continuing nursing care for compensation. 
b.  Dental, Medical, or Chiropractic Clinic - A facility or group of offices for one or more physicians for the examination and treatment of ill and afflicted human outpatients provided that patients are not kept overnight except under emergency conditions. 
c.  Dental Office or Doctors Office - Same as dental or medical clinic. 
d.  Hospital - An institution providing health services primarily for human inpatient medical or surgical care for the sick or injured and including related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient departments, training facilities, central services facilities, and staff offices which are an integral part of the facilities. 
e.  Massage Establishment - Any place of business in which massage therapy is practiced by a massage therapist, as defined and licensed by State law. "Massage therapy", as a health care service, means the manipulation of soft tissue by hand or through a mechanical or electrical apparatus for the purpose of body massage. The term includes effleurage (stroking), petrissage (kneading), tapotement (percussion), compression, vibration, friction, nerve strokes, and Swedish gymnastics. Massage therapy may include the use of oil, lubricant, salt glows, heat lamps, hot and cold packs, or tub, shower, jacuzzi, sauna, steam or cabinet baths. Equivalent terms for massage therapy are massage, therapeutic massage, massage technology, myo-therapy, body massage, body rub, or any derivation of those terms. Massage therapy is a health care service when the massage is for therapeutic purposes. The terms "therapy" and "therapeutic" do not include diagnosis, the treatment of illness or disease, or any service or procedure for which a license to practice medicine, chiropractic, physical therapy, or podiatry is required by law. Massage therapy does not constitute the practice of chiropractic. 
f.  Minor Emergency Care Clinic - (also known as Urgent Care Medicine clinic) an establishment providing immediate medical service offering outpatient care for the treatment of acute and chronic illness and injury. There is some overlap in the scope of practice between minor emergency and all existing medical specialties that involve direct patient care. Because of the convenience of minor emergency centers, patients choose these facilities when they are unable to see their usual doctor in a timely fashion or choose not to go to a hospital emergency department. (aaucm.org) 
g.  Nursing Home - A home or living quarters where elderly or handicapped persons are provided with lodging, meals and nursing care. 
h.  Optometrist - A person that practices or is in the profession of examining the eyes, by means of suitable instruments or appliances, for defects in vision and eye disorders in order to prescribe corrective lenses or other appropriate treatment. 
i.  Sanitarium - An institution providing health facilities for inpatient medical treatment or treatment and recuperation making use of natural therapeutic agents. 
j.  Surgical Out-patient Facility - An establishment offering any type of surgical procedures and related care which, in the opinion of the attending physician, can be performed safely without requiring inpatient overnight hospital care and exclusive of such surgical and related care as licensed physicians ordinarily may elect to perform in their private offices. 
266.  Mechanical Equipment -Any machinery designed or manufactured for permanent installation in one place, either outside of a building or inside of a mechanical equipment building or room. 
267.  Metal Walls - Metal walls shall include profiled panels, deep ribbed panels, and concealed fastener systems. Exterior finish shall be film laminated or baked on enamel painted to the wall manufacturer's standards. 
268.  Metal Recycling Collection Center - A facility for the collection and temporary storage of recyclable metal materials 
269.  Miniature Golf, Driving Range, and Putting Course - See Entertainment, Outdoor. 
270.  Mixed-Use Residential - A development that contains both residential and non-residential uses in which the ground floors of buildings that front public or private streets shall have a minimum of sixty percent (60%) non-residential uses. Non-residential uses may occupy upper floors. The ground floors of interior buildings not fronting public or private streets may have 100% residential uses. 
271.  Mobile Home - A structure or dwelling that was constructed and designed to be transported on its own chassis on the highway in one or more sections by a prime mover and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems in accordance with Texas Manufactured Housing Standards (Article 5221f V.T.C.S.). 
272.  Mobile Home Display and Sales - The offering for sale, storage, or display of trailers or mobile homes on a parcel of land but excluding the use of such facilities as dwellings either on a temporary or permanent basis. 
273.  Mobile Home Park - A parcel of land not less than five acres nor greater than twenty-five (25) acres which has been designed, improved, or intended to be used or rented for occupancy by one or more mobile homes or trailer houses in designated spaces. 
274.  Mobile Home Space - A plot of ground within a mobile home park, trailer court, or mobile home subdivision designed for the accommodation of one mobile home. 
275.  Model Home - A dwelling in a developing subdivision located on a legal lot of record that is limited to temporary use as a sales office for the subdivision and to provide an example of the dwellings which have been built or which are proposed to be built in the same subdivision. 
276.  Modular Home (or Industrialized Housing) - "Modular home" means a structure or building module as defined, under the jurisdiction and control of the Texas Department of Labor and Standards and that is installed and used as a residence by a consumer, transportable in one or more sections on a temporary chassis or other conveyance device, and designed to be used on a permanent foundation system. The term includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained in the structure. The term does not include a mobile home as defined in the Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Act (Article 5221f V.T.C.S.); nor does it include building modules incorporating concrete or masonry as the primary structural component. 
277.  Monuments and Headstones Sales with Outside Storage -The use of any land area for the outside display and sale of monuments and headstones for cemetery grave markings. 
278.  Motel -A roadside hotel designed primarily for motorists, typically having the rooms arranged in a low building with parking directly outside. 
279.  Motorcycle - A usually two-wheeled self-propelled vehicle having one or two saddles or seats, and which may have a sidecar attached. For purposes of this Code, motorbikes, motor scooters, mopeds, and similar vehicles are classified as motorcycles. 
280.  Motorcycle Sales Services - See Automobile Sales 
281.  Motor Vehicle - Any self-propelled vehicle, such as automobiles, motorcycles and light load and heavy load vehicles. 
282.  Multi-Use Building - Also Mixed Use - a combination of complimentary uses (such as retail sales, restaurants, upper floor residential dwelling, etc.) that would be in separate buildings under traditional zoning. 
283.  Multiple-Family Dwelling - Three or more dwelling units on a single lot designed to be occupied by three or more families living independently of one another, exclusive of hotels or motels. 
284.  Municipal/Public Domain Property - Any area, land, building, structure, and/or facility, which is owned, used, leased, or operated by the City of Keller, Texas or property in which the City has a legal or equitable ownership interest. Examples of this would include City Hall, right-of-ways, easements, trails, public parks, County property, Corp. of Engineers property, State of Texas right-of-ways, library, fire stations, water tower sites, or similar properties. 
285.  Museum or Art Gallery - A building in which objects of historical, scientific, artistic, or cultural interest are stored and exhibited. Art galleries may also sell the exhibits. 
N 
286.  New Car Dealer - Retail sales of new automobiles or light load vehicles, including, as a minor part of the business, the sales of used automobiles or light load vehicles. 
287.  Newspaper Printing - See Printing. 
288.  Nonconforming Use - A building, structure, or use of land lawfully occupied at the time of the effective date of this Code or amendments thereto, but which does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is situated. 
289.  Nonconforming Structure - A structure that does not comply with the zoning category of the property on which it rests. 
290.  Non-Residential Development - Any real estate development for the purposes other than the provision of housing. 
291.  Non-Whip Antenna - An antenna which is not a whip antenna, such as dish antennas, panel antennas, etc. 
O 
292.  Occupancy - The use or intended use of the land or buildings by proprietors or tenants. 
293.  Office, Professional and General Administrative - A room or group of rooms used for the provision of executive, management, or administrative services. Typical uses include administrative offices, and services including real estate, insurance, property management, investment, personnel, travel, secretarial services, telephone answering, and business offices of public utilities, organizations and associations, but excluding medical offices. 
294.  Office Center - A building or complex of buildings used primarily for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry or government, or like activity that may include ancillary services for office workers such as a coffee shop, newspaper or candy stand. 
295.  Office, City, County, State, and Other Governmental - A room or group of rooms used for the provision of executive, management, or administrative services for conducting the affairs of official governmental agencies. This will include administrative, proprietary and fiduciary activities. 
296.  Office-Showroom/Warehouse - An establishment with a minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) of its total floor area devoted to storage and warehousing, but not accessible to the general public. The remaining area may include retail and wholesale sales areas, sales offices, and display areas for products sold and distributed from the storage and warehousing areas. 
297.  Office Warehouse - An establishment that includes an office front and warehouse space behind, beside or above. 
298.  Officially Approved Place of Access - Access, other than a dedicated street, to a property which is approved by the City of Keller. 
299.  Off-Site Facilities or Improvements - Off-site facilities or improvements in excess of those required for service to the site. These include all oversizing for streets, sewer lines, water lines, storm drainage, as well as increasing the capacity of facilities, such as water storage tanks and waste water treatment plants. 
300.  Oil or Gas Extraction - The recovery of oil or natural gas, by means of drilling or digging a hole in the earth from which petroleum flows or is pumped. Also includes the means necessary to encourage recovery such as fracking. 
301.  On-Site Facilities or Improvements - On-site shall mean those existing or proposed facilities or improvements constructed within the property boundaries of the plat. On-site shall also mean those existing or proposed facilities required to be constructed or improved immediately adjacent to the property that are required to serve the development. These facilities include streets, water lines, sewer lines, storm drainage, curb and gutter, and any other construction or reconstruction to serve the property. 
302.  Open Space - An outdoor, unenclosed area located on the ground or on a roof, balcony, deck, porch, or terrace designed and accessible for outdoor living, recreation, pedestrian access, or landscaping, but not including roads, parking areas, driveways, or other areas intended for vehicular travel. 
303.  Open Space, Common - Open space within a development, not within individually owned lots or dedicated for public use, but which is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents or occupants of the development. Common open space does not include areas utilized for streets, alleys, driveways, private roads, or adjacent parkways located between the curb and sidewalks. However, the area of recreational activities such as swimming pools, tennis courts, shuffleboard courts, etc., may be included as common open space. 
304.  Open Space, Private - Open space within a development that is contained within individually owned lots and that is designated and intended primarily for the private use of residents or occupants of the lot on which the private open space exists. Private open space does not include areas utilized for streets, alleys, driveways, private roads, off-street parking, or loading areas. 
305.  Optical Store - A retail establishment that sells contact lenses and eyeglasses. 
306.  Optician or Optometrist - See Medical Facilities. 
307.  Outpatient Substance Use Treatment Program for Adolescents - Program licensed through the Texas Department of State Health Services providing substance use treatment for adolescents age 13-19. 
308.  Outside Display - Outside temporary display of finished goods specifically intended for retail sale but not displayed outside overnight. 
309.  Outside Storage - The keeping, displaying, or storing, outside a building, of any goods, material, merchandise, or equipment on a lot or tract for more than twenty-four (24) hours. Also referred to as open storage. This includes vending machines, ice machines, newspaper machines, and other similar machines. 
310.  Outside Storage of Building Materials and Hardware Sales - Materials, tools, and hardware customarily used in the construction of buildings and other structures, including facilities for storage outside a building and sale of ready-mix concrete. 
311.  Overlay Zoning District - A zoning district which is applied over one or more previously established zoning districts, establishing additional or stricter standards and criteria for covered properties in addition to those of the underlying zoning district. 
312.  Overnight Delivery and Service Center - A office/distribution center that sends and receives packages by the truckload. Generally involves a customer service center and a service bay with unloading docks. 
P - Q 
313.  Pad Site - The location of the proposed or actual footprint of a primary building as shown on a grading plan, site plan, or a plot plan. For purposes of initial tree removal, the maximum area of proposed pad site for residential lots as shown on a grading plan, shall not exceed one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the minimum dwelling unit allowed in the zoning district. 
314.  Paint Shop - A commercial establishment where painting services are performed. 
315.  Parcel - Any unplatted or portion of an unplatted tract of land. 
316.  Park or Playground - A recreation facility, recreation center, or park owned or operated by a public agency such as a City or School District and available to the general public. 
317.  Parking Lot - An off-street, ground level area, usually surfaced and improved, for the temporary storage of motor vehicles. 
318.  Parking Space - See Article Five - Subdivision Design Improvement Requirements and Design and Technical Construction Standards (DTCS) and Section 8.18 - Figures 14-18. 
319.  Patio Home (Zero Lot Line Dwelling) - A lot which is designed in such a manner that the side yard and adjacent use easement make maximum use of available land area to preserve an open, yet private, use of the side yard. 
320.  Pavement Width - The portion of a street available for vehicular traffic. Where curbs are laid, it is the portion face-to-face of the curbs. Where there are no curbs, it is measured from the edge of the hard surface. 
321.  Pawn Shop - An establishment where money is loaned on the security of personal property pledged in the keeping of the persons engaged in the business (pawnbroker) and goods may be purchased by the pawnbroker on condition that the goods may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period (Per Texas Finance Code Sec 371.003) and that have been licensed to transact business by the Consumer Credit Commissioner under Chapter 371, Finance Code (per Texas Local Government Code 211.0035). Retail sales also take place of primarily used items. 
322.  Pedestrian Scale - See Human scale. 
323.  Permanent - Intended to exist or function for a long, indefinite period without regard to unforeseeable conditions. 
324.  Permanent Cosmetics - The intradermal application of inks for the purpose of applying permanent make-up aka micropigmentation for the purpose of enhancing natural features (i.e. eyebrow fill-in, eyeliner, lipliner, etc.) 
325.  Permeable Paving - A range of sustainable materials and techniques for permeable pavements with a base and subbase that allow the movement of stormwater through the surface. In addition to reducing runoff, this effectively traps suspended solids and filters pollutants from the water. 
326.  Permeable Surfaces - A surface material that allows water to percolate into the soil to filter out pollutants and recharge the water table. 
327.  Permit - An official document giving someone authorization to do something. 
328.  Person - Any individual, association, firm, corporation, governmental agency, or political subdivision. 
329.  Pet Shop - A retail establishment offering small animals, fish or birds for sale as pets and where all such creatures are housed within the building. 
330.  Pharmacist or Drug Store - A store where medicinal drugs are dispensed and sold. 
331.  Photometric Plan - A drawn plan showing the measurement of light, in terms of its perceived brightness to the human eye. 
332.  Pier (Town Center Zoning "break facades with masonry piers") - A solid support designed to sustain vertical pressure, in particular. 
333.  Planned Development District - Planned associations of uses developed as integral land use units such as industrial parks or industrial districts, offices, commercial or service centers, shopping centers, residential developments of multiple or mixed housing, including attached single-family dwellings or any appropriate combination of uses which may be planned, developed or operated or integral land use units either by a single owner or a combination of owners. 
334.  Planning & Zoning Commission (P & Z) - A board, appointed by the City Council as an advisory body, authorized to recommend changes in the zoning and other planning functions as delegated by the City Council. Also referred to as the "Commission." 
335.  Plant Nursery Retail - A retail establishment that grows small trees, shrubs and herbaceous plants, usually designed for sale to the walk-in public. 
336.  Planting Strip - Grassy or unpaved section of right-of-way between the property line/right-of-way and the edge of the street pavement. 
337.  Plat - A plan of a subdivision of land creating building lots or tracts and showing all essential dimensions and other information essential to comply with the subdivision standards of the City of Keller and approved by the City of Keller and recorded in the plat records of Tarrant County. 
338.  Platted Lot - A lot within a subdivision recorded in the plat records of Tarrant County. 
339.  Plaza - A public square, marketplace, or similar open space in a built-up area. 
340.  Portable Building Sales - An establishment which displays and sells structures capable of being carried and transported to another location, but not including mobile homes. 
341.  Porte-cochère - A roofed structure located on the same lot, which extends from the roof of the principal building over an adjacent driveway that is designed to let vehicles pass from the street to an interior courtyard and used for the shelter of those getting in and out of vehicles. 
342.  Portico - a porch leading to the entrance of a building, or extended as a colonnade, with a roof structure over a walkway, supported by columns or enclosed by walls. 
343.  Preliminary Site Evaluation - The graphic expression of the proposed overall plan for subdividing, improving, and developing a tract shown by superimposing a scale drawing of the proposed land facilities, street layout and direction of curb flow, and other pertinent features with notations sufficient to substantially identify the general scope and detail of proposed development. 
344.  Premises - A lot or unplatted tract, or a combination of contiguous lots or unplatted tracts if the lot or tract, or combination, is under single ownership and is reflected in the plat records of the County. Includes any buildings or structures situated thereon. 
345.  Preservation - The state of being preserved, especially to a specified degree; to keep safe from harm or injury; protect or spare; to keep up; maintain 
346.  Primary Use - The principal or predominant use of any lot or building. 
347.  Principal Building - Same as Main Building. 
348.  Printing or Engraving, Commercial - The production of books, newspapers, or other printed material; print made from an engraved plate, block or other surface. 
349.  Printing or Copy Shop - An establishment that reproduces, in printed form, individual orders from a business, profession, service, industry or government organization and occupies less than four thousand (4,000) square feet. A printing company shall be any printing business which operates in a space of four thousand (4,000) square feet or larger. 
350.  Printing, Newspaper - A paper that is printed and distributed usually daily or weekly and that contains news, articles of opinion, features, and advertising. 
351.  Private Club - An establishment providing social and/or dining facilities which may serve alcoholic beverage service, to an association of persons, and otherwise falling with the definition of, and permitted under the provisions of, that portion of Title 3, Chapter 32, Vernon's Texas Codes Annotated, Alcoholic Beverage Code, as the same may be hereafter amended, and as it pertains to the operation of private clubs. 
352.  Private Recreation Facility or Private Park - A recreation facility operated for the exclusive use of private residents or neighborhood groups and their guests, and not the general public. 
353.  Private Street Residential Development - Any development that contains a group of lots that have no frontage on a publicly dedicated street and are accessible by way of a private street or access easement. Such subdivisions may also limit access to lots or dwelling units by the use of a gate, security guard or other active means of limiting access. 
354.  Produce Stand - A seasonal use for which the primary purpose and design is to sell fruit, vegetables, and similar foods. No cooking of produce occurs on the site. 
355.  Professional Service - Work performed which is commonly identified as a profession, and which may be licensed by the State of Texas. 
356.  Property Owner's Association - See Homeowner's Association. 
357.  Protective Fencing - Temporary chain link fence, temporary wire fence, orange vinyl construction fencing, snow fencing or other similar fencing with a minimum four-foot (4') height. 
358.  Public Art - Any art displayed, performed, or demonstrated in City Parks, rights-of-ways, on the interior or exterior or any city facility. 
(Amended by Ord. No. 1763 on October 20, 2015) 
359.  Public or Municipal Building or Facility - Any building (except a building used primarily for general office purposes) which is owned, leased, primarily used and/or primarily occupied by the State of Texas, the United States, the City of Keller, or any subdivision or agency of the State of Texas, the United States or the City of Keller, or by any public or quasi-public utility. 
R 
360.  Railroad or Bus Passenger Station - Any premises for the transient housing or parking of motor-driven buses and trains and the loading and unloading of passengers. 
361.  Railroad Team Track, Freight Depot or Docks - A facility/place for the loading and unloading of materials on trains. 
362.  Railroad Track and Right-of Way - The right-of-way and track used by a railroad, but not including railroad stations, sidings, team tracks, loading facilities, dockyards, or maintenance areas. 
363.  Real Estate Sales Offices - An office occupied by real estate agents and administrative staff. 
364.  Rear Yard - (See Yard, Rear). 
365.  Recess - Architectural reference to a small space created by building part of a wall further back from the rest. 
366.  Recording Date - The date the plat is filed with the Office of County Clerk of Tarrant County. 
367.  Recreation Center - A place designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, leisure time activities and other customary and usual recreational activities. 
368.  Recreational Vehicle (RV) - Any self-propelled or towed portable, mobile living unit used for temporary human occupancy away from the place of permanent residence of the occupants including motorhomes, travel trailers (bumper-tow and fifth-wheel), camping trailers, and truck campers, regardless of manufacturer's Gross Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR) or Maximum Loaded Trailer Weight (MLTW). A recreational vehicle park is an area or commercial campground for RVs and similar vehicles or trailers to reside, park, rent, or lease on a temporary basis. 
369.  Religious Institution - A building for regular assembly for religious worship which is used primarily and designed for such purpose and those accessory activities which are customarily associated therewith, and the place of residence for ministers, priests, nuns or rabbis on the premises (tax exempt as defined by State law). For the purposes of this Code, bible study and other similar activities which occur in a person's primary residence shall not apply to this definition. 
370.  Rental, Home Furnishings and Appliances - A building or a portion of a building used for the display and rental of home furnishings, electronics and appliances. 
371.  Rental, Tool and Machinery Rental Shop - A building or a portion of a building used for the display and rental of tools, machinery and instruments. 
372.  Rental, Trailer - The display and offering for rent of trailers designed to be towed by light load vehicles 
373.  Rental, Truck and Bus - The rental of new or used panel trucks, vans, trailers, recreational vehicles or motor-driven buses in operable condition and where no repair work is done. 
374.  Replatting - "Replatting" is the resubdivision of any part or all of any block or blocks of a previously platted subdivision, additional lot, or tract. 
375.  Research and Scientific Laboratories - A workplace for the conduct of scientific research. 
376.  Residence - Same as a dwelling; also, when used with District, an area of residential regulations. 
377.  Residential Development or Area - An area of land developed for use in which housing predominates, as opposed to industrial and commercial areas. Housing may vary significantly between, and through, residential areas. These include single-family housing, multi-family residential, or mobile homes. These are delineated by zoning regulations. 
378.  Residential District - District where the primary purpose is residential use. 
379.  Residential Dwelling - Any building or portion thereof, which is designed or used as living quarters for one or more families. 
a.  Dwelling, Multi-Family - Any structure divided by common walls creating more than two, attached dwelling units designed or used as living quarters for one family per dwelling unit on a rental versus ownership basis. 
b.  Dwelling, Condominium - Any structure divided by common walls creating more than two, attached dwelling units designed or used as living quarters for one family per dwelling unit on an ownership versus rental basis. 
c.  Dwelling, Manufactured Home - A structure constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems. The term does not include a recreational vehicle as that term is defined by 24 C.F.R. Section 3282.8(g). 
d.  Dwelling, Single-Family Detached - Any structure not attached to another structure or having shared walls, which is designed or used as living quarters for one family. 
e.  Dwelling, Two-Family or Duplex - Any structure divided by a common wall creating two, attached dwelling units. 
f.  Dwelling, Townhouse - A dwelling that is part of a structure containing three or more dwellings, each designed and constructed for occupancy by one (1) family, with each dwelling attached by a common wall to another with a minimum length of attachment of twenty feet (20'), in which each dwelling is located on a separate platted lot; except that twenty percent (20%) of the total dwellings in a single-family attached (townhouse) project may be included in structures containing only two (2) dwellings. 
380.  Restaurant, Cafe or Cafeteria - An eating establishment where customers are primarily served at tables or self-served and food is consumed on the premises. 
381.  Restaurant Drive Thru/Drive-In Type - An eating establishment where food or drink is served to customers in motor vehicles or where facilities are provided on the premises which encourage the serving and consumption of food in automobiles on or near the restaurant premises. 
382.  Retail or Service, Incidental - The rendering of incidental retailing or services incidental to the primary use. In the Office District, such uses include a barber or beauty shop, smoke shop, candy counter, restaurant, pharmacy or other incidental activity secondary to the primary office occupancy. Incidental uses shall mean uses which occupy less than 15% of the main use. 
383.  Retail Stores and Shops - This major group includes retail stores which sell primarily new merchandise including but not limited to dry goods, apparel and accessories, furniture and home furnishings, small wares, small appliances, hardware, and food. The stores included in this group are known as department stores, variety stores, general merchandise stores, general stores, etc. and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods. 
384.  Retail Sales of Used Goods and Merchandise -An establishment engaged in the selling of used goods and merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods. 
385.  Retaining Wall - A wall that holds back earth or water. 
386.  Retirement Home and/or Nursing Home - See Medical Facilities. 
387.  Right-of-Way - A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced dedication, prescription, or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary sewer, and other similar uses. 
388.  Roller Skating Rink (private) - See Entertainment 
389.  Roof Pitch - A numerical measure of the steepness of a roof. 
390.  Room - A building or portion of a building which is arranged, occupied, or intended to be occupied as living or sleeping quarters but not including toilet or cooking facilities. 
391.  Rooming House - See Boarding House. 
S 
392.  Salvage or Reclamation of Products (Also see Wrecking Yard) - The reclamation and storage of used products or materials. 
393.  Sand, Gravel, Stone or Petroleum Extraction - The process of extracting sand, gravel, stone, petroleum, or other minerals from the earth. See also Drilling. 
394.  Satellite Dish Antenna 
a.  Satellite television reception dish shall mean a round, parabolic apparatus capable of receiving communications from a transmitter relay located in planetary orbit. 
b.  Usable satellite signals shall mean satellite signals, from the major communication satellites that, when viewed on a conventional television set, are at least equal in picture quality to those received from local commercial television stations or by way of cable television. 
395.  School - An institution designed for the teaching of students (or "pupils") under the direction of teachers. 
a.  Private, Primary or Secondary - A school under the sponsorship of a private agency or corporation other than a public or religious agency, having a curriculum generally equivalent to public elementary or secondary schools. This includes parochial schools supported by a particular church or parish. 
b.  Private, Business or Trade - A higher-level learning institution that specializes in providing students with the vocational education and technical skills they need in order to perform the tasks of a particular job. 
c.  Public - A school under the sponsorship of a public agency providing elementary or secondary curriculum. 
d.  University or College - An educational institution designed for instruction, examination, or both, of students in many branches of advanced learning, conferring degrees in various faculties, and often embodying colleges and similar institutions. 
396.  Scientific and Industrial Research Laboratories - Facilities for research including laboratories, experimental equipment, and operations involving compounding or testing of materials or equipment. 
397.  Screened - Shielded, concealed, and effectively hidden from view by a person standing at ground level on an abutting site, or outside the area or feature so screened.. 
398.  Screening Wall - A wall, which provides a visual barrier and is opaque. 
399.  Seasonal Uses - Seasonal uses include the sale of Christmas trees, produce stands, and other temporary uses which occur at certain times of the year. 
400.  Security Fencing - A combination of eight foot (8') fence composed of chain link, wire mesh fabrics or wire mesh panels and fence toppings like barbed wire, concertina wire or spikes topping together. 
401.  Selective Thinning - The removal of selected trees from within a densely forested area. 
402.  Self-Storage - Small individual storage units for rent or lease, restricted solely to the storage of items. The conduct of sales, business or any other activity within the individual storage units, other than storage, shall be prohibited. 
403.  On Site Sewage Treatment System - A small-scale sewage treatment system common in areas with no connection to main sewage pipes provided by local governments or private corporations. An aerobic septic system is a small-scale sewage treatment system similar to a septic tank system, but which uses an aerobic process for digestion rather than just the anaerobic process used in septic systems. 
404.  Service Area - 1. a roadside area where services are available to motorists. 2. The area covered by the signal of a broadcasting station. 
405.  Service Line (Section 5.22) - Those electric lines used to connect between the utilities' supply system or lateral lines and the end-users meter box. Also called Utility lines. 
406.  Sexually Oriented Uses - In accordance with Texas Local Government Code, Sec. 243.002: Establishments and businesses a sex parlor, nude studio, modeling studio, love parlor, adult bookstore, adult movie theater, adult video arcade, adult movie arcade, adult video store, adult motel, or other commercial enterprise the primary business of which is the offering of a service or the selling, renting, or exhibiting of devices or any other items intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customer. (Refer to Ordinance No. 643) 
407.  Shared access - Lots have "mutual" driveways that both lot owners share to access property. Generally preserved in an access easement. 
408.  Shed Roof - A roof having a single slope. 
409.  Shopping Center - A group of primarily retail and service commercial establishments planned, constructed and managed as a total entity with customer and employee parking provided on-site, provision for goods delivery separated from customer access, provision of aesthetically appropriate design and protection from the elements. 
410.  Siding, Lightweight Masonry - Single-faced, cellulose fiber-reinforced cement building boards. These boards are available in various finish textures, and are generally supplied unprimed for subsequent application of an appropriate primer to be covered with an exterior grade acrylic, latex, polyvinyl alcohol, semi-gloss or flat paint or similar exterior wall covering. 
411.  Side Entry Garage - garages upon which the entry point from the street is on the side of the house and garage door is perpendicular to the front of the house. On corner lots, the garage door may be parallel to the street and have a side entry. See Section 8.17 for illustration. 
412.  Side Yard - See Yard, Side. 
413.  Signs 
a.  Billboard - A non-premise sign over two-hundred (200) square feet in area. 
(Amended by Ord. No. 1799 on July 5, 2016) 
b.  Development - A sign constructed on an ongoing or future development that advertises the future development, the funding company, the construction company, the utility company(s), the developer, the property owner, and/or any other advertisement typical to ongoing or future construction. 
c.  Effective Area - The area enclosed by drawing a rectangle of horizontal and vertical lines which fully contain all extremities of the sign drawn to scale, exclusive of its supports. The measurement is to be calculated from viewpoint, which gives the largest rectangle of that kind, including both sides as the viewpoint is rotated horizontally around the site. The effective area for attached signs shall mean the sum of the areas of the minimum imaginary rectangles enclosing each word attached to any particular facade or side Section 8.17, Figure 19. 
d.  Entry-way or Portal - A sign installed by the city and generally used to inform travelers they have arrived in Keller or to a specific area within Keller. 
e.  Fence Wrap (Mesh Screen) - An opaque type fence that includes graphics, typically printed on a flex mesh or flex vinyl material, that is be used to block a construction site from view of the public while advertising the future use of the property. 
f.  Flags - Cloth or fabric devices moved by the wind that are mounted to a pole and display messages, emblems, or insignia. 
(Amended by Ord. No. 1799 on July 5, 2016) 
g.  Flashing or Moving Sign - A permanent sign (other than banners or flags) which is animated, changes messages, revolves, swings, or is otherwise designed to move by mechanical means or by the force of wind. 
h.  Landmark - An object or feature of a landscape or town that is easily seen and recognized from a distance, especially one that enables someone to establish their location. 
i.  Luminance - The brightness of a sign or a portion thereof expressed in terms of footcandles. For the purposes of this chapter, luminance shall be determined by the use of an exposure meter calibrated to standards established by the National Bureau of Standards. 
j.  Murals - A painting or other work of art executed directly on a wall. 
k.  Premises - A lot or unplatted tract, or a combination of contiguous lots or unplatted tracts if the lot or tract, or combination, is under single ownership and is reflected in the plat records of the County. 
l.  Searchlights - A powerful outdoor electric light with a concentrated beam that can be turned in the required direction. 
m.  Sign - Any device, flag, banner, light, figure, letter, word, message, symbol, plaque, or poster visible from outside the premises on which it is located and designed to inform or attract the attention of persons not on that premises, including searchlights. 
n.  Sign, Abandoned - A sign which, for at least six (6) continuous months, does not identify or advertise a bona fide business, lessor, service, owner, product, or activity; for which no legal owner can be found; or which pertains to a time, event, or purpose which no longer applies. 
o.  Sign, address - Any sign which is commonly associated with illustrating the street address, as issued by the governing body. 
p.  Sign, Attached - Any sign attached to, applied on, or supported by, any part of a building (such as a wall or roof) which encloses or covers usable space. (Also called wall sign) 
q.  Sign, Detached - Any sign connected to the ground which is not an attached sign, inclusive of signs on movable objects, except signs on vehicles which are moving or are parked only temporarily, incidental to their principal use for transportation. (Also termed "pole signs" or "free-standing sign") 
r.  Sign, Wind Device - Any flag, hot air balloon, banner, pennant, streamer, or similar device that moves freely in the wind and designed to inform or attract the attention of persons not on that premises. 
s.  Sign, Dilapidated or Deteriorated - A sign where any portion of the finished material, surface, or message portion of the sign is visibly faded, flaked, broken off, missing, cracked, splintered, defective, or is otherwise visibly deteriorated or in a state of disrepair so as not to substantially appear as it was intended or designed to appear when originally constructed, or whose elements or the structural support or frame members are visibly bent, broken, dented, or torn, twisted, leaning, or at angles other than those at which it was originally erected (such as may result from being blown or by the failure of a structural support). 
t.  Sign, Electronic Message Board - A sign with characters, letters, or other content that can be changed, altered, or rearranged electrically or electronically without physically altering the permanent physical face or surface of a sign. 
u.  Sign, Hanging - A small signboard, as one indicating a professional office. Sometimes referred to as a shingle sign. 
v.  Sign, Hazardous or Nuisance - Any sign that is located in a manner that poses a hazard or nuisance; or illuminated with intensity to cause glare or brightness to degrees that could constitute a hazard or nuisance. This includes moving, flashing, intermittently lighted, changing colors, beacons, revolving or similarly constructed signs. 
w.  Sign, Illuminated - Any sign with internal illumination. 
x.  Sign, Message Board - A sign with removable characters, letters, or other content that can be changed, altered, or rearranged without physically altering the permanent physical face or surface of a sign. The message of a message board sign can only be varied manually and not by electrical, electronic, or non-physical other means. 
y.  Sign, Monument - A sign that is supported by a base of at least 75% of the sign width and is independent from any building (see Section 8.17 - Figure 12). 
z.  Sign, Movement Control - A sign which directs vehicular or pedestrian movement within or onto the premises on which the movement control sign is located. 
aa.  Sign, Off-premises - Any sign advertising a business, activity, goods, products or services not usually located on the premises where the sign is located or which directs persons to any premise other than where the sign is located. 
bb.  Sign, On-premise - Any sign, the content of which relates to the premises on which it is located, referring exclusively to the name, location, products, persons, accommodations, services or activities of or on those premises, or the sale, lease, or construction of those premises. 
cc.  Sign, Panel/Face - That portion of the sign, excluding the supporting structure, where copy can be placed. 
dd.  Sign, Political - Any type of non-premises sign which refers only to the issues or candidates involved in a political election. 
ee.  Sign, Portable - A sign designed to be readily moved from one location to another and which does not rely on a building or fixed foundation for its structural support. This definition shall include but is not limited to signs commonly referred to as mobile or trailer sign, T-frame, A-frame, sandwich board and sidewalk signs. Includes signs on vehicles left in one location for extended periods of time. 
ff.  Sign, Projecting - Any sign which extends out or beyond the face of the building more than eighteen inches (18") measured to the inside face of the sign. 
gg.  Sign, Sandwich Board - A specific kind of portable sign with an A-frame design. 
hh.  Sign, Sidewalk, Street, etc. - a specific kind of portable sign. 
ii.  Sign, Shingle - A small type of projecting sign that is attached to the wall with a post from which the sign hangs. 
(Amended by Ord. No. 1799 on July 5, 2016) 
jj.  Sign, State Law - Any type of which is regulated by the State of Texas. 
kk.  Sign Support - Any pole, post, strut, cable, or other structural fixture or framework necessary to hold and secure a sign, providing that said fixture or framework is not imprinted with any picture, symbol or word using characters in excess of one inch in height, nor is internally or decoratively illuminated. 
ll.  Signs, Temporary - A sign temporarily supplementing the permanent signs on the premises. 
mm.  Sign, Unified-Lot - A sign located on a premise consisting of two or more contiguous lots and/or tracts of land that the owners have agreed to treat as one lot for the limited purpose of providing shared signage. 
nn.  Sign, Vehicular - Any sign on any vehicle parked temporarily, incidental to its principal use for transportation. This definition shall not include signs which are being transported to a site of permanent erection or identification, company name or logo painted or permanently affixed to the vehicle or signs on vehicles transporting goods or providing services. 
oo.  Weekend Directional Signs - Temporary signs used during the weekend, often for real estate purposes. 
pp.  Way-finding - Signs used to convey the locations of destinations or attractions to travelers and direct them to these destinations or attractions. 
457.  Site Plan - A scaled drawing that shows building, parking, landscaping, and all other infrastructure improvements. 
458.  Skirting (in relation to manufactured dwellings) - To border, wrap, or cover with a skirt or something suggesting a skirt in appearance or function; to pass along or around the border or edge of a manufactured house. 
459.  Small Engine Repair Shop - Shop for repair of lawnmower, chain saws, lawn equipment, and other machines with one-cylinder engines. 
460.  Smart House Facilities - A residence that has appliances, lighting, heating, air conditioning, TVs, computers, entertainment audio & video systems, security, and camera systems that are capable of communicating with one another and can be controlled remotely by a time schedule, from any room in the home, as well as remotely from any location in the world by phone or internet. 
461.  Soffit Boards, Lightweight Masonry - Single- faced, cellulose fiber-boards have a smooth, unsanded surface and are generally supplied already primed with an opaque acrylic, latex, polyvinyl alcohol, semi-gloss or flat paint or equivalent exterior wall covering. 
462.  Solar Panel - A panel designed to absorb the sun's rays as a source of energy for generating electricity or heating. 
463.  Sound - Vibrations that travel through the air or another medium and can be heard when they reach a person's or animal's ear. 
464.  Special Event - An event or gathering open to the public, with or without ticket purchase, in areas or venues not specifically designated for that purpose and which requires a temporary exception to otherwise applicable rules or requirements. Any event or gathering that requires: 
a.  The temporary complete or partial closure of a public street; 
b.  The temporary closure or restriction of access to public property; 
c.  The temporary offer of merchandise, food, or beverages on public property or on private property where not otherwise permitted by the Code or the applicable certificate of occupancy; 
d.  The temporary erection of a tent on public property or on private property where not otherwise permitted by the Code or the applicable certificate of occupancy; 
e.  The temporary erection of a stage, band shell, portable building, grandstand, or bleachers on public property or on private property where not otherwise permitted by the Code or the applicable certificate of occupancy; 
f.  The temporary use, for other than storage, of a trailer or van on public property or on private property where not otherwise permitted by the Code or the applicable certificate of occupancy; 
g.  The temporary use of equipment to amplify and transmit sound, which exceeds ambient (background) sound pressure levels at the property lines; or 
h.  The placement of portable toilets on public property or on private property where not otherwise permitted by the Code or the applicable certificate of occupancy. 
465.  Special Exception - A use of property that is allowed under a zoning ordinance under specified conditions. 
466.  Specific Use Permit - Formal permission to allow a specific exception to the zoning regulations from a list of acceptable exceptions for a particular parcel of land in a district of a particular zoning character. 
467.  Stable, Commercial - A stable used for the boarding or keeping of more than one (1) horse, mule, donkey or pony per acre, that is not a private stable. 
468.  Stable, Private - An area used solely for the owner's private purposes for the safe keeping of horses, mules, donkeys or ponies. 
469.  Stealth Tower - Wireless communication towers that are disguised in order to blend in with their surroundings. 
470.  Stone Material - Masonry construction using stone material may consist of granite, marble, limestone, slate, river rock, and other hard and durable naturally occurring all- weather stone. Cut stone, cast stone, manufactured stone, and dimensioned stone techniques are considered stone material. 
471.  Storage Yard - A land area used for outdoor storage of materials, equipment, tools, products, and vehicles. 
472.  Story - That portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or, if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. The average height for a story shall be defined as twelve feet (12'). The definition of a story does not include parapets, gables, and other normal roof structures. 
473.  Story, Half - A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than three feet (3') above the top floor level, and in which space not more than two-thirds (2/3) of the floor area is finished off for use. A half story containing independent apartment or living quarters shall be counted as a full story. 
474.  Street - A public right-of-way, however designated, which provides vehicular access to adjacent land. 
a.  Major Thoroughfares (Also arterial streets, primary thoroughfares, etc.) provide vehicular movement from one neighborhood to another, to distant points within the urban area or to freeways or highways leading to other communities. 
b.  Collector Streets (Also feeder streets, secondary thoroughfares, etc.) provide vehicular circulation within neighborhoods and from minor streets to major thoroughfares. 
c.  Local Residential Streets (Also minor thoroughfares or streets, etc.) are primarily for providing direct vehicular access to abutting residential property. 
475.  Street Edge - The back of curb. In areas with no curb, the intended end of pavement at the street shoulder area. 
476.  Street Furniture - Objects placed or fixed in the right-of-way for public use, such as mailboxes, road signs, and benches. 
477.  Street, Intersection - Any street which joins another street at an angle, whether or not it crosses the other. 
478.  Street Yard - The area between the building front or building line and the front property (right-of-way) line. 
479.  Streetscape - All the visible features of an area of street, often considered in terms of their aesthetic appeal. 
480.  Structure - Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or which is attached to something having a location on the ground (also see definition of Building). 
481.  Structural Alterations - Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as load bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls. 
482.  Storage Container - Unmodified, stackable metal containers enclosed on all sides, originally designed and built to serve for commercial shipping. Storage Containers include, but are not limited to cargo containers, shipping containers, semi-truck trailers, and any other portable metal container used to store personal property of any kind. 
483.  Storage or Wholesale Warehouse - A building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials. 
484.  Street Network - A system of interconnecting lines and points that represent a system of streets or roads for a given area. 
485.  Stucco - Fine plaster used for coating wall surfaces or molding into architectural decorations. 
486.  Studios for Photographer, Musician, and Artist - A building or portion of a building used as a place of work by a photographer, musician or artist. 
487.  Studios for Radio and Television - A building or portion of a building used as a place for radio or television broadcasting. 
488.  Subdivider - Any person or any agent thereof, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as that term is defined herein. In any event, the term "subdivider" shall be restricted to include only the owner, equitable owner, or authorized agent of that owner, such as a developer of land sought to be divided. 
489.  Subdivision- A division or resubdivision of any tract of land situated within the corporate limits, or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of such limits, for the purpose of transfer of ownership, layout of any subdivision of any tract of land or any addition, or for the layout of building lots, or streets, alleys or parts of other portions for public use or the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto. 
490.  Substandard Street - An existing street or highway that does not meet the minimum specifications in the Thoroughfare Standards Ordinance and City Construction Standards and Specifications, or if a State Highway or F. M. Highway does not meet the minimum standard specifications of the State Department of Highways and Public Transportation and is not constructed to the ultimate extent for the type of roadway it is designated for in the Major Thoroughfare Plan. 
491.  Surveyor - A licensed state land surveyor or a registered professional land surveyor, as authorized by the Texas statutes to practice the profession of surveying. 
T 
492.  Tattoo Shop - The establishment for the application of intradermal inks for the purpose of applying permanent art, aka micropigmentation, to the body. 
493.  Telecommunications - The transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received. 
494.  Telecommunications Antenna - An antenna used to provide a telecommunications service. 
495.  Telecommunications Service - The offering of telecommunications for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used. 
496.  Telecommunications Tower - A structure more than ten (10) feet tall, built primarily to support one (1) or more telecommunications antennas. 
497.  Telephone Line and Exchange - A line for the transmission of telephone signals and a central office in which telephone lines are connected to permit communication but not including a business office, storage or repair yards. 
498.  Temporary - Used or lasting for only a specified, narrow period of time; not permanent. 
499.  Temporary Building - Any non-residential pre-manufactured structure which is not originally manufactured or constructed at its use site, required on-site installation of utilities and/or foundation. 
500.  Theater (Drive-In) - An open lot with its appurtenant facilities devoted primarily to the showing of motion pictures or theatrical productions on a paid admission basis to patrons seated in automobiles. 
501.  Theater (Indoor) - A building or part of a building devoted to the showing of motion pictures, or for dramatic, musical or live performances. 
502.  Throat Length - With regard to streets, the distance between the street and the internal traffic lane at driveway locations. 
503.  Tire Dealer, No Open Storage - A retail establishment engaged in the sale and/or installation of tires for vehicles, but without open storage. 
504.  Tire Dealer, With Open Storage - A retail establishment engaged in the sale and/or installation of tires for vehicles, with open storage. 
505.  Tire Re-Treading and Capping - The process by which tires are treated with a new tread. 
506.  Trade and Commercial Schools - Establishments, other than public or parochial schools, private primary or secondary schools, or colleges, offering training or instruction in a trade, art or occupation. 
507.  Trailer Court - (see Mobile Home Park). 
508.  Trailer - Any towed or non-self-propelled vehicle to be pulled behind an automobile or truck that is designed for hauling animals, produce, goods or commodities, including boats. 
509.  Trailer Home - (See Mobile Home). 
510.  Trailer or Mobile Home Space - (See Mobile Home Space) 
511.  Trailer, Travel or Camping - A portable or mobile living unit used for temporary human occupancy away from the place of residence of the occupants and not constituting the principal place of residence of the occupants or designed to be towed behind another vehicle. 
512.  Transportation and Utility Structures/Facilities - Permanent facilities and structures operated by companies engaged in providing transportation and utility services including but not limited to railroad track rights-of-way, sewage pumping stations, telephone exchanges, transit station turnarounds, water reservoirs and water pumping stations. 
513.  Trash Compactor - is a container used to compact trash or recycling material. 
514.  Tree - Any self-supporting woody perennial plant that will attain a trunk diameter of two inches (2") or more when measured at a point four and one-half feet (4.5') above ground level and normally an overall height of at least fifteen feet (15') at maturity, usually with one (1) main stem or trunk and many branches. It may appear to have several stems or trunks as in several varieties of oaks. 
515.  Tree, Canopy - The extent of the outer layer of leaves of an individual tree or group of trees. 
516.  Tree, Marginal - A tree that is not listed on the tree lists provided in Article 8 of this code; or trees that are on this list that have been determined to be at or near the end of their life span due to age, damage, or disease. 
517.  Tree Mitigation Plan - A plan that requires replacement of trees or payment of funds into a tree replacement fund for those areas/trees that are subject to tree protection. The mitigation plan shall provide for a 1:1 caliper inch replacement ratio of protected trees removed on a property. Tree replacement may take place on the same lot that tree removal took place or within the development that tree removal took place. 
518.  Tree, Park - Trees in public parks and all areas owned by the City to which the public has free access to as a park. 
519.  Tree, Protected/Quality - A tree that is listed within this Code and has a diameter of three inches (3") or greater measured at eighteen inches (18") above ground; an understory tree that has a diameter of two inches (2") or greater measured at eighteen inches (18") above ground (see Section 8.20 - Exhibit A). For a multi-trunk tree, the diameter shall be the total diameter of the largest trunk plus half (1/2) the diameter of each additional trunk (see Section 8.20 - Exhibit E). 
520.  Tree, Replacement - A quality tree of a minimum of three inches (3") in caliper measured at one foot (1') above ground, and a minimum of seven feet (7') in height at the time of planting (see Section 8.20 - Exhibit I). 
521.  Tree Removal - Any activity causing the trees to be removed, damaged, cut, injured, or destroyed. 
522.  Tree, Street - Trees located adjacent to streets within the rights-of-way or within landscaping easements. 
523.  Tree, Survey - A survey of protected or quality trees indicating size, type and location of trees, done by a professional land surveyor, civil engineer, landscape architect, or arborist. 
524.  Tree Topping - The severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches (3") in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. 
525.  Tree, Under Story - A tree that the City has determined has significant positive characteristics worthy of preservation and that does not typically attain great size (see Section 8.20 - Exhibit A). 
526.  Truck - A light or heavy load vehicle (see definitions for Light Load Vehicle and Heavy Load Vehicle). 
527.  Truck and Bus Repair - An establishment providing major and minor automobile repair services to heavy load vehicles. 
528.  Truck Parking Lot - Area for parking heavy load vehicles. 
529.  Truck Terminal - An area and building where cargo is stored and where trucks, including tractors and trailer units, load and unload cargo on a regular basis. May include facilities for the temporary storage of loads prior to shipment. 
530.  Truck Sales (Heavy Trucks) - The display, sale or rental of new or used heavy load vehicles in operable condition. 
531.  Truck Stop - Any building, land, area, or premise, or portion thereof used for the retail dispensing or sales of fuels, lubricants and accessories commonly utilized by heavy load vehicles, but not including those uses listed under Major Automobile Repair, as applying to heavy load vehicles. 
532.  Tubular Steel - A form of Cold-formed steel (CFS) it is the common term for products made by rolling or pressing thin gauges of sheet steel into goods. Cold-formed steel goods are created by the working of sheet steel using stamping, rolling, or presses to deform the sheet into a usable product. Cold worked steel products are commonly used in all areas of manufacturing of durable goods like appliances or automobiles but the phrase cold form steel is most prevalently used to described construction materials. Cold-formed steel construction materials differ from other steel construction materials known as hot-rolled steel. The manufacturing of cold-formed steel products occurs at room temperature using rolling or pressing. The strength of elements used for design is usually governed by buckling. The construction practices are more similar to timber framing using screws to assemble stud frames. 
U 
533.  Upholstery, boats and cars - An establishment for the production and sale of soft coverings for boats and cars. 
534.  Upholstery, furniture and cabinets - An establishment for the production, display and sale of cabinets, furniture and soft coverings for furniture 
535.  Usable Open Space - An open area or recreational facility which is designed and intended to be used for outdoor living and/or recreation and meets the requirements of Section 8.03 (L.6). 
536.  Use - The purpose for which land or buildings are or may be occupied. 
537.  Used Car Dealer - Retail sales or offering for sale of used automobiles or light load vehicles. 
538.  Utility Distribution/Transmission Lines - Facilities which serve to distribute and transmit electrical power, gas and water, including but not limited to electrical transmission lines, gas transmission lines, telephone lines and metering stations, whether operated by the City or private utility company. 
539.  Utility Duct Bank (Section 5.11(G)) - A group of conduits designed to protect and consolidate cabling to and from buildings. In a duct bank, data and electrical cables are laid out within PVC conduits that are bundled together; these groupings of conduit are protected by concrete and metal casings. Duct banks are often buried, allowing contractors to consolidate the wiring for a building into centralized underground paths. 
411.  Utility Lines - Lines of service (such as a supply of electricity or water) that is provided to the public. See Feeder or Transmission Line. 
545.  Utility Service (defined in Section 5.22) - The facilities of any person, firm, or corporation providing electric, telephone, TV cable, or any other such item or service for public use but not provided by the City of Keller. 
546.  Utility Structures - Structural facilities constructed and operated by private utility companies or other governmental entities (other than the City of Keller), including but not limited to, power substations, telephone exchanges, sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, water pumping stations, water storage tanks, and water treatment plants. 
V 
547.  Vacating Plat - A document that functions to legally void a prior plat or portion of a plat and is approved by the City of Keller and recorded in the plat records of Tarrant County. 
548.  Variance - Any deviation from any part of this code. Hearing and approving authority for each type of variance is provided in specific sections. 
549.  Veterinarian Clinic - An establishment where animals and pets are admitted for examination and medical treatment (also see Kennels - Indoor and Outdoor Pens). 
550.  Veterinarian Office with Outside Pens - A veterinary office that includes animal boarding facilities that are not wholly enclosed within a building. 
551.  Visibility Area (Corner Clearance, Visibility Easement) - An area preserved free of obstructions (signs, landscape, etc.) to maintain clear visibility for vehicles at intersection stop locations, and vehicles on the major roadway within a set of given dimensions. 
W - X 
552.  Wallpaper, Flooring, and Carpet Supply - A wholesale or retail distributor of wall and floor coverings. 
553.  Warehouse Uses without Outside Storage - A large building where raw materials or manufactured goods may be stored before their export or distribution for sale. Generally include loading docks/bays for commercial truck deliveries. 
554.  Waste Container - is a container used for trash or recycling purposes, including but not limited to fryer grease recycling bin or vessel. 
555.  Whip Antenna - An Omni-directional dipole antenna of cylindrical shape which is no more than six (6) inches in diameter. 
556.  Wholesale Distribution Center and Warehousing - an establishment offering wholesaling, storage or warehousing services not classified in any other land use category. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, wholesale distributors, storage warehouses, moving and storage firms, and trucking and shipping operations. A facility that is usually smaller than a firm's main warehouse and is used for receipt, temporary storage, and redistribution of goods according to the [retail] customer orders as they are received [no sales to the general public]. Also called branch warehouse or distribution warehouse. Generally include loading docks/bays for commercial truck deliveries. 
556.  Wholesale and Retail Uses without Outside Storage - A commercial use devoted to the sale of goods and commodities in larger lots to retail outlets, stores and manufacturers wholly enclosed inside the building. 
557.  Window - An opening in the wall of a building that is fitted with glass in a frame to admit light or air and allow people to see out. 
558.  Window Head - Horizontal beam or accent stone used as a finishing piece over a window. 
559.  Window Sill - A horizontal accent piece or shelf between the window frame and the glass. 
560.  Wind Turbines (Also referred to as Wind Energy Conversion System WECS) - any device that is capable of converting wind energy to a form of electricity, including wind chargers or windmills. 
561.  Winery - A building or property that produces wine, an establishment where wine is made or a business involved in the production of wine. 
562.  Wrecking Yard (Junkyard or Auto Salvage) - Any lot upon which two or more motor vehicles of any kind, which are incapable of being operated due to condition or lack of license, have been placed for the purpose of obtaining parts for recycling or resale. 
Y 
563.  Yard - An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except where otherwise specifically provided in this Code that the building or structure may be located in a portion of a yard required for a main building. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of the side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the shortest horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used (see Section 8.18 - Figure 8). 
564.  Yard, Front - A yard located in front of the front elevation of a building and extending across a lot between the side yard lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the front property line and the outside wall of the main building (see Section 8.18 - Figure 8). 
565.  Yard, Rear - The area extending across the rear of a lot measured between the lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the outside wall of the main building. On both corner lots and interior lots, the rear yard shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard (see Section 8.18 - Figure 3). 
566.  Yard, Side - The area between the building and side line of the lot and extending from the front lot line to the rear lot line and being the minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the outside wall of the side of the main building (see Section 8.18 - Figure 3). 
Z 
567.  Zoning District - A classification applied to any certain land area within the city stipulating the limitations and requirements of land usage and development. 
568.  Zoning District Map - The official map upon which the boundaries of the various Zoning Districts are drawn and which is an integral part of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1959 , § 2(Exh. A), 12-3-2019)  
Article Four - DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS FOR APPLICATION SUBMITTALS 
 
Section 4.01 - Application and General Requirements 
Article Four provides a simple framework for the processes of land development in the City of Keller. All land development and use within Keller's City Limits is guided by the many documents that form the City's Master Plan and regulated by the Unified Development Code, so that development will occur in a manner appropriate to the character of the city, as defined by its citizens. This section's purpose is to advise landowners, developers, architects, and engineers of the process of land development. This section contains flow charts and timelines of the processes, a list of steps involved, and a checklist of items to submit. Applications for each process are in Article Nine- Application Forms of this Code. The following general requirements shall apply to all applications under this Development Code: 
A.  Authority to File Applications. Any application for development review or approval under this Development Code shall be filed by the person having legal authority to take action in accordance with the approval sought. That person is presumed to be the record owner, purchaser under a sale from the record owner, or the duly authorized agent of the record owner in the absence of satisfactory proof to the contrary. The City shall be authorized to require proof of legal authority to take the action sought. The Planning and Zoning Commission or the City Council may initiate any action under this Development Code with or without an application from the property owner. 
B.  Applications. Applications required under this Article shall be submitted on forms and in such numbers as required by these regulations. Applications should be accompanied by all required documents and a nonrefundable fee established by City Council to defray the costs of processing applications. Applications shall be reviewed for completeness within five (5) days of submittal. If the City determines that the application is complete, the application shall then be processed. If the City determines that it is incomplete upon initial submittal, the City shall notify the applicant of the deficiencies. If the city determines that a resubmittal has not addressed comments provided on previous submittals, reapplication fees will be charged. Only complete applications will be accepted for review and processing. The required time frame for action by an approval body starts once a complete application and documents are submitted. An application that does not have all required documents will not be considered filed with the City and time periods for review will not begin to run until the application is complete. 
C.  Inactive Development Applications. All inactive development applications including Zoning Changes, Specific Use Permits, Site Plans, Landscaping and Screening Wall Plans, and all Plats that have remained idle for a total of six (6) months shall automatically expire. The six (6) month time period will begin on the date that the most recent set of staff comments was returned to the applicant. A complete application along with the appropriate application fee shall be resubmitted in order to resume activity on an application in the development process. 
D.  Application Completeness. 
1.  Any application that does not include required information or that is not accompanied by the required fee shall be returned to the applicant as incomplete and no further processing of the application shall occur until the deficiencies are corrected. Fees shall not be required with applications initiated by the Planning and Zoning Commission, City Council, or City department heads. 
2.  Basic fees associated with development applications are published in Article Nine - Fees. 
E.  Requirements for Development. 
1.  Zoning. The first step in development is zoning the property for its appropriate use. Zoning is the delineation of districts and the establishment of regulations governing the use, placement, spacing, and size of land and building. The purpose of zoning is to promote the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare and protecting and preserving places and areas of historical, cultural, or architectural importance and significance. Each Zoning District has a list of allowed uses and specifications for the size and type of building permitted. The Zoning Districts have been designed to lessen street congestion; to secure public safety from fire; to ensure adequate light and air, and prevent the overcrowding of land; to expedite the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewer, parks, and other public facilities; and to protect the natural resources that contribute to noise reduction, air quality, glare reduction, and promote the natural ecological, environmental, and aesthetic qualities of the City. 
2.  Site Plans and Civil Engineered Plans. Site plans and necessary civil engineered plans must be submitted prior to the Final Plat for residential construction; the building plans, site plans, and necessary civil engineered plans shall be submitted prior to the Final Plat for non-residential construction. These plans detail the specific locations and design of public and private improvements to be installed in the subdivision or addition. 
All non-single family residential construction requires a submittal of a Site Plan and full Civil Engineered Plans. This is a document that shows the development plan for one or more lots. A Site Plan may be submitted with a Preliminary Site Evaluation, however must be submitted prior to a Final Plat. Site Plans and Civil Engineered Plans show the location of proposed buildings, parking, fire lanes, fire hydrants, landscaping, access, lighting, signs (detached and directional) and public/private infrastructure needed to develop the site. Site Plan review is to ensure efficient and safe land development; harmonious use of land; compliance with appropriate design and zoning standards; safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation, parking, and loading; and adequate water supply, drainage and storm water management, sanitary facilities, and other utilities and services. Civil Engineered Plans shall be stamped, sealed, and signed as required by the Texas Board of Professional Engineers. (Amended by Ord. No. 1761 on October 6, 2015) 
3.  Plats. Platting is the act of subdividing land into lots on which homes and businesses can be built. Preliminary Site Evaluations and Final Plats locate the boundaries of each lot, street, open space, easements, dedications, etc., planned for the parcel. Platting ensures orderly development patterns, and enables City Staff and the developer to plan for appropriate drainage, streets, water, and sanitary sewer facilities when the property is developed. (Amended by Ord. No. 1761 on October 6, 2015) 
4.  Development Agreements. For all subdivisions or additions requiring public improvements such as streets, drainage, water, sewer facilities, or public fund participation, the developer shall enter into an agreement with the City to delineate responsibility for construction and expenditures. These agreements outline a general contractor's performance bond, contractor's maintenance bond, fees to be paid, and other information as required. This document is prepared by the Public Works Department. 
5.  Building Permits. Building Permits are permission from the City for the construction, repair, or alteration of, or addition to, a structure. For residential subdivisions, Building Permits are issued after drainage, water, sewer, and street facilities have been completed and accepted, in order to ensure that the underlying infrastructure is available before building begins. For non- residential development, a Building Permit may be issued simultaneously with the infrastructure construction. 
6.  Certificate of Occupancy. The final step in non-residential construction is the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, which allows use of a building, and certifies that it has been constructed and will be used in compliance with all municipal codes. 
F.  Requirements for Phasing a Development. A development may be phased on a preliminary site evaluation or site plan by establishing phase lines and/or lot lines. Each phase shall be capable of standing alone, as development occurs and not depend on future construction to meet City standards or requirements. All required public and private improvements, as defined by this Code, shall be designed and constructed with each phase in conformance with all current applicable City standards. (Amended by Ord. No. 1761 on October 6, 2015)  
Section 4.02 - Pre-Application Meeting 
A.  Before submitting any development application, the applicant is encouraged to confer with the Development Review Committee (DRC) to discuss the proposal and applicable regulations. The purpose of the Pre-Application Conference is for the applicant to become familiar with applicable City procedures and standards. Following their review, the reviewing officials may confer with the applicant to discuss any matters that will assist the applicant in preparing further submittals. No review fee shall be required for Pre-Application Conferences. 
B.  The Development Review Committee (DRC) meets weekly with potential applicants by appointment. All potential applicants are encouraged to meet with City Staff prior to submitting applications in order to review the application process, timing, and information submittals required. The DRC schedule may change without amending this Code. 
C.  Development Review Committee Members are listed in Article Nine - Development Review Committee Members (DRC).  
Section 4.03 - Zoning Change (Rezoning) Application Procedures 
A.  All zoning changes are subject to Article Eight - Zoning of this Code. The zoning of all property within Keller is reflected on the City's current Zoning Map. The process described in this section applies when a property owner, his attorney, or a person who has written authorization to act for the owner, wishes to change the property's zoning. In making a determination regarding a requested zoning change, the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council consider the following factors: 
1.  Appropriateness of all the uses permitted by the proposed change for the immediate area concerned, and the relationship of the proposed uses to the general area and to the City as a whole. 
2.  Agreement of the proposed change with any existing or proposed plans for providing streets, water supply, sanitary sewers, and other utilities to the area. 
3.  The amount of vacant land currently classified for similar development in the City, and any special circumstances that may make a substantial part of such vacant land unavailable for development. 
4.  The rate at which land in the same zoning classification has recently been developed, particularly in the vicinity of the proposed change. 
5.  Effect on other areas designated for similar development if the proposed amendment is approved. 
6.  Conformity with the goals and objectives for future developments within the Future Land Use Plan for the City of Keller. 
7.  Any other factors which will substantially affect the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the citizens of the City of Keller. 
B.  Application. The following minimum requirements shall be submitted to the Community Development Department in accordance with the Development Process Schedule (see Article Nine - Development Process Schedule): 
1.  A completed application form. 
2.  Application fee. 
3.  The property's legal description or metes and bounds description. 
4.  An exhibit showing the property. 
5.  Aerial photo with overlay of plan in accordance with Article Eight - Tree Preservation, as applicable. 
6.  Any drawings the applicant considers necessary to demonstrate the case for rezoning. Drawings of the site should be drawn to scale. 
C.  Public Hearing Process. 
1.  Public hearings prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission decision and the City Council decision are required for all zoning change cases in order to give citizens who may be affected by the proposed change an opportunity to voice their support or opposition. When applications are submitted, they are reviewed by the Development Review Committee (DRC). Notices of public hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission are mailed ten (10) days prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting to property owners within three hundred feet (300') of the subject property. Meanwhile, staff prepares a report to the Planning and Zoning Commission with its recommendation. This report is available to the applicant and the public on the Friday just prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting at which the case will be heard. Petitioners should be fully prepared to present their request to both the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council immediately prior to the public hearing. After the public hearing is held at the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting, the Planning and Zoning Commission decides what recommendation it will make to City Council based on the staff report and public input. 
2.  The staff report, Planning and Zoning Commission recommendation, and public response to the proposed zoning change are then made available to the public, and an additional public hearing before the City Council is scheduled following the initial hearing before the P&Z Commission. This public hearing is advertised in the newspaper fifteen (15) days before it is held. City Council Members make the final decision on the request. 
3.  It is recommended that applicants prepare a brief presentation on their proposal, to be given at each public hearing. The applicants should also have maps, slides, and handouts available at the meeting. Applicants should include in their presentation: 
a.  Current and proposed zoning or use. 
b.  Compatibility of proposed zoning with surrounding zoning and land uses. 
c.  Important physical features such as topography, roadways, or creeks. 
d.  A statement of the need for the proposed zoning change. 
e.  Descriptions that show in what ways the proposal is consistent with the City's Master Plan. 
f.  Evidence of communicating the proposal with the adjacent neighborhood. 
4.  The applicant should make the presentations, but it is recommended that the property owner, if different from the applicant, also be present at the hearing to answer questions if necessary. 
D.  Types of Zoning Applications. 
1.  Simple Zoning Changes. A Simple Zoning Change is one which involves a change from a Zoning District that has been approved by the Keller City Council within the Zoning section of this Code to another approved Zoning District. This request does not allow any deviations from the base zoning district. Simple Zoning Change requests require only the information listed above in Section 4.03 (B). 
2.  Planned Development District. A Planned Development District (PD) is a district which accommodates planned associations of uses developed and operated as integral land use units by a single owner or a combination of owners. A land area of one acre or more may be designed as a PD as an alternative to a Simple Zoning Change request. A PD Ordinance can designate specific designs, different development standards, and combinations of uses that are unique. Uses within the PD must conform to the standards and regulations of the base zoning district to which they are most similar. Some uses are allowed in the City of Keller only with the approval of a PD designation. Additional information must be included with the initial application for a Planned Development District listed in Section 4.03 (B). Other documents that are required: 
a.  A Concept Plan or Detailed Site Plan as described in Article Eight - Zoning. 
b.  A written proposal describing the uses, concept, and development standards. 
c.  Aerial photo with overlay of plan and a tree survey and preservation plan in accordance with Article Eight - Tree Preservation, as applicable. (Amended by Ord. No. 1818 on October 18, 2016) 
d.  The Planning Manager, Planning and Zoning Commission, or City Council may require additional information or drawings, operations data, or expert evaluation when considering the application, including traffic studies and drainage studies. 
e.  All plans submitted following the approval of the zoning change with attached Concept Plan or Detailed Site Plan must substantially comply with the plans submitted as part of the zoning change. Substantial deviation from the Concept Plan or Detailed Site Plan may require new public hearings. 
3.  Specific Use Permits. Specific Use Permits (SUP) are approved to allow uses that with special conditions and development restrictions may be considered compatible in a district in which they are not allowed by right. The City Council, after receiving a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission, may approve the permit based on its determination that the uses requested are in general conformance with the Keller Master Plan and objectives of the City, and that the SUP contains the requirements and safeguards that are necessary to protect adjoining property. In granting a SUP, the City Council may impose conditions to which the property must comply before a Certificate of Occupancy may be issued. Additional information must be included with the initial application for a Specific Use Permit as listed in Section 4.03 (B). Other documents that are required: 
a.  A written proposal outlining all special conditions and additional requirements for the property controlled by the SUP. 
b.  A Concept Plan or Detailed Site Plan in accordance with Article Eight - Zoning of this Code. The Planning Manager, Planning and Zoning Commission, or City Council may require additional information or drawings, operations data, or expert evaluation when considering the application. 
c.  The SUP is granted to the land owner and is transferable to a new owner upon sale of the property unless specified by approving Ordinance. If the SUP is approved, the applicant must secure a Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy within one (1) year of approval; otherwise, the SUP expires and the applicant must go through the entire process again to obtain another one if desired. A Building Permit is valid for six (6) months. If construction has not commenced following issuance of a Building Permit, the SUP expires upon expiration of the Building Permit. The applicant may request a one- time six (6) month extension, which may be approved by the Planning Manager. All applicable requirements of the SUP must be met before the building's occupancy. 
E.  Required Signs. City Staff will place at least one Notification of Requested Zoning Change or Specific Use Permit sign, whichever is applicable, on the property for which the Zoning or SUP Application has been proposed ten (10) days prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission public hearing. This sign will, if at all possible, be placed adjacent to a public street. The applicant is responsible for ensuring that the sign remains on the property until the City Council's final action. City Staff will remove the sign from the property after the final action by the City Council, or upon withdrawal of the application by the applicant. 
Zoning Change Process 
  
Section 4.04 - Exemptions 
A.  The following specific divisions of land do not require plat approval by the City of Keller. However, the City shall not extend utilities, provide access to public roads, or issue building permits for the development of any property that has not received Final Plat approval, except as otherwise provided by this Code. 
1.  The division of land into two or more parts where all parts are larger than five acres, where each part has direct access to a public right-of-way, where no new building or improvement is proposed, and no required public improvement is to be constructed or dedicated. 
2.  The creation of a leasehold for a space within a multi-occupant building or a commercial building site that does not abut a public street, or the division of property into such leaseholds, provided that the property is a part of an approved subdivision or addition and regulated in accordance with the site plan requirements of the City, and such plat has been amended as may be required to add easements or otherwise serve the leasehold. For purposes of this section, a leasehold abuts a public street if it is immediately adjacent to a public street or if it is so close to a public street that no usable property lies between the leasehold and the public street. 
3.  The creation of a leasehold for agricultural use of the subject property, provided that the use does not involve the construction of a building(s) to be used as a residence or for any purpose not directly related to agricultural use of the land or crops or livestock raised thereon. 
4.  The division of property through inheritance, the probate of an estate, or by a court of law. 
5.  Acquisition of property by a local, state, or federal government in a condemnation, dedication, or purchase. 
6.  Partition of property among co-tenants to give each owner the share of property already owned as a consequence of some prior conveyance. 
7.  Common ownership of apartments, condominiums, trailer (or manufactured housing) parks, commercial and office buildings. 
B.  A written request may be directed to the Community Development Department for information concerning whether a plat is required under these regulations, in accordance with Section 212.0115, as amended, of the Texas Local Government Code. 
C.  The exclusion of such activities from the platting regulations does not waive any jurisdiction the City now exercises or may exercise over such matters.  
Section 4.05 - Platting Applicability 
A.  A Final Plat is a survey prepared in accordance with this Code and prepared by a registered land surveyor. The Plat is prepared from actual field measurement and staking of all identifiable points, with the subdivision location referenced to a survey corner. All boundaries, corners, and curves of the land division are sufficiently described so that they can be reproduced without additional references. A plat shall be required in accordance with the Local Government Code, Section 212.004 and the City of Keller's local ordinances. An approved Final Plat is required prior to issuance of a Building Permit application. This includes any permit for new construction for tracts that conform with dimensions shown in current City Tax Department records but that have not been formally platted. 
B.  Platting shall be required for any division of land into two or more parcels or development on one or more contiguous parcels not previously platted, or for development that involves the construction of any public improvements to be dedicated to the City. 
C.  Except for legal lots of record established prior to the effective date of this Code, no land shall be sold or transferred until the property owner has obtained approval of a Final Plat from the Planning Manager, the Planning and Zoning Commission, or City Council, as required by this Code. 
D.  The City shall withhold all public improvements and utilities, including the maintenance of streets and/or sanitary sewer and water services, from all tracts, lots, or additions, the platting of which has not been officially approved by the Planning Manager, the Planning and Zoning Commission, or City Council as required by this Code. 
E.  Except as provided herein, no Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy for new structures shall be issued for any parcel or tract of land inside the city limits or Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) until such property has received Final Plat approval and is in substantial conformity with the provisions of these regulations and no private improvements shall take place or be commenced except in conformity with these regulations. 
F.  When a Platted lot is further subdivided, the entire lot of record must be Replatted. All Replats shall comply with the provisions of the Texas Local Government Code for public hearings. 
G.  No Plat or Replat shall create a non-conforming use or structures according to City Regulations. If a lot or tract with existing structures is later subdivided, an Exhibit of Existing Conditions (see Section 4.06 (C.2) for requirements) may be required to ensure that the subdivision of property does not create a non-conforming use or structures. 
H.  No Plat shall create a land-locked situation where any parcel is without access to public streets as described in the Texas Local Government Code.  
Section 4.06 - Preliminary Site Evaluations 
A Preliminary Site Evaluation is an overall preliminary development plan for a tract of land. A Preliminary Site Evaluation is intended to show the infrastructure requirements for developing property. A Preliminary Site Evaluation must be prepared by a Texas-Registered Civil Engineer. 
A.  Preliminary Site Evaluation Required. 
1.  A Preliminary Site Evaluation is required on all unplatted tracts: 
a.  That are larger than ten (10) acres, or 
b.  That do not conform with tract dimensions shown on Tarrant Appraisal District Maps, or 
c.  That the development of which involves dedication or construction of streets, drainage ways, or utilities. 
2.  The purpose of a Preliminary Site Evaluation is to allow the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Staff to review the property's proposed major thoroughfares and collector street patterns, land use, environmental issues, drainage patterns, availability of utilities, conformance to the Master Plan, and relationship to adjoining subdivisions or properties. 
3.  A Preliminary Site Evaluation shall include all contiguous property that is under the ownership or control of the applicant. It may contain more than one phase, but each phase must contain improvements that do not depend on future construction in order to meet City standards. 
B.  Application. A complete Preliminary Site Evaluation application consists of the application form, fee, five (5) collated and folded copies of the Preliminary Site Evaluation including proposed Drainage and Utility Plans, and all information listed below in Section 4.06 (C). When a complete application is submitted, the Preliminary Site Evaluation and accompanying documents are distributed to Development Review Committee (DRC) members. The Development Review Committee will review the application within fifteen (15) working days. Following review, comments and requested revisions are forwarded to the applicant. The applicant must then return revised copies along with all markups made by staff to the Community Development Department. The Development Review Committee will review the revised documents and will provide comments again within ten (10) working days. An application that does not have all required documents will not be considered filed with the City and time periods for review will not begin to run until the application is complete. Once all comments are addressed, the project will be scheduled on the Planning and Zoning Commission agenda. Preliminary Site Evaluations may be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission if they meet all applicable requirements of this Code. Any changes, variances, or alternatives to the City's requirements must be noted on the Preliminary Plat, which can only be approved by City Council. 
C.  Information to be Submitted with Preliminary Site Evaluation Applications. The review process will not begin until a Preliminary Site Evaluation that includes at least the information on the following list is submitted with a completed application form and filing fee. The applicant must submit to the Community Development Department five (5) 24" x 36" copies of the Preliminary Site Evaluation and five (5) 22" x 34" copies Proposed Utility and Drainage Plans, collated and folded to 9" x 12" paper size (see Article Nine - Plan Folding Procedures). Rolled documents will not be accepted. Scale used should be 1" = 100' or larger. 
1.  Preliminary Site Evaluation sheet should contain the following information: 
a.  Title block (see Article Nine - Title Blocks Formats) in lower right hand corner of site evaluation to include: 
1)  Project's name. 
2)  Address and/or legal description of the project, total number of lots and/or phases, total acreage, and zoning. 
3)  Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. 
4)  Name, address, and telephone number of contact person of the developer. 
5)  Name, address and telephone number of the preparer (Engineer). 
6)  Date of preparation and dates of revisions, if any (As plats are revised, add dates of revision to each submittal). 
b.  For all single-family residential subdivisions, a plan summary table to include: 
1)  Total number of lots. 
2)  Number of lots per zoning category. 
3)  Total acreage per phase. 
4)  Number of lots per phase. 
5)  Minimum lot size. 
6)  Minimum dwelling unit size. 
7)  Density per acre. 
c.  Graphic Scale labeled with scale used. 
d.  North arrow oriented to the top or right of the sheet. 
e.  Vicinity map of the City Base Map with scale of 1" = 1000' with site location shaded. 
f.  Length and bearing of all straight lines; radii, arc length, tangent length, and central angles of all curves, indicated along the lines of each lot or in tables. 
g.  Diagram of a typical corner clip and visibility easement. 
h.  Cross-section of proposed streets and alleys, showing the width and type of pavement and the location and width of sidewalks. 
i.  Park Dedication requirements. 
j.  A list of requested variances from development requirements, if applicable. 
k.  Signature block labeled: "Preliminary Site Evaluation Approved by the City of Keller Planning and Zoning Commission for the Preparation of a Final Plat" (see Article Nine - Signature Blocks for Plats). 
l.  Signature block labeled: "Preliminary Site Evaluation Approved by the City of Keller City Council for the Preparation of a Final Plat" if variances are requested (see Article Nine - Signature Blocks for Plats). 
m.  Names and boundary lines of abstracts and surveys of the land being platted. 
n.  Description and location of all survey monuments placed or found. 
o.  Lines delineating the proposed phases of development, if applicable. 
p.  Property lines, including lot and block numbers and date recorded if applicable, of land within the area being platted. 
q.  The layout and approximate dimensions of proposed lots and blocks, with: 
1)  Front building setback lines and a note that reads, "All setbacks shall be in accordance with the zoning district, as described in the Keller Unified Development Code." 
2)  Lot number and block letter designations. 
3)  Acreage or square footage of each lot. 
4)  Proposed use. 
r.  Existing and/or proposed streets and alleys, showing proposed street names and the widths of right-of-way and pavement. Where a development abuts a street shown on the City's Thoroughfare Plan, the Preliminary Site Evaluation shall include a proposed dedication of right-of-way in accordance with the requirements of the Thoroughfare Plan. 
s.  Median openings, turning lanes, acceleration lanes, deceleration lanes, and proposed driveway locations with dimensions. 
t.  Traffic control signals, devices, and striping, if applicable. 
u.  Other features that impact the land being platted - including, but not limited to, buildings, cemeteries, parks, landfills, and monuments. 
v.  Easements, deed restrictions, or other encumbrances that impact development of the property. 
w.  Names and recording information of adjoining subdivisions, municipalities, counties, special districts, and parcels of unsubdivided land, including: 
1)  Names of owners of record. 
2)  Boundary lines. 
3)  Zoning designations. 
4)  Names and accurate location of all adjacent streets. 
5)  Dimensions of all abutting lots. 
6)  Reference ties to courses and distances of at least one recognized land corner. 
7)  Easements on all abutting lots. 
x.  Land proposed for dedication to public use, or for reservation for the common use of property owners, including parks and linear trails, labeled with a separate lot and block designation. Also include a list of the conditions of or limitations on the use of this land. 
y.  Traffic study and/or drainage study, if required to further clarify the needs of the project. 
z.  The Planning Manager, Planning and Zoning Commission, or City Council may require additional information or drawings, operations data, or expert evaluation when considering the application, including traffic studies and drainage studies. 
2.  Drainage Plan sheet showing existing and proposed systems, including: 
a.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development. 
b.  Location of lines and inlets. 
c.  Location of all existing and proposed utility and/or drainage easements, or right-of-way and detention/retention structures. 
d.  Proposed drainage rights-of-way. 
e.  Delineation of the 100-year floodplain, if applicable. 
f.  Easements, deed restrictions, or other encumbrances that impact development of the property. 
g.  Contours at intervals of two feet (2') or less, referred to the latest USC or GS sea level datum, including benchmark. 
3.  Utility Plan sheet showing existing and proposed systems, including: 
a.  Location and size of all existing and proposed water systems and sanitary sewer lines shown for the distance which impacts the land being platted. 
b.  Location and size of other existing and/or proposed utility lines which may impact the land development. 
c.  Identification of proposed lots that will be served by septic tanks, if applicable. 
d.  Easements, deed restrictions, or other encumbrances that impact development of the property. 
4.  Aerial photo with overlay of plan and tree survey and preservation plan in accordance with Article Eight - Tree Preservation, as applicable. (Amended by Ord. No. 1818 on October 18, 2016) 
5.  UDC Variance Request as described in Section 2.08 - Procedures for Variances from the Regulations of the Code, if applicable. 
D.  Approval Process for Preliminary Site Evaluations. 
1.  Once all comments are addressed, the project will be scheduled on the Planning and Zoning Commission agenda. Preliminary Site Evaluations may be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission if they meet all applicable requirements of this Code. Any changes, variances, or alternatives to the City's requirements must be noted on the Preliminary Site Evaluation, which can only be approved by City Council. Preliminary Site Evaluation applications will be scheduled for a Planning and Zoning Commission meeting if they are considered complete by Friday at noon, ten (10) days prior to the meeting. The Community Development Department must receive electronic copy and one (1) collated and folded copy on 24" x 36" paper size for the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting. Based on the Development Review Committee's review, staff will prepare a report and recommendation for the Planning and Zoning Commission. A copy of this information and an agenda for the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting at which the application will be discussed will be available to the applicant on the Friday prior to that Planning and Zoning Commission meeting. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider approval or approval with conditions of the Preliminary Site Evaluation that conforms to all City regulations. 
2.  If alternatives or variances are requested, the Preliminary Site Evaluation will be forwarded to the City Council along with the Planning and Zoning Commission's recommendations within thirty (30) days of the last Planning and Zoning Commission meeting. In such case, the Community Development Department must receive one electronic copy and one (1) collated and folded copy on 24" x 36" paper size at least two (2) weeks prior to the City Council meeting. 
3.  Alternatively, the Planning and Zoning Commission may table the request and ask the applicant to make revisions and/or provide additional information on the Preliminary Site Evaluation before it approves the site evaluation. In such cases, the Community Development Department must receive one electronic copy and one folded copy on 24" x 36" paper size at least two (2) weeks prior to the next Planning and Zoning Commission meeting. Staff will provide to the applicant a copy of the staff report and recommendations, according to the review-and-comment process described above, and the approval process will begin again. 
E.  Final File Copies. 
1.  Once approved, the official approved copy of the Preliminary Site Evaluation will be scanned for electronic filing with the city. 
2.  Approval of a Preliminary Site Evaluation is effective for two (2) years. At the end of two (2) years, if no development or change in requirements that affects the Preliminary Site Evaluation has occurred, the applicant may request a one-time one (1) year extension which may be granted by the Planning Manager. No filing fee is required for such extensions. If an extension is not requested or if City regulations have significantly changed since the approval of the Preliminary Site Evaluation, the site evaluation or any portion that has not been constructed or has not received Final Plat approval will be deemed invalid and a new application shall be submitted for development. 
 
*If Approved, Preliminary Site Evaluation Expires After Two (2) Years.  
Section 4.07 - Minor Subdivision Final Plats 
A Minor Subdivision Plat is a Final Plat that creates no more than four lots and does not require the creation of a new street or a major extension of municipal facilities. A Preliminary Site Evaluation is not required prior to preparation of a Minor Subdivision Plat. Minor Subdivision Plats may be approved for residential and non-residential properties. The Planning Manager may approve Minor Subdivision Plats or refer them to the Planning and Zoning Commission for their action. 
A.  Minor Subdivision Final Plat Requirements. 
1.  A minor platting procedure is applicable if the subdivision meets the following requirements: 
a.  No more than four (4) lots are contained within the subdivision plat and are fronting on an improved existing street or an approved access easement. 
b.  The proposed lots meet all the requirements of the existing zoning district. 
c.  The plat proposes no vacation of public rights-of-way or easements. 
d.  The extensions of public facilities, such as streets or utilities, are not required for utilization of the property except for minor extensions of existing water or sewer lines (less than 300 feet), construction plans of which shall be submitted at the time of application. 
e.  The proposed development does not create nor contain any drainage problem, it conforms to FEMA flood plain management rules, and it is not within the flood way. 
2.  If the applicant proposes to plat less than all of its property, a preliminary site evaluation shall be required and the minor plat process shall not be used. 
3.  The Planning Manager may require a Preliminary Site Evaluation prior to a Minor Subdivision Final Plat application to evaluation of site elements on a case by case basis. 
B.  Application. A complete Minor Subdivision Plat application consists of the application form, fee, and five (5) collated and folded copies of the Final Plat that includes all information listed below in Section 4.07(C). When a complete application is submitted, the Final Plat and accompanying documents are distributed to Development Review Committee (DRC) members. DRC will review the application within five (5) working days. Following review, comments and requested revisions are forwarded to the applicant. The applicant must then return revised copies along with all markups made by staff to the Community Development Department. The Development Review Committee will review the revised documents and will provide comments again within ten (10) working days. An application that does not have all required documents will not be considered filed with the City and time periods for review will not begin to run until the application is complete. 
C.  Information to be Submitted with Minor Subdivision Plats. The final plat application shall not be considered filed and the review process will not begin until a Final Plat that includes the complete information on the following list is submitted with a required application form and filing fee. The applicant must submit to the Community Development Department seven (7) 24" x 36" copies of the Minor Final Plat, collated and folded to 9" x 12" paper size (see Article Nine - Plan Folding Procedures). When more than one sheet is required to show a subdivision, a 24" x 36" index sheet must be filed showing the entire subdivision and all dedications, attests, dates, titles, and seals on one sheet. Rolled documents will not be accepted. Scale used should be 1" = 100' or larger. 
1.  Final Plat sheet should contain the following information: 
a.  Title Block (see Article Nine - Title Blocks Formats) in lower right hand corner of plat to include: 
1)  Project's name. 
2)  Address and/or legal description of the project, total number of lots and/or phases, total acreage and zoning. 
3)  Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. 
4)  Name, address, and telephone number of contact person of the developer. 
5)  Name, address, and telephone number of the preparer (Surveyor). 
6)  Date of preparation and dates of revisions, if any (As plats are revised, add dates of revision to each submittal). 
b.  For all single-family residential subdivisions, a plan summary table to include: 
1)  Total number of lots. 
2)  Number of lots per zoning category. 
3)  Total acreage per phase. 
4)  Number of lots per phase. 
5)  Minimum lot size. 
6)  Minimum dwelling unit size. 
7)  Density per acre. 
c.  Graphic Scale labeled with scale used. 
d.  North arrow oriented to the top or right of the sheet. 
e.  Vicinity map of the City Base Map with scale of 1"=1000' with site location shaded. 
f.  Length and bearing of all straight lines; radii, arc length, tangent length, and central angles of all curves, indicated along the lines of each lot or in tables. 
g.  Diagram of a typical corner clip and visibility easement. h. Park Dedication requirements. 
i.  A list of variances from development requirements, if applicable. 
j.  Signature block labeled: "Approved by the City of Keller Community Development Department" (see Article Nine - Signature Blocks for Plats). 
k.  Signature block labeled: "Approved by the City of Keller Planning and Zoning Commission" (see Article Nine - Signature Blocks for Plats). 
l.  Signature block labeled: "Approved by the City of Keller City Council" (see Article Nine - Signature Blocks for Plats). 
m.  The following statement when City sewer will not be utilized: "This subdivision is subject to all of the terms and conditions of Tarrant County Commissioner Court Order Number 42703 (Sewage Regulations). Prior to the issuance of a building permit, a license must be obtained by the owner for any private sewage facility (septic tank or aerobic system) to be constructed in the subdivision. A sewage disposal plan will be filed with Tarrant County and areas suitable for septic tanks or aerobic systems will be defined." 
n.  An Owner's Certificate stating the following: 
OWNER'S CERTIFICATE 
STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF TARRANT 
WHEREAS, John Doe and Jane Doe are the Owner(s) of a tract of land situated in the (Survey Name), Abstract Number (Survey Number), Tarrant County, Texas and being that same tract of land described in (Name and Recording Information), and being more particularly described by metes and bounds as follows: 
(Metes and bounds description of subdivision with exact acreage and the volume and page of the County Deed Records of the deed for the land being platted and description and location of all survey monuments placed or found) 
NOW THEREFORE, KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS: 
That we, John Doe and Jane Doe, Owners, do hereby adopt this plat designating the hereinabove described property as (Plat Name, include lot and blocks), an addition to the City of Keller and do hereby dedicate to the public use forever the streets and alleys shown thereon and do hereby reserve the easement strips shown on this plat for the mutual use and accommodation of garbage collection agencies and all public utilities desiring to use or using same. Any public utility shall have the right to remove and keep removed all or part of any buildings, fences, or other improvements which in any way endanger or interfere with the construction, maintenance, or efficiency of its respective systems on any of these easement strips and any public utility shall at all times have the right of ingress and egress to and from and upon the said easement strips for the purpose of constructing, reconstructing, inspecting, and patrolling, without the necessity at any time of procuring the permission of anyone. Trees and shrubs further than five- feet from the utility lines shall remain. This plat approved subject to all platting ordinances, rules, regulations, and resolutions of the City of Keller, Texas. 
Witness our hands at Tarrant County, Texas, this _____ day of ___________. 
___________  ___________ 
John Doe, Owner     Jane Doe, Owner 
o.  Notary Public's Certificate with a signature line, the Notary Public's stamp, and stating the following: 
STATE OF TEXAS COUNTY OF TARRANT 
Before me, the undersigned authority, a Notary Public in and for said County and State on this date personally appeared John Doe and Jane Doe, Owners, known to me to be the persons whose names are subscribed to the foregoing instrument and acknowledged to me that they each executed the same for the purpose and considerations therein expressed. 
Given under my hand and seal of office, this _____ day of ___________. 
___________ 
Notary Public in and for the State of Texas 
p.  Surveyor's Certificate with a signature line, the Surveyor's seal, and stating the following: 
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS: 
That I, [Surveyor's Name], do hereby certify that I prepared this plat from an actual and accurate survey of the land and that the corner monuments shown thereon as set were properly placed under my personal supervision in accordance with the platting rules and regulations of the City of Keller, Texas. 
___________ 
Registered Professional Land Surveyor 
q.  Names and boundary lines of abstracts and surveys of the land being platted. 
r.  Lines delineating the proposed phases of development, if applicable. 
s.  The layout and exact dimensions of proposed lots and blocks, with: 
1)  Front building setback lines and a note that reads, "All setbacks shall be in accordance with the zoning district, as described in the Keller Unified Development Code." 
2)  Lot number and block letter designations. 
3)  Acreage or square footage of each lot and minimum finished floor elevation (minimum finished floor elevation is required only if lot is located within 100-year floodplain or near natural drainage feature). 
t.  Land proposed for dedication to public use or for reservation for the common use of property owners, labeled with a separate lot and block designation. Also include a list of the conditions of or limitations on the use of this land. 
u.  Deed restrictions or other encumbrances that impact development of the property. 
v.  Rights-of-way and public property to be abandoned should be identified on the plat, but information is to be provided separately for the creation of an abandonment certificate (see Section 4.12 - Abandonment of Easements or Rights-of-Way for procedures). 
w.  Existing and/or proposed streets and alleys, showing street names and the widths of rights-of-way and pavement. Where a development abuts a street shown on the City's Thoroughfare Plan, the Final Plat must include the dedication of rights-of-way in accordance with the requirements of the Thoroughfare Plan. 
x.  Location and size of all existing and proposed utility, access, and/or drainage easements for electric, telephone, gas, cable, and solid waste disposal, with a note regarding responsibility for maintenance. 
y.  Delineation of the 100-year floodplain, if applicable. 
z.  Names and recording information of adjoining subdivisions, municipalities, counties, special districts, and parcels of unsubdivided land, including: 
1)  Names of owners of record. 
2)  Boundary lines. 
3)  Zoning designations. 
4)  Names and accurate location of all adjacent streets. 
5)  Dimensions of all abutting lots. 
6)  Reference ties to courses and distances of at least one recognized land corner. 
aa.  The Planning Manager, Planning and Zoning Commission, or City Council may require additional information or drawings, operations data, or expert evaluation when considering the application, including traffic studies and drainage studies. 
2.  Exhibit of Existing Conditions sheet showing existing and proposed systems, including: 
a.  Location of all existing above-ground structures, driveways, sheds, fences, etc., if applicable. 
b.  Location and size of all existing and proposed utility, access, and/or drainage easements, with a note regarding responsibility for maintenance. 
c.  Location and size of all other utilities existing and/or proposed, underground or overhead, including private transmission lines. 
d.  Location and size of all public and private service lines and meters for water and sanitary sewer or septic tanks, if applicable. 
e.  Location and distance of nearest existing fire hydrant. 
f.  Proposed grading, and a description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development. 
g.  Delineation of the 100-year floodplain, if applicable. 
3.  A drainage study shall be provided for each development in accordance with Article Five - Design and Technical Construction Standards (DTCS). The study shall be provided to ensure that all upstream and downstream watershed components are accounted for and will not be adversely impacted. The study shall include a pre-development versus post development runoff analysis and a storm water runoff routing analysis designed to predict the post development runoff rate and the downstream drainage system ability to accommodate post development runoff. 
4.  Tree survey and aerial photo with overlay of plan and tree survey and preservation plan in accordance with Article Eight - Tree Preservation, as applicable. (Amended by Ord. No. 1818 on October 18, 2016) 
5.  UDC Variance Request as described in Section 2.08 - Procedures for Variances from the Regulations of the Code, if applicable. 
D.  Approval Process For Minor Subdivision Final Plats. 
1.  The Planning Manager may approve a Minor Subdivision Final Plat if it meets all requirements of this Code. The Planning Manager shall make final approval or disapproval of a Minor Subdivision Final Plat application within thirty (30) days of a complete application filing. The Planning Manager's decision may be appealed to the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council. 
2.  Based on the Development Review Committee's review, staff will prepare a report and recommendation for the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or City Council if variances are requested. A copy of this information and an agenda for the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or City Council meeting at which the application will be discussed will be available to the applicant on the Friday prior to that Planning and Zoning Commission and/or City Council meeting. The Planning and Zoning Commission and/or City Council votes on approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval. 
E.  Final File Copies. 
1.  The applicant must provide to the Community Development Department one (1) 24" x 36" of each blackline and mylar copies of the Final Plat exactly as it was approved by the City, complete with owner's signatures with notarization and the surveyor's signature and seal. One of the copies will be filed with Tarrant County Plat Records, and the other copy will be kept on file with the City. A Development Agreement for the development or a Building Permit shall not be executed if the mylar copies of the approved Final Plat have not been provided to the City. An electronic format of the plat, in AutoCAD version for GIS purposes must also be submitted with the final mylar copies (see Article Nine - Keller CAD Standards for CAD plat requirements). 
2.  Additionally, the applicant must provide current certified original tax receipts on all properties being platted. These are required by state law in order to file the plat with Tarrant County. The Applicant is also responsible for the filing fees to file the plat with Tarrant County. Addresses will be assigned for each lot once the plat is recorded with Tarrant County. 
3.  Approval of a Minor Subdivision Final Plat is effective for two (2) years. At the end of two (2) years, if the Minor Subdivision Final Plat has not been filed with Tarrant County, the plat will be deemed expired and the applicant/developer must go through the entire Minor Subdivision Final Plat process again to obtain another one if desired. 
  
Section 4.08 - Major Subdivision Final Plats 
A.  Major Subdivision Final Plat Requirements. 
1.  Major Subdivision Final Plat involves the creation of new streets, the extension of municipal facilities or the creation or more than four lots. Major Subdivision plat may be applicable for residential and non-residential properties. The procedure for approving a major subdivision plat shall require an approved Preliminary Site Evaluation, approved site plan, and approved civil engineered plans (see Section 4.13 or Section 4.15, as applicable). 
2.  Major Subdivision Final Plats shall substantially conform with approved Preliminary Site Evaluations, or a revised Preliminary Site Evaluation shall first be submitted for formal approval. The Major Subdivision Final Plat shall include a complete set of approved site plan and approved civil engineered construction plans for all public improvements. 
3.  Except as otherwise permitted, the Planning and Zoning Commission's approval of a final plat is required prior to the construction of public improvements on the property. 
B.  Application. A complete Major Subdivision Final Plat application consists of the application form, fee, seven (7) collated and folded copies of the Final Plat along with three (3) sets of approved, Detailed Site Plan and Engineering Construction Plans at 22" x 34" page size (when applicable - See Section 4.13 for requirements), and all information listed below in Section 4.08(C). Detailed construction plans may be rolled. When a complete application is submitted, the Final Plat and accompanying documents are distributed to Development Review Committee (DRC) members. The Development Review Committee has five (5) working days to review the application. Following review, comments and requested revisions are forwarded to the applicant. The applicant must then return revised copies along with all markups made by staff to the Community Development Department. The Development Review Committee will review the revised documents and provide comments again within ten (10) working days. 
C.  Information to be Submitted with Major Subdivision Final Plats. The final plat application shall not be considered filed and the review process will not begin until a Plat that includes at least the information on the following list is submitted with a completed application form and filing fee. The applicant must submit to the Community Development Department seven (7) 24" x 36" copies of the Plat, collated and folded to 9" x 12" paper size (see Article Nine - Plan Folding Procedures). When more than one sheet is required to show a subdivision, a 24" x 36" index sheet must be filed showing the entire subdivision and all dedications, attests, dates, titles, and seals on one sheet. Rolled documents will not be accepted. Scale used should be 1" = 100' or larger. 
1.  Final Plat sheet should contain the following information: 
a.  Title Block (see Article Nine - Title Blocks Formats) in lower right hand corner of plat to include: 
1)  Project's name. 
2)  Address and/or legal description of the project, total number of lots and/or phases, total acreage and zoning. 
3)  Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. 
4)  Name, address, and telephone number of contact person of the developer. 
5)  Name, address, and telephone number of the preparer (Surveyor). 
6)  Date of preparation and dates of revisions, if any (As plats are revised, add dates of revision to each submittal). 
b.  For all single-family residential subdivisions, a plan summary table to include: 
1)  Total number of lots. 
2)  Number of lots per zoning category. 
3)  Total acreage per phase. 
4)  Number of lots per phase. 
5)  Minimum lot size. 
6)  Minimum dwelling unit size. 
7)  Density per acre. 
c.  Graphic Scale labeled with scale used. 
d.  North arrow oriented to the top or right of the sheet. 
e.  Vicinity map of the City Base Map with scale of 1"=1000' with site location shaded. 
f.  Length and bearing of all straight lines; radii, arc length, tangent length, and central angles of all curves, indicated along the lines of each lot or in tables. 
g.  Diagram of a typical corner clip and visibility easement. 
h.  A note that a Park Dedication Agreement exists, if applicable. 
i.  A list of variances from development requirements, if applicable. 
j.  Signature block labeled: "Approved by the City of Keller Planning and Zoning Commission" (see Article Nine - Signature Blocks for Plats). 
k.  Signature block labeled: "Approved by the City of Keller City Council" if variance is requested (see Article Nine - Signature Blocks for Plats). 
l.  The following statement when City sewer will not be utilized: "This subdivision is subject to all of the terms and conditions of Tarrant County Commissioner Court Order Number 42703 (Sewage Regulations). Prior to the issuance of a building permit, a license must be obtained by the owner for any private sewage facility (septic tank or aerobic system) to be constructed in the subdivision. A sewage disposal plan will be filed with Tarrant County and areas suitable for septic tanks or aerobic systems will be defined." 
m.  An Owner's Certificate stating the following: 
OWNER'S CERTIFICATE 
STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF TARRANT 
WHEREAS, John Doe and Jane Doe are the Owner(s) of a tract of land situated in the (Survey Name), Abstract Number (Survey Number), Tarrant County, Texas and being that same tract of land described in (Name and Recording Information), and being more particularly described by metes and bounds as follows: 
(Metes and bounds description of subdivision with exact acreage and the volume and page of the County Deed Records of the deed for the land being platted and description and location of all survey monuments placed or found) 
NOW THEREFORE, KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS: 
That we, John Doe and Jane Doe, Owners, do hereby adopt that plat designating the hereinabove described property as (Plat Name, include lot and blocks), an addition to the City of Keller and do hereby dedicate to the public use forever the streets and alleys shown thereon and do hereby reserve the easement strips shown on this plat for the mutual use and accommodation of garbage collection agencies and all public utilities desiring to use or using same. Any public utility shall have the right to remove and keep removed all or part of any buildings, fences, or other improvements which in any way endanger or interfere with the construction, maintenance or efficiency of its respective systems on any of these easement strips and any public utility shall at all times have the right of ingress and egress to and from and upon the said easement strips for the purpose of constructing, reconstructing, inspecting, and patrolling, without the necessity at any time of procuring the permission of anyone. Trees and shrubs further than five- feet from the utility lines shall remain. This plat approved subject to all platting ordinances, rules, regulations, and resolutions of the City of Keller, Texas. 
Witness our hands at Tarrant County, Texas, this _____ day of ___________. 
___________  ___________ 
John Doe, Owner     Jane Doe, Owner 
n.  Notary Public's Certificate with a signature line, the Notary Public's stamp, and stating the following: 
STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF TARRANT 
Before me, the undersigned authority, a Notary Public in and for said County and State on this date personally appeared John Doe and Jane Doe, Owners, known to me to be the persons whose names are subscribed to the foregoing instrument and acknowledged to me that they each executed the same for the purpose and considerations therein expressed. 
Given under my hand and seal of office, this _____ day of ___________. 
___________ 
Notary Public in and for the State of Texas 
o.  Surveyor's Certificate with a signature line, the Surveyor's seal, and stating: 
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS: 
That I, [Surveyor's Name], do hereby certify that I prepared this plat from an actual and accurate survey of the land and that the corner monuments shown thereon as set were properly placed under my personal supervision in accordance with the platting rules and regulations of the City of Keller, Texas. 
___________ 
Registered Professional Land Surveyor 
p.  Names and boundary lines of abstracts and surveys of the land being platted. 
q.  Lines delineating the proposed phases of development, if applicable. 
r.  The layout and exact dimensions of proposed lots and blocks, with: 
1)  Front building setback lines and a note that reads, "All setbacks shall be in accordance with the zoning district, as described in the Keller Unified Development Code." 
2)  Lot number and block letter designations. 
3)  Acreage or square footage of each lot and minimum finished floor elevation (minimum finished floor elevation is required only if lot is located within 100-year floodplain or near natural drainage feature). 
s.  Land proposed for dedication to public use or for reservation for the common use of property owners, labeled with a separate lot and block designation. Also include a list of the conditions of or limitations on the use of this land. 
t.  Deed restrictions or other encumbrances that impact development of the property. 
u.  Rights-of-way and public property to be abandoned should be identified on the plat, but information is to be provided separately for the creation of an abandonment certificate (see Section 4.12 - Abandonment of Easements or Rights-of-Way for procedures). 
v.  Existing and/or proposed streets and alleys, showing street names and the widths of rights-of-way and pavement. Where a development abuts a street shown on the City's Thoroughfare Plan or a proposed Thoroughfare is within the development, the Final Plat shall include the dedication of rights-of-way in accordance with the requirements of the Thoroughfare Plan. 
w.  Location of all existing and proposed utility, access, and/or drainage easements, with a note regarding responsibility for maintenance. 
x.  Delineation of the 100-year floodplain, if applicable. 
y.  Names and recording information of adjoining subdivisions, municipalities, counties, special districts, and parcels of unsubdivided land, including: 
1)  Names of owners of record. 
2)  Boundary lines. 
3)  Zoning designations. 
4)  Names and accurate location of all adjacent streets. 
5)  Dimensions of all abutting lots. 
6)  Reference ties to courses and distances of at least one recognized and corner. 
z.  The Planning Manager, Planning and Zoning Commission, or City Council may require additional information or drawings, operations data, or expert evaluation when considering the application, including traffic studies and drainage studies. 
2.  Exhibit of Existing Conditions (if Construction Plans are not required) showing the following: 
a.  Location of all existing and proposed utility, access, and/or drainage easements, with a note regarding responsibility for maintenance. 
b.  Proposed grading, and a description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development. 
c.  Delineation of the 100-year floodplain, if applicable. 
d.  Location of all public and private service lines for natural gas, water, sanitary sewer or septic tanks, and other buried utilities, if applicable. (Amended by Ord. No. 1818 on October 18, 2016) 
3.  Tree survey and aerial photo with overlay of plan and tree survey and preservation plan in accordance with Article Eight - Tree Preservation, as applicable. 
4.  UDC Variance Request as described in Section 2.08 - Procedures for Variances from the Regulations of the Code, if applicable. 
D.  Approval Process for Major Subdivision Final Plats. 
1.  Major Subdivision Final Plat applications will be scheduled for a Planning and Zoning Commission meeting once approved by the DRC. The Community Development Department must receive one (1) electronic copy and one (1) collated and folded copy on 24" x 36" paper size for the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting. Based on the Development Review Committee's review, staff will prepare a report and recommendation for the Planning and Zoning Commission. A copy of this information and an agenda for the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting at which the application will be discussed is available to the applicant on the Friday prior to that Planning and Zoning Commission meeting. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider approval or approval with conditions of the Major Subdivision Final Plat that conforms to all City regulations. 
2.  If alternatives or variances are requested, the Major Subdivision Final Plat shall be forwarded to the City Council along with the Planning and Zoning Commission's recommendations within thirty (30) days of the last Planning and Zoning Commission meeting. In such case, the Community Development Department must receive one (1) electronic copy at least two (2) weeks prior to the City Council meeting. 
E.  Final File Copies. 
1.  The applicant must provide to the Community Development Department one (1) 24" x 36" of each blackline and mylar copies of the Final Plat exactly as it was approved by the City, complete with owner's signatures with notarization and surveyor's signature and seal. One of the blackline mylars will be filed with Tarrant County Deed Records. The other will be kept on file with the City. A Development Agreement for the development may not be executed if the mylar copies of the approved Final Plat have not been provided to the City. An electronic format of the plat, in AutoCAD version for GIS purposes must also be submitted with the final mylar copies (see Article Nine - Keller CAD Standards for CAD plat requirements). 
2.  Additionally, the applicant must provide current certified original tax receipts on all properties being platted. These are required by state law in order to file the plat with Tarrant County. The Applicant is also responsible for the filing fees to file the plat with Tarrant County. The Community Development Department will assign addresses for each lot once the plat is recorded with Tarrant County. 
3.  Approval of a Major Subdivision Final Plat is effective for two (2) years. At the end of two (2) years, if the Major Subdivision Final Plat has not been filed with Tarrant County, the plat will be deemed expired and the applicant/developer must go through the entire process again to obtain another one if desired. 
Major Subdivision Final Plat Process 
 
Site and Civil Engineered Plans must be approved prior to submittal. 
If Approved Final Plat Expires After Two (2) Years, if not filed. 
  
Section 4.09 - Amending Plats 
Amending Plats can be filed to correct an error in the real property description on part of all of an officially recorded Plat. Amending plats can be filed only to correct the errors specifically listed in Section 212.016 of Texas Local Government Code. 
A.  Amending Plat Requirements. An Amending Plat shall meet all of the informational requirements set forth for a Final Plat in Section 4.07 (C). The Planning Manager may approve and issue an Amending Plat, which may be recorded and is controlling over the preceding or final plat without vacation of that plat, if the amending plat is signed by the applicants only and is solely for one or more of the following purposes: 
1.  Correcting an error in a course or distance shown on the preceding plat. 
2.  Adding a course or distance that was omitted on the preceding plat. 
3.  Correcting an error in a real property description shown on the preceding plat. 
4.  Indicating monuments set after the death, disability, or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor responsible for setting monuments. 
5.  Showing the location or character of a monument that has been changed in location or character or that is shown incorrectly as to location or character on the preceding plat. 
6.  Correcting any other type of scrivener or clerical error or omission previously approved by the municipal authority responsible for approving plats, including lot numbers, acreage, street names, and identification of adjacent recorded plats. 
7.  Correcting an error in courses and distances of lot lines between two adjacent lots if: 
a.  Both lot owners join in the application for amending the plat. b. Neither lot is abolished. 
c.  The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions. 
d.  The amendment does not have a material adverse effect on the property rights of the owners in the plat. 
8.  Relocating a lot line to eliminate an inadvertent encroachment of a building or other improvement on a lot line or easement. 
9.  Relocating one or more lot lines between one or more adjacent lots if: 
a.  The owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the plat. 
b.  The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions. c. The amendment does not increase the number of lots. 
10.  To make necessary changes to the preceding plat to create six or fewer lots in the subdivision or a part of the subdivision covered by the preceding plat if: 
a.  the changes do not affect applicable zoning and other regulations of the municipality; 
b.  the changes do not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions; and b. the area covered by the changes is located in an area that the municipal planning commission or other appropriate governing body of the municipality has approved, after a public hearing, as a residential improvement area; or 
11.  To replat one or more lots fronting on an existing street if: 
a.  the owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the plat; 
b.  the amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; 
c.  the amendment does not increase the number of lots; and 
d.  the amendment does not create or require the creation of a new street or make necessary the extension of municipal facilities. 
12.  Notice, a public hearing, and the approval of other lot owners are not required for the approval and issuance of an amending plat. 
B.  Approval Process for Amending Plats. Other than noted above, the procedure for approval of plat amendment(s) shall be the same as for approval of a Minor Subdivision Final Plats seen in Section 4.07 (D). 
C.  Final File Copies. 
1.  Within thirty (30) days of the Amended Plat's approval by the Planning Manager, the applicant must provide to the Community Development Department one (1) 24" x 36" of each blackline and mylar copies of the Final Plat exactly as it was approved by the City, complete with owner's signatures with notarization and surveyor's signature and seal. One of the blackline mylars will be filed with Tarrant County Deed Records. The other will be kept on file with the City. A Development Agreement for the development may not be executed if the mylar copies of the approved Final Plat have not been provided to the City. An electronic format of the plat, in AutoCAD version for GIS purposes must also be submitted with the final mylar copies (see Article Nine - Keller CAD Standards for CAD plat requirements). 
2.  Additionally, the applicant must provide current certified original tax receipts on all property being platted. These are required by state law in order to file the plat with Tarrant County. The Applicant is also responsible for the filing fees to file the plat with Tarrant County. Addresses will be assigned for each lot once the plat is recorded with Tarrant County. 
3.  Approval of an Amended Plat is effective for two (2) years. At the end of two (2) years, if the Amended Plat has not been filed with Tarrant County, the plat will be deemed expired and the applicant/developer must go through the entire process again to obtain another one if desired.  
Section 4.10 - Replats 
A.  A Replat replaces part or all of an officially recorded Final Plat. Requirements for the replatting process are the same as the process for approval of a Final Plat. A public hearing will be required for replatting in accordance with Section 212.014 and 212.015 of Texas Local Government Code. 
B.  Replats involving four (4) or fewer lots fronting on an existing street and not requiring the creation of any new street or the extension of municipal facilities shall meet the submittal requirements of a Minor Subdivision Final Plat in Section 4.07 of this Code, however are still subject to a public hearing. All other Replats shall meet the requirements of a Major Subdivision Final Plat in Section 4.08 of this Code and are subject to a public hearing. 
C.  A public hearing may be required on all Replats in accordance with the Texas Local Government Code. 
D.  Information to be Submitted with Replats. 
1.  Information to be included on Replats is the same as that required for a Final Plat in Section 4.07 (C). No Preliminary Site Evaluation is required when property is replatted except in the case of Replats that create major changes in infrastructure requirements for a subdivision. 
2.  The Replat of a subdivision shall meet all current requirements of this Code. 
3.  The title shall identify the document as "Lots, being a Replat of Lots of Block of the (Name of Addition) Subdivision" as seen in Article Nine - Title Blocks Formats. 
E.  Approval Process for Replats. 
1.  Public hearings prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission decision and the City Council decision are required for all replat cases in order to give citizens who may be affected by the proposed change an opportunity to voice their support or opposition. When applications are submitted, they are reviewed by the Development Review Committee (DRC). Staff prepares a report to the Planning and Zoning Commission with its recommendation. This report is available to the applicant and the public prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting at which the case will be heard. Petitioners should be fully prepared to present their request to both the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council immediately prior to the public hearing. After the public hearing is held at the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting, the Planning and Zoning Commission decides what recommendation it will make to City Council based on the staff report and public input. 
2.  The staff report, Planning and Zoning Commission recommendation, and public response to the proposed replat are then made available to the public, and an additional public hearing is scheduled within thirty (30) working days of the initial hearing. The second public hearing is then conducted at a City Council meeting, after which Council Members make the final decision on the request. 
3.  It is recommended that applicants prepare a brief presentation on their proposal, to be given at each public hearing. The applicants should also have maps, slides, and handouts available at the meeting. 
4.  The applicant should make the presentations, but it is recommended that the property owner, if different from the applicant, also be present at the hearing to answer questions if necessary. 
F.  Final File Copies. 
1.  Within thirty (30) days of the Replat's approval by the Director of Community Development, Planning and Zoning Commission and/or City Council, the applicant must provide to the Community Development Department, one (1) 24" x 36" each black line and Mylar copies of the Final Plat exactly as it was approved by the City, complete with owner's signatures with notarization and surveyor's signature and seal. One of the blackline mylars will be filed with Tarrant County Deed Records. The other will be kept on file with the City. A Developer Agreement for the development may not be executed if the mylar copies of the approved Final Plat have not been provided to the City. An electronic format of the plat, in AutoCAD version for GIS purposes must also be submitted with the final mylar copies (see Article Nine - Keller CAD Standards for CAD plat requirements). 
2.  Additionally, the applicant must provide current certified original tax receipts on all properties being platted. These are required by state law in order to file the plat with Tarrant County. The Applicant is also responsible for the filing fees to file the plat with Tarrant County. Addresses will be assigned for each lot once the plat is recorded with Tarrant County. 
3.  Approval of a Replat is effective for two (2) years. At the end of two (2) years, if the Replat has not been filed with Tarrant County, the plat will be deemed expired and the applicant/developer must go through the entire process again to obtain another one if desired.  
Section 4.11 - Vacation of Plats 
Vacation procedure shall be followed as set forth in Chapter 212, Section 212.013 of the Texas Local Government Code. 
A.  The owners of a tract covered by a plat may vacate the plat at any time before any lot in the plat is sold. The plat is vacated when a signed, acknowledged instrument declaring the plat vacated is approved and recorded in the manner prescribed for the original plat. 
B.  If lots in the plat have been sold, the plat, or any part of the plat, may be vacated on the application of all the owners of lots in the plat with approval obtained in the manner prescribed for the original plat. 
C.  A Vacating Plat shall meet all of the informational requirements set forth for a Final Plat in Section 4.07 (C). Each lot vacated shall be clearly marked with the word "VACATED" boldly printed across the lot on the plat. 
D.  Final File Copies. 
1.  Within thirty (30) days of the Vacating Plat's approval by the Planning Manager, the applicant must provide to the Community Development Department one (1) 24" x 36" of each blackline and mylar copies of the Final Plat exactly as it was approved by the City, complete with owner's signatures with notarization and surveyor's signature and seal. One of the blackline mylars will be filed with Tarrant County Deed Records. The other will be kept on file with the City. A Development Agreement for the development may not be executed if the mylar copies of the approved Final Plat have not been provided to the City. An electronic format of the plat, in AutoCAD version for GIS purposes must also be submitted with the final mylar copies (see Article Nine - Keller CAD Standards for CAD plat requirements). 
2.  Additionally, the applicant must provide current certified original tax receipts on all property being platted. These are required by state law in order to file the plat with Tarrant County. The Applicant is also responsible for the filing fees to file the plat with Tarrant County. Addresses will be assigned for each lot once the plat is recorded with Tarrant County.  
Section 4.12 - Abandonment of Easements or Rights-of-Way 
The abandonment of easements and rights-of-way that are determined to be unnecessary by the City may be approved by a Certificate of Abandonment. Any dedicated or recorded easement shall be abandoned in the same manner as it was dedicated, either by Final Plat or by Separate Instrument. All supporting documents including exhibits and fees shall be submitted prior to approval of the Certificate (see Article Nine - Fees and Application Forms). 
A.  Abandonment of Easements or Rights-of-Way Requirements. 
1.  An abandonment procedure is applicable if the legal lot or record, as defined by this Code, or subdivision meet the following requirements: 
a.  The proposed lot(s) meet all the requirements of the existing zoning district. 
b.  The proposed abandonment does not create nor contain any drainage problem, it conforms to FEMA flood plain management rules, and it is not within the flood way. 
2.  A pre-application meeting with City Staff is encouraged if the applicant plans to request an Abandonment of Easements or Rights-of-Way Process. 
3.  Any dedicated or recorded easement to be abandoned by plat will follow replat procedures. 
4.  Any dedicated or recorded easement to be abandoned by separate instrument, will follow process outlined below. 
B.  Application. 
1.  A complete Certificate of Abandonment application consists of the application form, fee, letters of acceptance from private utility companies, and three (3) copies of the Abandonment exhibit that includes all information listed below in Section 4.11 (C). When a complete application is submitted, the Easements or Rights-of-Way Abandonment and accompanying documents are distributed to Development Review Committee (DRC) members. DRC has fifteen (15) working days to review the application. Following review, comments and requested revisions are forwarded to the applicant. The applicant must then return revised copies along with those marked by staff to the Community Development Department. The Development Review Committee will review the revised documents and provide comments again within ten (10) working days. The applicant is responsible for providing any necessary letters of verification of utility company review and Easement or Rights-of-Way abandonment approvals from electric, telephone, gas, cable, and other applicable companies that may affect this easement(s) or rights-of-way. 
C.  Information to be Submitted with Certificate of Abandonments. The review process will not begin until an Abandonment exhibit that includes at least the information on the following list is submitted with a completed application form, filing fee, and letters of acceptance from private utility companies. The applicant must submit to the Community Development Department three (3) 8-1/2" x 11" or 8-1/2" x 14" copies of the Abandonment exhibit. Scale used should be 1" = 100' or larger. 
1.  Title Block in lower right hand corner of Abandonment Exhibit to include: 
a.  Project's name. 
b.  Address and/or legal description of the project, total acreage and zoning. 
c.  Name, address, and telephone number of the preparer (Surveyor). 
d.  Date of preparation and dates of revisions, if any (As exhibits are revised, add dates of revision to each submittal). 
2.  Graphic Scale labeled with scale used. 
3.  North arrow oriented to the top or right of the sheet. 
4.  Metes and bounds description of the property to be abandoned. 
5.  Surveyor's Certificate with a signature line, the Surveyor's seal, and stating: 
"This is to certify that this abandonment exhibit is an accurate representation of an actual survey made on the ground under my supervision of the described tract and the boundary lines, corners, and dimensions shown are as indicated." 
___________ 
Registered Professional Land Surveyor 
6.  An Owner's Certificate stating the following: 
OWNER'S CERTIFICATE 
STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF TARRANT 
WHEREAS, John Doe and Jane Doe are the Owner(s) of a tract of land situated in the (Survey Name), Abstract Number (Survey Number), Tarrant County, Texas and being that same tract of land described in (Name and Recording Information), and being more particularly described by metes and bounds as follows: 
(Metes and bounds description of subdivision with exact acreage and the volume and page of the County Deed Records of the deed for the land being platted and description and location of all survey monuments placed or found) 
NOW THEREFORE, KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS: 
That we, John Doe and Jane Doe, Owners, do hereby adopt this plat designating the hereinabove described property as (Plat Name, include lot and blocks), an addition to the City of Keller and do hereby dedicate to the public use forever the streets and alleys shown thereon and do hereby reserve the easement strips shown on this plat for the mutual use and accommodation of garbage collection agencies and all public utilities desiring to use or using same. Any public utility shall have the right to remove and keep removed all or part of any buildings, fences, , or other improvements which in any way endanger or interfere with the construction, maintenance, or efficiency of its respective systems on any of these easement strips and any public utility shall at all times have the right of ingress and egress to and from and upon the said easement strips for the purpose of constructing, reconstructing, inspecting, and patrolling, without the necessity at any time of procuring the permission of anyone. Trees and shrubs further than five- feet from the utility lines shall remain. This plat approved subject to all platting ordinances, rules, regulations, and resolutions of the City of Keller, Texas. 
Witness our hands at Tarrant County, Texas, this day of . 
___________  ___________ 
John Doe, Owner      Jane Doe, Owner 
Notary Public's Certificate with a signature line, the Notary Public's stamp, and stating the following: 
STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF TARRANT 
Before me, the undersigned authority, a Notary Public in and for said County and State on this date personally appeared John Doe and Jane Doe, Owners, known to me to be the persons whose names are subscribed to the foregoing instrument and acknowledged to me that they each executed the same for the purpose and considerations therein expressed. 
Given under my hand and seal of office, this day of . 
Notary Public in and for the State of Texas 
7.  Length and bearing of all straight lines, radii, arc length, tangent length, and central angles of all curves, indicated along the lines of the easement or rights-of-way that is to be abandoned. 
8.  Label showing which easement or rights-of-way to be abandoned. 
a.  For drainage easements or areas within or near a 100-year floodplain, the following note will need to be included; "The property owner(s) shall maintain the drainage patterns, after abandonment of easement, as per the plans on file at the City of Keller as record drawings for this property." 
b.  Additional information pertaining to such easement abandonment may be required by the Public Works Department. 
9.  Description and location of all survey monuments placed or found. 
10.  Metes and bounds description of the easement or rights-of-way that is to be abandoned with exact acreage and the volume and page of the County Deed Records of the deed for the land being abandoned. 
11.  Existing and/or proposed streets and alleys, showing street names and the widths of right- of-way and pavement. 
12.  Location of all existing and proposed utility, access, and/or drainage easements. 
13.  Delineation of the 100-year flood plain, if applicable. 
14.  Legal description and recording information of all adjacent properties including subdivisions, municipalities, counties, special districts, and parcels of unsubdivided land. 
D.  Approval Process for Certificate of Abandonments. 
1.  Easements. 
a.  The City Manager makes the final decision on a Certificate of Abandonment for all easements if it meets all of the City's Code requirements for development. The City Manager shall make final approval or disapproval of a Certificate of Abandonment application within thirty (30) days of a complete application filing. The City Manager may refer any Certificate of Abandonment application to the City Council for their action. 
b.  City Manager or designee will prepare an approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval letter for the Certificate of Abandonment. A copy of this information will be available to the applicant. 
2.  Rights-of-Way. 
a.  The Certificate of Abandonment for rights-of-way will be scheduled for a City Council meeting if it is considered complete by Friday at noon, thirty (30) days prior to the meeting. The Community Development Department must receive seven (7) collated and folded copies of the informational documents described in 4.11.C. for distribution to the Development Review Committee. Based on the Development Review Committee's review, Public Works staff will prepare a report and recommendation for City Council. Upon approval by the DRC, an electronic copy shall be provided to the Community Development Department. A copy of this information and an agenda for the City Council meeting at which the application will be discussed will be made available to the applicant on the Friday prior to that City Council meeting. 
b.  The City Council makes final decision on rights-of-way abandonments in accordance with Texas Local Government Code. 
E.  Final File Copies. 
1.  After approval of the Certificate of Abandonment, the applicant shall provide two (2) copies of the Certificate of Abandonment and filing fees to file the document at Tarrant County. 
2.  Easements abandoned by a Final Plat shall meet the requirements for final copies of a Minor Plat in Section 4.06 of this Code. 
3.  An electronic, georeferenced format of the plat either in AutoCAD version, for GIS purposes must also be submitted with the final mylar copies. Following is the appropriate coordinate reference system to be used: 
Geographic Coordinate System: GCS_North_American_1983 
Projected Coordinate 
System: NAD_1983_StatePlane_Texas_North_Central_FIPS_4202_Feet 
Projection: Lambert_Conformal_Conic 
(see Article Nine - Keller CAD Standards for CAD plat requirements).  
Section 4.13 - Single-Family Residential Construction Process 
A.  Application. 
1.  Civil Engineered Plans must be submitted for review prior to the Final Plat, and they must detail the specific location and design of public improvements to be installed in the subdivision or addition. This review process was created to ensure that the improvements installed comply with all applicable City Codes and Ordinances. Three (3) sets of Civil Engineered Plans, including all applicable fees should be submitted to the Community Development Department when any single-family residential Final Plat is submitted. The Civil Engineered Plans are considered to be an integral part of the Final Plat and will be reviewed accordingly. Community Development Department staff forwards the plans to the Development Review Committee for review. The Plans must be reviewed and released for construction before a Pre-Construction Meeting will be scheduled. 
2.  Civil Engineered Plans will be reviewed by the Development Review Department, and comments will be returned to the developer within fifteen (15) working days. Each subsequent submittal of Civil Engineered Plans will be reviewed within ten (10) working days. When the Civil Engineered Plans have been reviewed and released for construction, the developer shall provide Public Works with two (2) sets of 22" x 34" and three sets of (3) 11" x 17" approved sets of Civil Engineered Plans. The Civil Engineered Plans shall be valid for one (1) year, after which they shall be resubmitted for review and release of before their use will be allowed. All Civil Engineered Plans shall be signed by the City Engineer to indicate acceptance and release for construction. 
3.  Community Development Department staff will provide preliminary approval of proposed street names and will address the lots. 
4.  For single-family residential developments platted with rear or side yards adjacent to arterial or collector streets identified on the City of Keller Thoroughfare Plan, landscaping and screening walls shall be required (see Section 5.10 - Residential Subdivisions Thoroughfare Screening and Landscaping for requirements). Landscaping and Screening Wall Plans must be submitted as part of the Civil Engineered Plans for review and approval before building permits can be issued (see Section 4.14 - Landscaping and Screening Wall Plans for plan requirements). 
B.  Information To Be Submitted With Single-Family Residential Civil Engineered Plans. Three (3) complete sets of Civil Engineered Plans must be submitted when the Final Plat is submitted. The Final Plat will not be released for filing until the complete set of Plans has been reviewed and released for construction by the Director of Public Works. The set of Plans must conform to the requirements listed within this Code. A complete set of Civil Engineered Plans includes Detailed Engineering Civil Engineered Plans; Trench Safety Plans; Utilities Plans; Park and/or Trail Improvements (if applicable); Landscape and Screening Wall Plans (if applicable), Tree Survey and Tree Protection Plans (if applicable). (Amended by Ord. No. 1818 on October 18, 2016) 
1.  Detailed Engineering Civil Engineered Plans. Civil Engineered Plans shall conform to Design and Technical Construction Standards (DTCS) requirements (see Article Five - DTCS) and include at least the following: 
a.  Cover page with name, address, and telephone number of the engineer and developer. 
b.  Vicinity map on cover page. 
c.  Final Plat. 
d.  North arrow, scale, and engineer's seal on each page. e. Design details of: 
1)  Streets. 
2)  Drainage systems. 
3)  Site grading. 
4)  Water systems. 
5)  Sanitary sewer system. 
6)  Alleys. 
7)  Sidewalks. 
8)  Erosion control. 
9)  Tree survey. 
10)  Tree preservation. 
f.  City of Keller Construction Details. 
2.  Trench Safety Plans. For projects in which trench excavation will exceed a depth of five feet (5'), a Trench Safety Plan that complies with all Occupational Safety and Health Administration standards and State of Texas regulations must be submitted prior to any utility construction. 
3.  Utilities Plans. Location and description of easements for private utilities must be included. 
4.  Park and/or Trail Improvements (if applicable): 
a.  Note existing trees to be removed in accordance with Article Eight - Tree Preservation of this Code. 
b.  Note existing distinctive natural features. 
c.  For Park Improvements, provide a site plan denoting the improvements and details of specifications of the proposed site features. 
d.  For Trail Improvements, provide a layout of the trail and details of specifications in accordance with the City Wide Trail System Master Plan (see Section 7.02 for requirements). 
5.  Tree Survey and Tree Protection Plan. Location and description of all existing trees. Location and description of those to be protected and/or removed. (see Section 8.20 - Exhibit C for requirements). 
C.  Pre-Construction Meeting. Public Works staff will then make arrangements with the project engineer for a pre-construction meeting. The developer, engineer, contractor, sub-contractors, and other interested parties are required to attend this meeting. At the meeting, City Staff will discuss Keller's construction sequencing and the Development Agreement. The applicant pays Development and Inspection Fees and submits Payment and Performance Bonds and Trench Safety Plan. A Notice to Proceed will be issued at this meeting if all needed information and fees have been provided by the developer. 
D.  Development Agreement. 
1.  For all subdivisions or additions that require public improvements, such as streets, drainage, water, and sewer facilities, the developer must enter into an agreement with the City to delineate responsibility for construction and expenditures. These Agreements are required in order to ensure proper construction and completion of the subdivision. A Development Agreement usually contains the following elements: 
a.  Cost estimate for public improvements. b. Street and drainage participation. 
c.  Oversizing agreements. 
d.  Fee amounts - inspections, impact, parks, street signs. 
e.  Assurance of construction of water and sewer facilities, streets, drainage, street lights and street signs, and park trail improvements. 
f.  Construction phasing. 
g.  Performance, payment, and contractor's maintenance bonds in the amount of one hundred percent (100%) of construction cost. 
h.  Stipulation of the amounts for which the developer must require the contractors to obtain Public Liability, Bodily Injury, and Property Damage Insurance. 
i.  Requirement that the contractor provide Workers' Compensation Insurance in accordance with the most recent Texas Workers' Compensation Commission's rules. 
j.  Any off-site easements required. 
2.  The Development Agreement is executed on forms available from Public Works. When required by the Director of Public Works, the Final Plat will be filed with Tarrant County following the approval of the Development Agreement and payment of all fees. Under special circumstances, the Final Plat may be filed with Tarrant County following approval of the Development Agreement and payment of the Parks Fees. In such a case, all other fees may be submitted after Final Plat is filed, but they must be in before construction of improvements begins. City participation in the development cost will require approval of the Development Agreement by the City Council. 
E.  Construction Sequence. Detailed construction specifications can be found in the City of Keller Design and Technical Construction Standards (DTCS), the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, and this Development Code. Private utilities shall be installed at the same time that public utility features are being installed where practicable. The developer is responsible for coordination of the construction activity to provide for orderly installation of all utilities. Construction should generally follow this sequence of events: 
1.  Begin cut and fill procedures. 
2.  Install water and sewer mains. 
3.  Install underground storm drainage facilities. 
4.  Complete public utilities installation. 
5.  Install streets, curb inlets, sidewalks, and trails (when applicable). 
6.  Install street lights. 
7.  Install street signs per Development Agreement. 
8.  Install screening walls, irrigation systems, and landscaping. 
9.  Contact the Public Works Department to schedule a final inspection. 
F.  Formal Acceptance. 
1.  City Staff will conduct a final inspection after the Public Works Department is notified by the contractor. A contractor must be present at the final inspection and prepared to pull all manhole covers, meter lids, valve covers, and clean-out covers. The contractor must be prepared to open valves, curb stops, and fire hydrants. The final inspection shall apply to all of the following: 
a.  Infrastructure has been completed according to approved plans and specifications. b. Street lights and regulatory signs have been installed. 
c.  Retesting and fire hydrant meter fees have been paid. 
2.  After final inspection, the City will formally accept ownership of water, sanitary sewer, drainage, and street facilities by issuing a Letter of Acceptance signed by the Director of Public Works to the contractor if all work has been completed as specified and the City has received the following: 
a.  2-year 100% Maintenance Bonds from each contractor. 
b.  Lien Releases from Contractors and Subcontractors that they have received payment in full and release any lien rights. 
c.  One (1) sets of blueline or blackline Civil Engineered Plans, one (1) set of mylar Civil Engineer Plans and one electronic copy reflecting the project "as built". The engineer of record must sign, date, and certify that the "as built" Construction Plans (based on field observation comments submitted by the construction inspector, construction manager, and construction general contractor and subcontractors with these comments) accurately annotated on the original construction drawings by the project engineer or project engineer's staff, reflect the project as it has actually been constructed. 
d.  Computer Aided Design (CAD), in appropriate format and georeferenced for GIS purposes, of the As-Built Construction Plans submitted by the design engineer (see Article Nine - Keller CAD Standards for CAD construction plan requirements). Following is the appropriate coordinate reference system to be used: 
Geographic Coordinate System: GCS_North_American_1983 
Projected.Coordinate.System: NAD_1983_StatePlane_Texas_North_Central_FIPS_4202_Feet 
Projection:  Lambert_Conformal_Conic 
(see Article Nine - Keller CAD Standards for CAD plat requirements). e. Affidavit of Bills Paid. 
G.  Issuance of Building Permit. As a general rule, the subdivision must be fully completed and accepted before any building permit is issued. An exception may be granted if all infrastructure improvements (i.e. water, sanitary sewer, drainage, paving, street lights, regulatory signs, perimeter sidewalks, public trail construction, and detention ponds) except for the screening wall, landscaping, irrigation system, and private amenities (pool, clubhouse, trail, etc.) approved as part of a PD are ready for final acceptance. In such a situation, the developer may request a final inspection from the Public Works Department for the infrastructure improvements. The Director of Public Works or designee may issue a letter of acceptance on the infrastructure improvements and notify the Community Development Department of the acceptance. The Community Development Department may then authorize the release of up to ten percent (10%) of the building permits within the subdivision upon receipt of the letter of acceptance. If the Community Development Department releases ten percent (10%) of the permits, the Community Development Department may consider prior performance or require escrow funds up to the amount required to complete the screening walls, landscaping, irrigation and other amenities. The Community Development Department will release the remaining ninety percent (90%) of the building permits when the screening wall, landscaping, irrigation system, and all other amenities are completed and installed in accordance with the reviewed and released landscaping and screening wall plans and/or site plans. 
  
Section 4.14 - Landscaping and Screening Wall Plans 
A.  Application. Screening walls shall be required in all residential subdivisions platted with rear or side yards adjacent to arterial or collector streets identified on the City of Keller Thoroughfare Plan (see Section 5.10 - Residential Subdivisions Thoroughfare Screening and Landscaping). A complete Landscaping and Screening Wall Plan application consists of the application form and three (3) sets of detailed Landscaping and Screening Wall Plans. These plans may be rolled. When a complete application is submitted, the Landscaping and Screening Wall Plans and accompanying documents are distributed to Development Review Committee (DRC) members. The Development Review Committee has fifteen (15) working days to review the application. Following review, comments and requested revisions are forwarded to the applicant. The applicant must then return revised copies along with all markups made by staff to the Community Development Department. The Development Review Committee will review the revised documents and provide comments again within ten (10) working days. Every subsequent submittal will be reviewed within ten (10) working days. 
B.  Information to be Submitted with Landscaping and Screening Wall Plans. The review process will not begin until a complete Landscaping and Screening Wall Plan that includes at least the information on the following list is submitted with a completed application form. The applicant must submit three (3) 24" x 36" sets of Landscaping and Screening Wall Plans to the Community Development Department. Plans for private park improvements, pools, and clubhouses must be submitted independently to Keller's Development Services Division. Scale used must be 1" = 50' or larger. 
1.  Landscaping and Screening Wall Plans should contain the following information: 
a.  Title Block to include: 
1)  Project's name. 
2)  Address and/or legal description of the project. 
3)  Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. 
4)  Name, address, and telephone number of contact person of the developer. 
5)  Name, address, and telephone number of the preparer (Landscape Architect and/or Engineer). 
6)  Date of preparation and dates of revisions, if any (As plans are revised, add dates of revision to each submittal). 
b.  North arrow oriented to the top or right of the sheet. 
c.  A typical section showing the lot, street, parkway, sidewalk, screening wall easement, landscaping, and screening wall (include dimensions). 
d.  Paving and design detail (sidewalks, streets, parking, etc.). 
e.  A typical elevation of the screening wall including signage and landscaping (show dimensions, materials, colors, plant types, etc.) 
f.  Structural design for the wall, including column, drainage, and footing design, and stamped by a Structural Engineer. Wall design shall accommodate drainage. 
g.  A note placed on all sheets stating that upon completion of the screening wall construction, a letter will be submitted to the City signed and sealed by a Licensed Engineer or contractor responsible for the construction of the wall stating that the screening wall was built in accordance with the approved Landscaping and Screening Wall Plans and specifications. 
h.  Plan view that includes dimensions and shows the rights-of-way, lots, all easements, and the location of the screening wall(s) and landscaping. 
i.  Location of the required sidewalks and trails to be constructed with the subdivision. Sidewalks are required along all thoroughfares and are to be located at the property line or one-foot (1') from the property line. Trails are required in accordance with the City Parks and Trails Master Plan. Other sidewalk and trail locations must be approved by the Development Review Committee. 
j.  Location, size, and species of all trees to be preserved in accordance with this code (see Section 8 for Tree Preservation Requirements). "Tree stamps" are not to be used unless they indicate the true size and location of trees. 
k.  Location, size, species, and spacing of all required trees and plant material to be used. (see Section 5.10 - Residential Subdivisions Thoroughfare Screening and Landscaping for requirements). Existing trees credited toward the requirements must also be shown. Proposed trees must be located within the landscaping and screening wall easement. 
l.  Location of all other landscaping material to be used, including paving, benches, screens, fountains, statues, earthen berms, and ponds (marked with water depth). 
m.  Additional landscaping amenities provided by the developer or required as part of a Planned Development zoning. 
n.  Topography of the site. 
2.  Irrigation Plans should contain the following information: 
a.  Description of maintenance provisions and specific models/materials used. 
b.  Layout and description of irrigation, sprinkler, or water systems and the placement of water sources. 
c.  Location and size of all water and irrigation meters. 
d.  Location and type of backflow prevention device. 
e.  Location and type of rain and freeze sensor. 
f.  Irrigation plans shall be designed by a licensed irrigator. Irrigator shall sign and seal the plans submitted. 
3.  UDC Variance Request as described in Section 2.08 - Procedures for Variances from the Regulations of the Code, if applicable. 
C.  Approval Process for Landscaping and Screening Wall Plans. 
1.  Landscaping and Screening Wall Plans can be approved by the Planning Manager if it meets all applicable requirements of this Code. 
2.  If variances are requested for the Landscaping and Screening Wall Plan, then variance requests shall be considered for approval by City Council before it can proceed. 
3.  Based on the Development Review Committee's review, staff will prepare a report and recommendation for the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council if variances are requested. A copy of this information and an agenda for the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council meeting at which the application will be discussed will be available to the applicant on the Friday prior to that Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council meeting. The Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council votes on approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval. 
D.  Final File Copies. 
1.  After approval by the Planning Manager, the applicant shall submit to the Community Development Department: 
a.  one (1) set on 24" x 36" paper size of the Landscaping and Screening Wall Plan as approved by the Planning Manager; 
b.  Computer Aided Design (CAD), in appropriate format and georeferenced for GIS purposes, of the As-Built Construction Plans submitted by the design engineer (see Article Nine - Keller CAD Standards for CAD construction plan requirements). Following is the appropriate coordinate reference system to be used: 
Geographic Coordinate System: GCS_North_American_1983 
Projected.Coordinate.System: NAD_1983_StatePlane_Texas_North_Central_FIPS4202_Feet 
Projection:Lambert_Conformal_Conic 
(see Article Nine - Keller CAD Standards for CAD plat requirements). 
2.  Approval of a Landscaping and Screening Wall Plan is effective for one (1) year. At the end of one (1) year, the Landscaping and Screening Wall Plan or any portion that has not been constructed or is deemed not to be under construction, shall expire. The applicant may request a one-year extension from the Planning Manager, if no changes in development requirements impacting the Landscaping and Screening Wall Plan have occurred. 
3.  The Community Development Department will release the remaining ninety percent (90%) of the building permits for a single-family residential development when the screening wall, landscaping, irrigation system, and all other amenities are completed and installed in accordance with the approved Landscaping and Screening Wall Plans (see Section 4.13 (G) - Single-Family Residential Construction Process).  
Section 4.15 - Non-Single Family Residential Construction Process 
A.  Site Plan Required. All non-single family-residential construction in the City of Keller requires Site Plan approval prior to construction. A complete Site Plan is required for the following: 
1.  All new non-single family-residential developments. 
2.  Additions or changes to an existing non-residential building, or conversion of a building for a non-residential use. 
3.  Changes in use or occupancy of an existing non-residential building requires a modified Site Plan that shows parking, dumpster location and screening, screening walls, landscaping, and signage (see Section 8.02 (A.5.g) for requirements) 
4.  Multi-family, mobile home park, or mixed use developments. 
5.  Planned Developments and Specific Use Permits. 
B.  Application. 
1.  A complete Site Plan application consists of the application form, fee, and seven (7) collated and folded copies of the Site Plan that includes all information listed below in Section 4.15 (C). When a complete application is submitted, the Site Plan and accompanying documents are distributed to the Development Review Committee (DRC) members. The Development Review Committee has fifteen (15) working days to review the application. Following review, comments and requested revisions are forwarded to the applicant. The applicant must then return revised copies along with all markups made by staff to the Community Development Department. The Development Review Committee will review the revised documents and provide comments again within ten (10) working days. This review-and- comment process will repeat until the Site Plan is in a form that could be approved. 
2.  All non-single family-residential site plan applicants are responsible for coordinating with all utility companies to determine the locations of all utility needs of the development. Utility boxes shall be placed in locations where they will not detract from the visual quality of the site from the street view and be screened with live landscaping. 
C.  Information To Be Submitted With a Site Plan Application. The review process will not begin until a Site Plan that includes at least the information on the following list is submitted with a completed application form and filing fee. Site Plans shall be prepared by a Texas-Registered Professional Architect, Texas-Registered Professional Civil Engineer, or other qualified professional (as approved by the DRC). Utility plans, Drainage Plans, and Grading Plans shall be prepared by a Texas Registered Professional Civil Engineer. Architectural elevation plans shall be prepared by a Texas Registered Professional Architect. Landscape Plans shall be prepared by a Texas Registered Landscape Architect. Trails may be designed by either a Texas Registered Professional Engineer or Landscape Architect. Screening walls and other structural walls must be designed by a Texas Registered Structural Engineer. The applicant shall submit to the Community Development Department seven (7) 22" x 34" copies of the Site Plan, collated and folded to 9" x 12" paper size (see Article Nine - Plan Folding Procedures, no later than Friday at noon. Rolled documents will not be accepted. Scale used should be 1" = 50' or larger. The overall site plan package must contain the following six sheets with the corresponding information listed below: 
1.  Site Plan Sheet. 
a.  Title Block in lower right hand corner of site plan to include: 
1)  Project's name. 
2)  Name, address, telephone number, fax number, and contact person of the Applicant. 
3)  Name, address, telephone number, fax number, and contact person of the Owner. 
4)  Name, address, telephone number, fax number, and contact person of the preparer (Architect or Engineer). 
5)  Address and/or legal description of the project (addition's name, lots, and blocks). 
6)  Total acreage and zoning. 
7)  Date of preparation and dates of revisions, if any (as the site plan is revised, add dates of revision to each submittal). 
b.  A summary table showing: 
1)  Total building square footage. 
2)  Number of required parking spaces (show calculations based on building usage). 
3)  Number of provided parking spaces (number of handicapped parking spaces shall not be included as part of required parking spaces). 
c.  Graphic Scale labeled with scale used. 
d.  North arrow oriented to the top or right of sheet. 
e.  Vicinity map of the City Base Map with scale of 1"=1,000' with site location shaded. 
f.  Distances and bearings of all lots. 
g.  Cross section of proposed streets, alleys, and parking lots, showing the width and type of pavement and the location and width of sidewalks. 
h.  The footprints of all proposed buildings or structures. 
i.  Setback lines as required by the respective zoning district. 
j.  The names and widths of rights-of-way and pavement of existing and proposed streets and alleys. 
k.  All curbs or pavement edge and lane striping on adjacent streets with dimensions. 
l.  Driveway and sidewalk locations with dimensions and curve radii labeled. 
m.  Parking layout, including maneuvering, loading, and unloading areas. 
n.  Easements, deed restrictions, or other encumbrances that impact development of the lot. 
o.  Location, type, material, and height of: 
1)  Required screening walls or fences, including elevations. 
2)  Site lighting showing the height and location of exterior light fixtures. 
3)  Signs locations (All signs shall be permitted separately and meet the sign requirements of this Code at the time of permit). 
p.  Location and screening of trash receptacles with materials clearly identified (Trash receptacles/dumpsters are required for all non-single family-residential developments unless other acceptable alternative is proposed). 
q.  Zoning, legal description, and owner of record for all adjacent lots or tracts. 
r.  Park/Trail location and improvements, if applicable. 
s.  Location of all utility boxes, cabinets, or meters, which shall be located at rear or side of building, if practical. 
2.  Utility Plan. 
a.  All property lines and easements. 
b.  The footprints of all proposed buildings or structures. 
c.  Driveway and sidewalk locations with dimensions and curve radii labeled. 
d.  Parking layout, including maneuvering, loading, and unloading areas. 
e.  Location and size of all existing and proposed water and sewer lines. 
f.  Location and size of all other utilities existing and proposed, underground or overhead. 
g.  Fire protection, including locations of existing and proposed fire hydrants, fire lanes, and fire lines, with all dimensions clearly designated. 
h.  Distances to closest existing fire hydrants, on-site or off-site, which would provide water access for this property in the event of a fire. 
i.  Location of trees and shrubs to be preserved or planted. Trees and shrubs within five- feet of the utility lines may be removed. All others shall remain in compliance with the UDC. 
3.  Grading and Drainage Plan 
a.  All property lines and easements. 
b.  The footprints of all proposed buildings or structures. 
c.  Driveway and sidewalk locations with dimensions and curve radii labeled. 
d.  Parking layout, including maneuvering, loading, and unloading areas. 
e.  Existing and proposed contours. 
f.  Location of existing and proposed drainage structures with sizes and dimensions clearly labeled. 
g.  Location of 100-year floodplain and floodway. 
h.  Location of proposed improvements in relation to Areas of Special Flood Hazard. 
i.  Elevation from mean sea level of new or substantially improved structures. 
j.  A certificate from a Texas-registered Professional Engineer or Architect that states non- residential flood proofed structures meet the criteria contained in the Flood Plain Ordinance. 
k.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development. 
4.  Landscape Plan. The Landscape Plan must be prepared by a Texas Registered Landscape Architect. It must include the following at a minimum scale of 1" = 50'. The Landscape Plan shall conform to the requirements set forth in Article Eight of this Code. 
a.  Name of preparer. 
b.  Date of preparation. 
c.  North arrow oriented to the top or right of the sheet. 
d.  Location and spacing of all plants and landscaping materials and features to be used, including paving, benches, and fountains. 
e.  Species, quantity, and size of all plant materials to be used. 
f.  Location, size, and species of all trees to be preserved ("tree stamps" may not be used unless they indicate the true size and location of trees). 
g.  Depth of pond, if applicable. 
h.  Topography. 
i.  Description of provisions for maintenance. 
j.  A note that states that all landscaped areas will be irrigated and that detailed irrigation plans will be submitted with construction plans. 
k.  A note that all landscaped areas are to be maintained in accordance with City regulations. 
l.  Location and size of all other utilities existing and/or proposed, underground or overhead, including private transmission lines. 
5.  Elevations. 
a.  Architectural elevations showing all sides of the proposed building and labeled north, south, east and west. 
b.  The height of the proposed building clearly dimensioned. 
c.  All exterior finishes and roofing materials clearly identified. 
d.  One 11" x 17" sheet with all elevations in color with labels and dimensions removed to serve as a color sample of exterior finishes. 
6.  Photometric Plan. The Photometric Plan must be submitted with all site plans that are adjacent to residential zoning or uses, showing the light intensity within and around the perimeter of the site. The Photometric Plan shall conform to the requirements set forth in Section 8.16 - Lighting and Glare Standards. 
a.  All property lines and easements. 
b.  The footprints of all proposed buildings or structures. 
c.  Parking layout, including maneuvering, loading, and unloading areas. 
d.  Type, location, and height of all proposed light poles and fixtures. 
7.  Aerial Overlay. A recent aerial photograph must be submitted (if applicable) in either 11" x 17" or 8.5" x 11" format with an attached transparent overlay that shows the following items: 
a.  All property lines and easements. 
b.  The footprints of all proposed buildings or structures. 
c.  Driveway and sidewalk locations. 
d.  Parking layout, including maneuvering, loading, and unloading areas. 
8.  Tree Survey and Tree Preservation Plan, as applicable see Section 8.19 (Amended by Ord. No. 1818 on October 18, 2016) 
9.  UDC Variance Request as described in Section 2.08 - Procedures for Variances from the Regulations of the Code, if applicable. 
D.  Approval Process For Site Plans. 
1.  Modified Site Plans for existing buildings or Site Plans for parking improvements may be approved by the Development Review Committee if it meets all applicable requirements. The DRC's decision may be appealed to the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council. 
2.  Site Plans within the Town Center (TC) Zoning District shall be considered for approval by City Council after a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission. All other site plans shall be considered for approval by the City Manager or designee if it complies with best professional practices and meets all applicable requirements of this Code for development. The City Manager's decision may be appealed to the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council. 
3.  If variances are requested, the Site Plan shall be considered by City Council after a recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Based on the Development Review Committee's review, staff will prepare a report and recommendation for the Planning and Zoning Commission. Staff can recommend approval, conditional approval, or denial based on the requirements of this Code. A copy of this information and an agenda for the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting at which the application will be discussed will be available to the applicant on the Friday prior to that Planning and Zoning Commission meeting. The Site Plan will be placed on a City Council agenda within thirty (30) days following the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting. The applicant shall submit one (1) collated and folded 24" x 36" copy and twelve (12) 11" X 17" reductions of the Site Plan at least ten (10) days prior to the City Council meeting. 
4.  Prior to the City Council meeting, staff will provide to the applicant a copy of the staff report and recommendations, and the City Council agenda. The City Council can approve, approve with conditions, or deny a Site Plan. After the City Council approves a Site Plan, if final architectural or engineering design necessitates minor changes in the approved Site Plan, the changes may be approved by the City Manager or his/her designee, provided that they do not materially alter traffic circulation, building location, or any conditions attached to the City Council's approval of the Site Plan. 
E.  Final File Copies. 
1.  After approval by the Development Review Committee and/or the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council, the applicant shall submit to the Community Development Department: 
a.  Three (3) 22" x 34" blueline or blackline copies of the Site Plan as approved. All changes made by the approving body shall be reflected on the Site Plan; 
b.  An electronic format of the exterior elevations of the project, either in .pdf or .jpeg versions. These copies of the approved site plan must be submitted within thirty (30) days of the date of approval. No Building Permit will be issued until the copies are submitted; 
c.  Computer Aided Design (CAD), in appropriate format and georeferenced for GIS purposes, of the As-Built Construction Plans submitted by the design engineer (see Article Nine - Keller CAD Standards for CAD construction plan requirements). Following is the appropriate coordinate reference system to be used: 
Geographic Coordinate System: GCS_North_American_1983 
Projected.Coordinate.System: NAD_1983_StatePlane_Texas_North_Central_FIPS4202_Feet 
Projection:Lambert_Conformal_Conic 
(see Article Nine - Keller CAD Standards for CAD plat requirements). 
2.  Approval of a Site Plan is effective for one (1) year. At the end of one year, the Site Plan or any portion that has not been constructed or is deemed not to be under construction, shall expire. The applicant may request a one-year extension from the City Manager or his/her designee, if no changes in development requirements impacting the Site Plan have occurred. 
F.  Construction Plans. Following the approval of the Site, Construction Plans may be submitted to the Development Services Division. Three (3) sets of Building Plans prepared and/or stamped by a Texas- Registered Architect; three (3) sets of Paving, Drainage, and Utility Plans prepared by a Texas- Registered Civil Engineer; Landscape Plans shall be prepared by a Texas Registered Landscape Architect. Trails may be designed by either a Texas Registered Professional Engineer or Landscape Architect. Screening walls and other structural walls must be designed by a Texas Registered Structural Engineer, the Building Permit Application; and applicable fees must be submitted before the review process can begin. These plans will be reviewed within fifteen (15) working days by all applicable departments and may be picked up at the Development Services Division of the City. Every subsequent submittal will be reviewed within ten (10) working days. A Building Permit will be issued when the Plans are released for construction by all applicable departments. Developments requiring public infrastructure improvements (road and utility extensions) must include Construction Plans for the improvements. 
G.  Development Agreement. After approval of Building Plans and Paving, Drainage, and Utility Plans, the developer shall enter into an agreement with the City to delineate responsibility for construction of public improvements and related expenditures, if applicable. 
H.  Pre-Construction Meeting/Issuance of Building Permit. Public Works staff will then make arrangements with the project engineer for a pre-construction meeting. The developer, engineer, contractor, sub-contractors, and other interested parties are required to attend this meeting. At the meeting, City Staff will discuss Keller's construction sequencing and the Development Agreement. The applicant pays Development and Inspection Fees and submits Maintenance Bonds and Trench Safety Plan. A Notice to Proceed will be issued at this meeting if all needed information and fees have been provided by the developer. 
I.  Final Acceptance/Certificate of Occupancy. Inspections will be performed at various stages of work. The City will conduct a final inspection after all work has been completed. This includes all building-related and site-related (on-site and off-site) improvements. Computer Aided Design (CAD) in appropriate format of the As- Built Construction Plans must be submitted by the design engineer (see Article Nine - Keller CAD Standards for CAD construction plan requirements) before the letter of final acceptance from the City. A Certificate of Occupancy will be issued upon completion of all improvements in accordance with all applicable codes. 
  
Article Five - SUBDIVISION DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS 
 
Section 5.01 - Adequate Public Facilities and Services 
A.  An applicant for development review, including rezoning and specific use permit reviews, shall submit proof of having reviewed the development proposal with applicable street, access, water, sewer, fire protection, drainage, and private utility services. The applicant is responsible for researching the existing and future availability and timing of services needed for the subject property. 
B.  No development plan shall be approved unless the City of Keller determines that public facilities will be adequate to support and service the area of the proposed development. The applicant shall, at the request of the City, submit sufficient information and data on the proposed development to demonstrate the expected impact on and use of public facilities. Public facilities and services to be examined for adequacy will include roads and public transportation facilities, water, sanitary sewer, and drainage services. 
1.  Comprehensive Plan Consistency Required. Proposed public improvements shall conform to and be properly related to the City of Keller's Comprehensive Plan and all applicable capital improvements plans. 
2.  Water. All habitable buildings and buildable lots shall be connected to a public water system capable of providing water for health and emergency purposes, including adequate fire protection. 
3.  Wastewater. All habitable buildings and buildable lots shall be served by an approved means of wastewater collection and treatment. 
4.  Subsurface Stability. Developer shall provide a geotechnical report providing specific information on subsurface soil, rock, and water conditions. While the geotechnical report content and format will vary by project size, all geotechnical reports should contain certain basic essential information, including: 
a.  Summary of all subsurface exploration data, including subsurface soil profile, exploration logs, laboratory or in situ test results, and ground water information; 
b.  Interpretation and analysis of the subsurface data; 
c.  Specific engineering recommendations for design; 
d.  Discussion of conditions for solution of anticipated problems; and 
e.  Recommended geotechnical special provisions. 
The Scope of the geotechnical investigation, including the number and types of borings or soundings, the equipment used to drill or sample, the in situ testing equipment and the laboratory testing program, shall be determined by a registered design professional. However, there shall be at least one exploratory boring to adequate depth below the disturbed area for every 10,890 square feet of disturbed area for building, infrastructure, detention, etc., and such additional tests as the city engineer requires. Adequate depth is defined as subsurface disturbance. 
5.  Stormwater Management. Drainage improvements shall accommodate potential runoff from the entire upstream drainage area and shall be designed to prevent increases in downstream flooding. The City may require the use of control methods such as retention or detention, and/or the construction of off-site drainage improvements to mitigate the impacts of the proposed developments. 
6.  Roads. Proposed roads shall provide a safe, convenient, and functional system for vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle circulation and shall be appropriate for the particular traffic characteristics of each proposed development. The developer is responsible for providing the appropriate means of access to the development. 
7.  Extension Policies. All public improvements and required easements shall be extended through the parcel on which new development is proposed. Streets, water lines, wastewater systems, drainage facilities, and utility lines shall be constructed through new development to the next property line to promote the logical extension of public infrastructure. The City may require the applicant of a development to extend off-site improvements to reach adjacent development or oversize required public facilities to serve anticipated future development as a condition of plat approval. 
At the time of submittal of a site plan or final plat application, the applicant shall submit proof that adequate water, sanitary sewer, fire protection, gas, and electric services are presently available to the subject property. If adequate public facilities and services are not presently available at the time of submittal of application for site plans or final plats, or are not planned to be provided by the developer/applicant to appropriately serve the proposed development as determined by the City, the site plan or final plat may be denied.  
Section 5.02 - Grading, Excavating, and Land Clearing Permit 
A permit (see Article Nine - Application Forms) shall be obtained from the Director of Public Works prior to commencement of any of the following: 
A.  Grading, excavation, land clearing, or any activity precedent to development of open, vacant, or unimproved land. 
B.  Dredging, filling, grading, excavation, or clearing of land within any Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) designated floodplain areas. 
C.  Tree Preservation requirements, as outlined in Article Eight, shall be met. 
D.  Grading Permit Criteria shall be reviewed by the City Engineer, the Planning Manager and the Director of Public Works for completeness and conformance with this UDC and best professional practices: 
1.  Developer Agreement in Process with the City of Keller 
2.  Construction Plans are substantially complete 
3.  Final Plat has been submitted to and approved by the City 
4.  Full Application Includes the Following: 
5.  Cover Sheet 
6.  Grading Plan 
7.  Erosion Control Plan and Details 
8.  Geotechnical Report 
9.  Tree Survey 
10.  Tree Protection Plan and Details  
Section 5.03 - Streets and Thoroughfares 
A.  General Policy. 
1.  Every subdivision or development shall be served by streets and thoroughfares adequate to accommodate the vehicular traffic to be generated by the development. Proposed streets shall provide a safe, convenient, and functional system for traffic access and circulation, shall be properly related to the City's Comprehensive Plan and Thoroughfare Plan, and shall be appropriately designed and sized for the traffic characteristics of each development. 
2.  The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all streets shall conform to the City of Keller Thoroughfare Plan, the Design Standards, and the Technical Construction Standards of this UDC; and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets or driveways, topographical conditions, public safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. A Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) may be required to determine if additional measures must be taken to adequately serve both the development and the public circulation system. Reserve strips of land controlling access to or egress from other property, or to or from any street or alley, or having the effect of restricting or damaging the adjoining property for subdivision purposes or which will not be taxable or accessible for special improvements shall not be permitted in any subdivision. All streets shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the Design Standards and Technical Construction Standards of this UDC. 
3.  Minor residential streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged, and access is provided to adjacent subdivisions. 
4.  Direct residential driveway access onto all thoroughfares as shown on the Thoroughfare Plan is prohibited unless specifically approved by a Planned Development Zoning District. Where a subdivision contains an existing or proposed thoroughfare, or where a thoroughfare is the only access point to a residential lot, the City may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage, deep lots, rear service alleys, or such treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection to residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
B.  Responsibility for Adequacy of Streets and Thoroughfares, Right-of-Way Dedication and Construction. 
1.  The developer is responsible for the dedication of the right-of-way and construction of all street(s) within the development including all thoroughfares as shown on the Thoroughfare Plan, additional lanes as determined by a TIA, and one-half of the street(s) that abuts the development or the proportionate cost of constructing one-half (1/2) of the street that abuts the development. Any off-site street required, by the platting process, to provide adequate access to the development shall be the entire responsibility of the developer. These provisions shall apply in all cases including where there is an existing sub-standard street. 
2.  When the owner or subdivider is responsible for one-half (1/2) of the street construction, the owner or subdivider may escrow the amount of the construction cost of the facility unless the City participates in the construction of the facility. Whenever a partial street previously has been platted along a common property line, the other portion of the street right-of-way shall be dedicated at the time of Final Plat approval. 
3.  Roadway impact fee credit for road construction shall be given in accordance with the Impact Fee Ordinance. The developer shall be responsible for constructing the thoroughfare(s) that is within or adjacent to the development. When appropriate, impact fee credits will be applied based on the assessment rate (Schedule 1) as shown in the Impact Fee Ordinance and in no case shall exceed the actual cost of construction. The City may elect to participate in any road construction at a ratio approved by the City Council. 
C.  Deviation From Thoroughfare Plan. 
1.  A developer/applicant desiring to deviate from the Thoroughfare Plan must make application to amend the Plan prior to proceeding with the development. All expenses related to a request for the Thoroughfare Plan amendment will be the responsibility of the developer/applicant. This includes a Traffic Study to support the change in the plan. Failure to provide for such approval prior to submission of a plan shall be grounds for automatic denial. 
2.  When such a street is not on the Thoroughfare Plan, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall: 
a.  Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing streets into surrounding areas. 
b.  Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the City to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformity to existing streets impracticable. 
c.  Provide for future access to adjacent vacant areas that will likely develop under a similar zoning classification. 
d.  Not conflict in any way to existing or proposed driveway openings. 
D.  Street Dedications. Dedication of Rights-of-way - The property owner shall provide all rights-of-way required for existing or future streets and on-site streets including perimeter streets and approach roads as shown in the Thoroughfare Plan or other valid detailed development plans. Prior to submittal of a Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA), a completed Trip Generation Form shall be submitted for review. 
E.  Road Network. 
1.  New subdivisions and developments shall be supported by a road network having adequate capacity and safe and efficient traffic circulation. The adequacy of the road network for developments of more than five hundred (500) trips per day for residential traffic and more than two thousand (2,000) trips per day for commercial traffic, or for developments involving collector or arterial streets not appearing on the City's approved Thoroughfare Plan, shall be demonstrated by preparation of a Traffic Impact Analysis. 
Developer shall be responsible for mitigation if traffic impact exceeds five percent (5%) of current traffic counts or causes level of service (LOS) to drop below a LOS "C". 
2.  If a property to be developed is intended as a phase in a larger development project, or constitutes a portion of the land to be ultimately developed, the City may require a demonstration of adequacy pursuant to this section, for additional phases or portions of the property, as a condition of approval for the proposed plat. 
F.  Approach Roads and Access. All subdivisions or developments must be connected to the City's approved thoroughfare and street system by one or more approach roads of such dimensions and approved to such standards as are hereinafter set forth. Requirements for dedication of rights-of-way and improvement of approach roads may be increased depending on the density or intensity of the proposed development if the need is demonstrated by a Traffic Impact Analysis. 
G.  Points of Access. Subdivisions generally may provide one point of access in each direction (north, east, south and west) to a public street and/or future connection, which is adequately designed and sized to handle the traffic adjacent to the development. For a development of over fifty (50) lots, a minimum of two (2) functional access points shall be required. Developments of fifty (50) lots or less but more than twenty (20) lots may be served with one point of access and one point of future connection. Developments of twenty (20) lots or less may be served with one point of access. Single points of access, including cul-de-sac streets, may exceed six hundred feet (600') if a residential fire sprinkler system is provided and a recommendation from the Fire Marshal and approval of the City Council. 
H.  Intersection Improvements. Intersection improvements and traffic control devices shall be installed by the developer as warranted in accordance with the traffic impact analysis. The signals shall be installed in accordance with procedures specified in the state Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
I.  Street Dimensions. 
1.  Street right-of-way widths shall be as shown on the Thoroughfare Plan. 
2.  The classification and widths of rights-of-way listed within this section are subject to changes per the City's Thoroughfare Plan and can be revised in accordance with the Thoroughfare Plan without an amendment to this Code. 
J.  Half Streets. Construction of half streets shall be prohibited, except when essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conforming with the other requirements of these regulations and the Thoroughfare Plan, and where the City finds it will be practical to require the dedication of the other one-half when the adjoining property is subdivided. When the owner or subdivider is responsible for one-half (1/2) of the street construction, the owner or subdivider shall escrow the amount of the construction cost of the facility unless the City participates in the construction of the facility. Whenever a partial street previously has been platted along a common property line, the other portion of the street shall be dedicated at the time of Final Plat approval. 
K.  Cul-De-Sac Streets. A cul-de-sac street is a street with only one inlet/outlet and may be used with a suitable turnaround provided for, with an outside right-of-way diameter of one hundred twenty feet (120') and pavement diameter of one hundred feet (100'). The cul-de-sac shall be measured from the centerline of the intersecting street to the center of cul-de-sac turnaround. Cul-de-sacs greater than six hundred feet (600') in length may be allowed for developments of less than twenty (20) lots with a recommendation from the Fire Marshal and approval of the City Council. 
L.  Dead End or Stub Streets. 
1.  Dead end or stub streets are not allowed except as required to provide future access to adjacent vacant land areas that will likely develop under a similar zoning classification and in no case shall be more than one hundred fifty feet (150') in length or equal to one lot depth, whichever is greater. 
2.  A sign shall be placed at the beginning of a dead end street stating "No Outlet" and barricades will be placed at the dead end. Such sign and barricades shall be installed at the expense of the developer. 
M.  Street Pavement Design and Standards. 
1.  All new streets shall be constructed in accordance with paving widths and specifications as set forth in the Design Standards and Technical Construction Standards of this UDC. 
2.  Pavement widths shall be thirty feet (30') from face-of-curb to face-of-curb on local residential streets with curbs. All streets with curbs shall be considered local residential for width design unless one of the following conditions exists: 
a.  Designated as a collector or thoroughfare by the City's Thoroughfare Plan. 
b.  Adjacent to commercial, multi-family, industrial, or public land uses or in a residential subdivision where, in the opinion of the City, additional street width is indicated for proper access and circulation. 
c.  Where, in the opinion of the City or in the opinion of the developer with the concurrence of the City, the aesthetic value is achieved if extra width is dedicated. 
d.  Residential subdivision street connections to the thoroughfares, at the entrance to the subdivision, shall provide for a ten-foot (10') extra right-of-way and five-foot (5') of additional pavement to accommodate for easier turning movement. These entrances to residential additions shall provide a divided entry with a landscaped island. The landscaping and irrigation for the islands shall be shown on the landscaping plans for the development. All raised islands within developments and/or medians that have no landscaping shall be paved with brick/concrete pavers or stamped concrete as approved by the City. 
3.  In the case of 2.a above, the section to be constructed shall be in accordance with the Thoroughfare Plan or a revision thereof based on updated conditions. In the case of 2.b and 2.c, each condition shall be studied individually and approved by the City prior to approval of the subdivision in question. 
N.  Street Construction. All streets shall be constructed in accordance with current City standards and specifications before the street(s) are accepted for maintenance by the City.  
Section 5.04 - Private Street Developments 
Subdivisions may be developed with private streets instead of public streets if the development complies with the requirements of this section and the subdivision has received zoning approval for a private street development (see Article Eight - Planned Developments (PD) for procedures). Variances to these requirements shall not be considered. 
A.  Private Street Development Requirements. 
1.  Private Street Developments shall be designated on the plat as a separate lot(s) owned by an approved Public Improvement District (PID) or a property owners association. The street lots shall conform to the City's Standards for public streets and rights-of-way. An access, utility, and drainage easement covering the street lots shall be granted to the City allowing unrestricted access and use of the property by the City and all other utility providers for the purpose of maintaining the utility services. The easement shall provide the City with the right of access for any purpose related to the exercise of a governmental service or function, including but not limited to fire and police protection, inspection, utility repair, and code enforcement. The easement shall permit the City to remove any vehicle or obstacle within the street lot that impairs emergency access. 
2.  The developer shall install all necessary appurtenances for the access gates and provide to the City all equipment necessary to operate the access control devices as determined by the City at no cost to the City. 
3.  It shall be the responsibility of the residential development to install and maintain all necessary preemptive access control system (i.e. Opticom) devices at all entrances (accesses) to said residential development in accordance with the City's requirements therefore. 
4.  A fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per each platted private street single-family residential lot shall be paid by the development at the time of execution of the Development Agreement. 
5.  A fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per each residential building within a multi-family development at the time of issuance of a building permit for the development. 
6.  Each residential development shall be solely responsible for the operation and maintenance of the preemptive access control system installed at all entrances (accesses) to their respective residential development. 
B.  General Design and Construction Standards for Private Streets. Private streets shall conform to the same standards regulating the design and construction of public streets. These standards shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Developments proposed with private streets must submit to the City the same plans and engineering information required to construct public streets and utilities. The City shall inspect of hire a firm of the City's choosing to inspect, at the developer's expense, all private streets, pavement, utilities, and private infrastructure. The inspections shall confirm compliance with the civil engineered plans and City's design and construction standards. Safe emergency access shall be required at all times. All standard requirements and fees will be applicable. 
2.  Water, sewer and drainage facilities, landscaping, screening walls, street lights, and signs placed within the private street right-of-way or public utility easement shall be built to City standards. Unless otherwise stated on the plat or within the development agreements, all maintenance and operation costs of landscaping, street lights, screening walls, and signage shall be the responsibility of the PID, homeowners association, or homeowners, whichever is applicable. The City of Keller will maintain the public water, sanitary sewer, and storm drainage infrastructure. 
3.  The City shall not participate in the payment for any portion of the cost of constructing and maintaining a private street. 
4.  There shall be a two (2) year maintenance bond provided to the developer for every private street. There shall be a two (2) year maintenance bond provided to the City of Keller for public water, sanitary sewer, and storm drainage infrastructure. 
C.  Property Owners Association Required. A mandatory property owners association shall be established for all subdivisions developed with private streets. The association shall own the private streets and be responsible for maintaining the streets and all applicable appurtenances to City maintenance standards. The association documents shall reflect that the City may use the reserve funds or assess the lot owners for street repair if the streets are not continually maintained to City standards. The association documents shall be reviewed and approved by the City and City Attorney at the time of submittal of the preliminary site evaluation and be filed concurrently with the final plat. 
D.  Access Restrictions. 
1.  The entrances to all private streets shall be marked with a sign stating that it is a private street. An access control gate, guardhouse or other means of restricting access to private streets may be constructed. Gates must be located on private property a minimum of fifty feet (50') from the right-of-way line with entrance gates that swing in, away from the right-of-way of the intersecting street, or side-to-side on a pulley, but cannot swing out toward the right-of-way. All gates and drives shall accommodate government and utility personnel, U.S. Postal Service, solid waste collection, residents, guests, deliveries, etc., without impeding traffic movement on public thoroughfares. If the PID or HOA fails to maintain reliable access as required to provide city services, the City may enter the subdivision and remove any gate or device that is a barrier to access at the sole expense of the PID or association. The PID or HOA documents shall contain provisions in conformity with this paragraph that may not be amended without the written consent of the City. 
2.  The location and design of each entrance or exit shall accommodate peak travel times. Adequate stacking distance, not less than a total of a hundred feet (100'), shall be provided to allow for any delay in gate(s) opening. The gate(s) must setback from the public right-of-way for a minimum distance of fifty feet (50') with a turn-around provided for vehicles denied access to be able to exit onto a public street in a forward manner before getting to the gate. If an overhead barrier is used, it must have a minimum vertical clearance of sixteen feet (16') in height above the road surface. A construction detail in accordance with the above parameters shall be provided with construction plans, prior to submission of the final plat, for review and approval by the City. 
3.  All gates shall comply with the Keller Fire Department regulations for emergency access. The developer shall install all necessary appurtenances for the access gates and provide to the City all equipment necessary to operate the access control devices as determined by the City at no cost to the City. 
E.  Waiver of Services. 
1.  The subdivision final plat and the PID or property owners association documents shall reflect that the streets are private and certain City services shall not be provided on private streets. Among the services that will not be provided are routine police patrol, enforcement of traffic and parking ordinances, and preparation of accident reports. All private traffic regulatory signs shall conform to the Texas Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Depending on the characteristic of the development, other city services may not be provided. 
2.  The subdivision final plat and the PID or property owners association documents shall contain language that the PID or association and the residents as the owner of the streets, agree to release, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, any government or public utility for damages to the private streets occasioned by the reasonable use of the private street by the City, government, or public utility; for damages or injury (including death) arising out of the condition of said private street; for damages or injury (including death) arising out of the use by the City, government, or public utility of any restricted access gate or entrance; and for damages and injury (including death) arising out of the use of the subdivision by the City, government, or public utility. The indemnifications contained in this paragraph apply whether or not such damages and injury (including death) are caused by the negligent act of omission of the City, government, or public utility, or their representative officers, employees or agents. Those portions of the PID or homeowners association's documents pertaining to the subject matter contained in this paragraph shall not be amended without the approval of the City Council. 
F.  Petition to Convert to Private Streets. Existing public street subdivisions may request a Specific Use Permit (SUP) for a private street subdivision subject to the approval criteria for Planned Development (PD) as listed in Article Eight. 
G.  Petition to Convert to Public Street(s). The City shall not be obligated to accept private streets as public streets at a later time. However, a private street subdivision may be converted to a public street subdivision with the following conditions: 
1.  A petition containing the signatures of one hundred percent (100%) of property owners within the subdivision must be submitted to the City. The PID or property owner association documents shall allow the association to request the City to accept private streets and associated property as public streets and rights-of-way upon written notice to all association members and the favorable vote of a majority of the membership, in accordance with the voting rights and procedures of the PID or association. 
2.  The property must be replatted to dedicate the streets to the City on the revised Final Plat. 
3.  Should the City elect to accept the streets as public, the City shall inspect the private streets and either: 
a.  Assess the lot owners for the expenses needed to repair the streets to current public street maintenance standards; or 
b.  Require that the streets be repaired to city standards in lieu of payment. 
c.  Either method must be completed prior to acceptance by the city. In the event that option b. (above) is selected, engineered plans shall be submitted for review and approval, a permit shall be obtained, and the city shall inspect each phase of the construction process in the same manner all public street construction projects are inspected. The City may require, at the lot owner's expense, the removal of guardhouses, access control devices, landscaping, or other appurtenances located within the street lot.  
Section 5.05 - Alleys 
A.  Alleys shall be optional in all zoning districts. Service alleys in commercial and industrial districts shall be a minimum right-of-way of twenty-five feet (25') and pavement width of fifteen feet (15'). Construction details for proposed alleys shall be provided with development construction plans. 
B.  Residential alleys shall not be required except to connect to a subdivision with existing alleys for the purpose of providing continuity. If alleys are required, the following standards shall be met: 
1.  In residential districts, alleys shall be parallel, or approximately parallel, to the frontage of the street. Alleys in residential districts shall provide a minimum of twenty feet (20') of right-of-way and fifteen feet (15') of pavement. 
2.  Alleys shall be paved in accordance with the design and construction details within the Design Standards and Technical Construction Standards of this UDC at the time of subdivision construction. 
3.  Where the deflection of alley alignment occurs, the design of the paving and property line shall be as established by the Design Standards and Technical Construction Standards of this UDC. 
4.  Dead end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but, if unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the dead end as recommended by the City. 
5.  Alleys may not exceed the roadway length to which it is parallel to, unless otherwise approved by the City Council. 
6.  Alleys shall not be obstructed in any way. 
7.  The City shall provide pavement maintenance of all accepted alleys. Right-of-way areas outside of pavement boundaries shall be maintained by the adjacent property owner. 
8.  All alley intersections must meet line-of-sight requirements for streets (see Design Standards and Technical Construction Standards of this UDC.  
Section 5.06 - Sidewalks and Trails 
Sidewalks 
A.  The purpose of the public sidewalk and curb ramps is to provide a safe area for all pedestrians. Sidewalks and curb ramps are required on all streets to be constructed with the paving of streets or when building construction occurs. All sidewalks shall conform to state laws for barrier free construction. 
B.  Sidewalks not less than four feet (4') wide shall be constructed adjacent to all residential streets. A five feet (5') wide sidewalk is required for all thoroughfares as shown on the Thoroughfare Plan. Sidewalks shall be constructed within the street right-of-way one foot from the property line. If sidewalks are constructed adjacent to the curb on a thoroughfare, a six-foot (6') wide sidewalk shall be provided. Other locations may be approved by the City at the time of plat or site plan approval. If sidewalks are to be constructed on private property, a sidewalk easement shall be granted to the City. 
C.  Sidewalks and curb ramps shall conform to the Design Standards and Technical Construction Standards of this UDC and shall be constructed by the builder and/or developer as applicable. A Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued until the required sidewalk is in place or a sidewalk fee in lieu of construction is paid to the City as determined by the Director of Public Works. 
D.  The construction of sidewalks along thoroughfares, as shown on the Thoroughfare Plan, may be delayed if approved by the City. In such cases, the developer/builder shall pay a fee in lieu of sidewalk construction to be used by the City in the future construction of sidewalks (see Article Nine - Fees). This provision applies to all lots and developments adjacent to the thoroughfares. 
E.  If a sidewalk and a hike/bike trail are located in the same location, the hike/bike trail shall replace the sidewalk and be constructed in accordance with the section below and the Parks and Trails Master Plan within the trail right-of-way. Minor adjustments to the trail location may be approved by the Development Review Committee (DRC). Park Development Fees will be credited for the difference in the required width (see Design Standards and Technical Construction Standards of this UDC). 
Trails 
A.  The purpose of the public trail is to provide a safe area for recreational walking, jogging, biking, etc. and in some cases, equestrian use. All trails shall conform to state laws for barrier free construction. 
B.  Trails not less than ten feet (10') wide shall be constructed according to the Parks and Trails Master Plan. Trails shall be constructed within the easement or right-of-way dedicated for trails. Other locations may be approved by the City at the time of plat or site plan approval. If trails are to be constructed on private property, easement or right-of-way dedicated shall be granted to the City. 
C.  Trails and curb ramps shall conform to the Design Standards and Technical Construction Standards of this UDC and shall be constructed by the builder and/or developer as applicable. A Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued until the required trail is in place or a fee in lieu of construction is paid to the City as determined by the City Manager or designee. 
D.  If a hike/bike trail and a sidewalk are located in the same location, the hike/bike trail shall replace the sidewalk and be constructed in accordance with the Parks and Trails Master Plan within the trail right-of-way. Minor adjustments to the trail location may be approved by the Development Review Committee (DRC). Park Development Fees may be credited for the difference in the required width (see Design Standards and Technical Construction Standards of this UDC).  
Section 5.07 - Driveways 
All driveways in the City of Keller shall be constructed with a permit from the Public Works Department. A permit will be granted by the City Engineer only after due consideration of safety, traffic flow, and conflicts with existing and proposed facilities. In addition to the above, access to State controlled highways shall require State and City permits. 
A.  Residential Driveway Approaches. 
1.  Residential driveway approaches shall follow these guidelines: 
Residential driveways shall be permitted onto residential streets only, unless an access from a residential street is not available. Driveways (either individual or the entry drive of a subdivision) shall be located a minimum of seventy-five feet (75') from any intersection of residential streets and a minimum of two hundred fifty feet (250') from any intersection of arterial or collector streets. This may be waived by the DRC on a case-by-case basis for reasons of hardship not created by the applicant, nor solely financial in nature. Driveways shall not be located within the entry drive of a subdivision. 
2.  Width shall be twelve feet (12') minimum and twenty-four feet (24') maximum, plus a five-foot (5') radii (if access is onto street) or a five-foot (5') flare (if access is onto alley). 
3.  The radius or flare point at the street or alley of any driveway shall not extend beyond the intersection of the side property line(s) with the street or alley when projected. 
4.  All residential driveway approaches shall be constructed in accordance with the City Standard Driveway Construction Details and be maintained by the property owners or property associations. 
5.  Maximum slope of a residential driveway shall not exceed eight percent (8%) up to the right-of-way line. Sidewalk cross slopes shall not exceed two percent (2%) when crossing a driveway. 
B.  Non-Residential and Multi-Family Driveway Approaches. Non-Residential and Multi-Family driveway approaches shall follow these guidelines: 
1.  Required widths: 
a.  One-Way Driveway: Fifteen feet (15') plus ten-foot (10') radii. 
b.  Two-Way Driveway: Thirty feet (30') plus fifteen-foot (15') radii. 
c.  A maximum width of forty-five feet (45') plus twenty-foot (20') radii will be allowed where significant traffic is projected for two-way access as determined by the Director of Public Works. 
2.  Maximum slope of a commercial driveway shall not exceed six percent (6%) up to the right-of-way line and ten percent (10%) beyond the right-of-way line on a case-by-case basis (as determined by the Fire Department), except in areas required for accessibility purposes. Sidewalk cross slopes shall not exceed two percent (2%) when crossing a driveway. 
3.  The minimum spacing (measured at inside edge of driveway to inside edge of driveway at the right-of-way line) between driveways along: 
a.  Principal arterial streets (A6D) (A4D) (C4U) shall be two hundred fifty feet (250') on the same platted lot, and two hundred feet (200') between adjacent lots. Joint access shall be strongly considered for adjacent properties. All properties shall extend access points to the adjacent property for future connection. 
b.  Collector streets (C2U) (C3U) shall be one hundred fifty feet (150'). 
c.  Driveways shall be located a minimum of two hundred fifty feet (250') from arterial street intersections and two hundred feet (200') from collector street intersections. 
4.  All two-way driveways shall intersect at ninety degrees (90°). 
5.  Parking lots shall be designed with adequate internal circulation. There shall be a minimum of sixty feet (60') driveway (throat length) between the street and the internal traffic lane at driveway locations. Adequate site distances and on-site maneuvering shall be available from every driveway. The parking lot and driveways shall be so designed to allow vehicles to exit the street in a forward manner, to park, load and unload totally within the site, and to enter onto the street in a forward manner. In no instance shall vehicles use street right-of-way to travel in reverse unless approved by a Planned Development or in the Old Town/Town Center Zoning Districts. 
6.  All non-residential driveway approaches shall be constructed in accordance with the City Standard Driveway Construction Details and be maintained by the property owners or property associations. 
7.  All driveways for non-residential uses shall have a minimum ten-foot (10') wide band of brick/concrete pavers or stamped concrete at the entry drives and crosswalks. The color and materials shall be consistent with the existing or proposed pattern of the non-residential use(s). The band of brick/concrete pavers or stamped concrete shall be centered with the sidewalk. 
C.  Modifications. Modifications or alternatives to the standards in this section may be considered by the Director of Public Works. If he/she determines that the requested changes will not create a serious detriment to the safety or operation of traffic on the street or roadway, he/she may forward to the City Council for final approval. The Director of Public Works may require that the applicant submit a traffic analysis if it is determined that such an analysis is necessary in order to render a decision on the request. 
D.  Right-of-Way Work Permit. No construction, grading, excavation, repair or reconstruction of any street, curb or gutter, or any sidewalk or driveway between the street and the property line shall be commenced without first obtaining a Right-of-Way Work Permit from the Director of Public Works. A permit is not required for the utility companies in case of an emergency to restore service or to perform minor repair and maintenance operations.  
Section 5.08 - Turning Lanes 
A.  Turning lanes are provided at intersections to accommodate left and right-turning vehicles. The primary purpose of these turning lanes is to provide storage for the turning vehicles. The secondary purpose is to provide space to decelerate from normal speed to a stopped position in advance of the intersection or to a safe speed for the turn in case a stop is unnecessary. 
B.  Left-turn lanes shall be provided on all approaches to existing or proposed intersections when four or six-lane streets cross. Left-turn lanes shall also be provided for all divided streets where median openings provide access to streets, alleys or driveways, when required by the City. 
C.  Right-turn/deceleration lanes shall be provided on all approaches at intersections of arterial and collector streets (as shown on the Thoroughfare Plan). Right-turn/deceleration lanes shall also be provided at driveways to all commercial developments of five (5) acres or more (includes overall development with pad sites). The DRC may approve modifications to this requirement at one or more driveways when multiple entries from different streets are proposed for a commercial development of five (5) acres or more and based on a Traffic Impact Analysis demonstrating adequate traffic safety. 
D.  The minimum length of left-turn lanes, right-turn lanes, and deceleration lanes shall be one hundred feet (100') stacking and one hundred feet (100') transition except at locations specifically identified by the City as needing less than one hundred feet (100'). 
E.  In the event that the City staff, based on the TIA, determines that the developer must install a turn lane, the developer will be wholly responsible for the dedication of all rights-of-way and the construction of all turning lanes.  
Section 5.09 - Residential Subdivisions Entry Features and Signage 
All subdivisions in excess of ten (10) platted lots shall provide a landscaped entryway feature at the primary access point from an arterial or collector street as designated on the City of Keller Thoroughfare Plan. 
A.  The entryway feature shall be placed in an easement a minimum of five feet (5') in width or open space lot identified for such use adjacent to the street right-of-way. All site visibility requirements shall be observed. 
B.  The entryway feature shall include living landscape materials as specified in Article Nine - Recommended List for Required Landscape Areas. Wall materials shall be the same as those specified in Section 5.10. The design of the entryway feature shall also include an irrigation system and subdivision identification signage located on the wall. All plants shall be living and in a sound, healthy, and vigorous growing condition. The subdivision shall provide for the maintenance of the entry feature and landscaping. 
C.  Materials for identification signage shall consist of cast stone, brick, or metal. Wood and plastic are not acceptable signage materials. Signage color shall be limited to earth-tone colors or natural metal colors. All identification signage shall be externally illuminated. 
D.  The design of the entryway feature and signage shall be reflected on the Landscaping and Screening Wall Plans submitted for any existing or new residential subdivision (see Section 4.14 - Landscaping and Screening Wall Plans for requirements). 
E.  The subdivision entry feature and landscaping shall be maintained by the Public Improvement District (PID), the homeowners or Homeowners Association.  
Section 5.10 - Residential Subdivisions Thoroughfare Screening and Landscaping 
A.  Screening Walls. 
1.  Screening walls shall be required in all residential subdivisions platted with rear or side yards adjacent to arterial or collector streets identified on the City of Keller Thoroughfare Plan. Any changes or modifications to these standards shall be approved through a Planned Development (PD) zoning request. 
2.  The screening wall shall be located on the lot side or back side of a minimum ten-foot (10') wide landscape/screening wall easement or a separate open space lot adjacent to the street right-of-way. 
3.  The screening wall shall be constructed of double wall brick or thin wall brick. Thin wall columns are to be spaced no greater than twelve feet (12') on center. The brick shall be clay-fired brick of natural colors. Concrete poured in place, concrete panel, wood, and stucco shall not be allowed. 
4.  A combination brick masonry and decorative metal/iron wall with brick detailing may be used to create a change in plane or texture at locations adjacent to the side yards in front of the building line. Columns shall be constructed of brick and centered no more than twelve feet (12') on center. The tubing or pickets shall be a minimum of one inch by one inch (1" X 1") and spaced a maximum of four inches (4") on center. Tubing may be painted with epoxy paint, the color of which to be approved by the City. 
5.  For residential subdivisions within the SF-36 (Single Family Residential-Low Density-36,000 square foot lots) zoning district, the screening wall may be constructed of a combination brick or stone masonry columns and decorative metal/iron wall. Masonry columns are to be spaced no less than twenty-five feet (25') and no greater than thirty-five feet (35') on center. The tubing or pickets shall be a minimum of one inch by one inch (1" X 1") and spaced a maximum of six inches (6") on center. Wood fencing shall not be allowed behind the open screening. 
6.  Required wall heights, measured at the spans between columns, shall be a minimum of six feet (6') in height and a maximum of eight feet (8') in height from natural grade. 
7.  All screening wall plans and details shall be approved and sealed by a licensed civil or structural engineer or a landscape architect (see Section 4.14 - Landscaping and Screening Wall Plans for requirements). 
8.  The screening wall should be constructed and completed prior to the release of any building permits within the subdivision. If screening wall construction is under way at the time of final acceptance of the infrastructure by the Public Works Department, then ten percent (10%) of the building permits may be released by the Community Development Department, per Section 4.13 of this Code. The remaining permits will not be released until all screening walls, entry features, landscaping, and irrigation is complete and a letter, signed and sealed by the licensed, Texas registered, professional engineer has been received by the City of Keller stating that the construction of the screening wall has been constructed properly and matches the approved construction plans for the screening wall. The Community Development Department may release additional permits if progress is being made toward completion of this improvement. 
B.  Landscaping. 
1.  Large canopy trees a minimum of three inches (3") in caliper, spaced a distance to accommodate mature tree canopy (on center), and shall be planted within the minimum ten foot (10') wide landscape/screening wall easement or open space lot between the screening wall and the right-of-way line. Tree planting shall also comply with the requirements of Section 8.19 (M). 
2.  Grass or other permanent, living groundcover shall be installed in all areas between the back of curb and screening wall. 
3.  A permanent automatic irrigation system, equipped with a rain sensor and anti-freeze device, shall be installed for all landscaped and grass areas. Each irrigation head shall be of an approved water conservation type. A licensed irrigation designer must design the system. Irrigation plans and details in front of screening walls and within entry features shall accompany the landscape and screening wall plans. 
4.  The irrigation system shall be installed by a licensed irrigator who will provide a two (2) year maintenance bond to assure that the irrigation system remains in good condition. The irrigation will be metered in the name of the developer, PID, or Homeowners Association. 
5.  All plants (trees, shrubs, ground cover) shall be living and maintained in a sound, healthy, and vigorous growing condition. The contractor installing the landscaping shall provide a two (2) year maintenance bond to assure that plant materials remain in good condition. 
6.  The landscaping and irrigation should be completely installed prior to the release of any building permits within the subdivision. If landscaping and irrigation installation is under way at the time of final acceptance of the infrastructure by the Public Works Department, then ten percent (10%) of the building permits may be released by the Community Development Department, per Section 4.13 of this Code. The remaining permits will not be released until all screening walls, entry features, landscaping, and irrigation is complete. 
C.  Maintenance. The maintenance of the screening wall, landscaping, and entry features shall be the responsibility of the developer, PID, or Homeowners Association. If a PID or HOA has not been established for the subdivision, maintenance of the screening wall, landscaping and entry feature will become the responsibility of the property owners within the entire subdivision.  
Section 5.11 - Easements 
A.  The property owner shall be required to furnish all easements and rights-of-way required to serve the development with both public and private utilities and shall be shown on the Preliminary Site Evaluation or Final Plat and accompanying construction plans. Utility easements shall be considered part of the right-of-way and subject to all ordinance requirements for right-of-way. 
[B.]  Easements shall be provided for both municipal and private utilities. Municipal or other public easements for water, wastewater and storm sewer shall be a minimum fifteen (15') in width. All municipal easements may be wider as determined by the Director of Public Works depending on the depth and size of the utility. Easements for the private utility companies shall be established based on the utility company's guidelines. However, trees and shrubs shall remain if further than five feet from utility lines. Proper coordination shall be established between the property owner, developer, and the applicable utility companies for the establishment of utility easements as needed to serve the development. 
C.  Location of utility easements. When topographical or other conditions are such as to make impractical the inclusion of utilities within public rights-of-way, perpetual unobstructed easements at least fifteen feet (15') in width shall be provided along selected side lot lines for satisfactory access to the street or rear lot lines. Easements shall be indicated on the plat. 
D.  Water, sanitary sewer, or drainage easements shall be allowed to straddle an internal lot line or be placed with one half of the easement width on each adjacent lot except for those easements that are placed along the boundary of a subdivision shall not straddle the lot line but be contained with the boundary of the lot for that subdivision. 
E.  Electric, gas, telephone, and cable TV easements shall meet the requirements of the respective utility company and shall not conflict with the UDC nor with, or be coincident with, water, sanitary sewer, or drainage easements. 
F.  The contractor and owner shall be responsible for locating existing utilities and is responsible for all damage to existing public improvements caused during construction of new public improvements. 
G.  Electric, cable, traffic, water and sanitary sewer metering, low-watt lighting, telephone, internet provider, and smart house facilities serving the subdivision may be located with a Utility Duct Bank Facility. If a Utility Duct Bank is proposed for a development, easements shall be provided and utilities shall be installed to adequately serve the subdivision. All easement locations and utility installations shall comply with the UDC. All provisions and responsibilities regarding dedication, construction, installation and maintenance shall be incorporated into the Development Agreement for the addition. Easement installation and maintenance shall not remove trees and shrubs if further than five feet from the utility lines. 
H.  Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for utilities where necessary and shall be of such widths as may be reasonably necessary for the utility or utilities using same. It shall be the subdivider's responsibility to determine appropriate easement widths as required by utility companies. 
I.  Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, or channel, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with such course and of such additional width as may be designated by the Director of Public Works, subject to determination according to proper engineering considerations. The required width shall conform to the requirements set forth by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). Parallel streets or parkways may be required adjacent to creek or drainageways to provide maintenance access or access to recreation areas. City approved utilities are permitted within the drainage easement. 
J.  A lot area shall be computed inclusive of all easements. 
K.  Accessory buildings, swimming pools and its appurtenances are not allowed in any rights-of-way, easements, floodway or 100-year flood plains. 
L.  All construction within easements shall comply with the requirements outlined in Design Standards and Technical Construction Standards of this UDC.  
Section 5.12 - Blocks 
A.  The length, width, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
1.  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated. 
2.  Zoning requirements as to lot sizes, setbacks, and dimensions. 
3.  Needs for convenient access, circulation, control, and safety of street traffic. 
B.  In general, intersecting streets, determining the blocks, lengths and widths, shall be provided at such intervals as to serve cross-traffic adequately, and to meet existing streets or customary subdivision practices. Where no existing subdivision controls, the block lengths shall not exceed one thousand six hundred feet (1,600') and shall generally be one thousand (1,000) to one thousand two hundred feet (1,200') in length. Where no existing subdivision controls, the blocks shall not be less than five hundred feet (500') in length; however, in cases where physical barriers or property ownership creates conditions where it is appropriate that these standards be varied, the length may be increased or decreased to meet the existing conditions having due regard for connecting streets, circulation of traffic and public safety. 
C.  Where blocks are adjacent to a school or public park, or are platted one thousand feet (1,000') or longer, the City may require a walkway near the middle of the block or at a street that terminates between the streets at the ends of the block. The walkway shall be concrete and shall not be less than four feet (4') or more than eight feet (8') in width, and shall extend through the block from sidewalk to sidewalk, or to the rear property line of the lots that front the street, if a double row of lots do not exist. The walkway shall not cross streets.  
Section 5.13 - Lots 
A.  Lots shall comply with the minimum requirements of the established zoning district and with the minimum standards of this Code. 
B.  Each residential lot shall front on a dedicated public/private street right-of-way or an approved recorded paved public/private access easement (see Section 5.04 Private Street Developments). Each lot shall meet the minimum required lot width at the front building setback line and for the entire depth of the property from the front property line to the rear property line. The minimum width of access easements for all platted/replatted lots, from the date of the adoption of this Code shall be sixty feet (60'). All access easements shall be listed as a public/private access/public drainage/utility easement. The paving standards for the access easements shall be in accordance with the Design Standards and Technical Construction Standards of this UDC (Section 5.23). Fire Department access shall be provided to all lots as required per the adopted Fire Code. The minimum width of pavement for an access easement shall be twenty-four feet (24'). Access easements that serve more than three (3) lots shall comply with the requirements established in Section 5.04 - Private Street Developments. Access easements shall be owned and maintained by the homeowners, PID or Home Owners Association (HOA) when applicable. 
C.  For Irregular-shaped lots, the lot width at the front and rear building setback lines can be averaged; however, the lot width at the front building setback line and at the frontage of the public/private street right-of-way or public/private access easement shall not be less than required by the particular zoning district or per Section 8.15(A)(4) Supplementary Regulations (concerning cul-de-sacs). The rear width shall be sufficient to provide access for all necessary utilities. Lots that front on a cul-de-sac shall have a minimum of fifty feet (50') frontage along the dedicated public/private street right-of-way or public/private access easement. 
D.  No lot shall be platted less than one hundred feet (100') in depth except as approved as part of a Planned Development (PD) ordinance or in cases where an irregular-shaped tract is platted into lots and a remnant piece of property has sufficient area to plat one or more lots. In this case, the Planning and Zoning Commission may approve a waiver of the width and depth requirement, if needed, to prevent a hardship. 
E.  Side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines (or radial to curving street lines) unless a variation from this rule will give a better street or lot plan. 
F.  Double frontage and reversed frontage lots shall be avoided except where necessary to provide separation of residential development from traffic arterials (Thoroughfare Types A6D, A4D, C4U, C2U, or C3) or to overcome specific disadvantage to topography and orientation. Where lots have double frontage, a front building line shall be established for each street (see Section 8.18 - Figure 6). Double frontage lots in subdivisions will not be allowed without providing screening walls in accordance with this Code. Lot depths adjacent to thoroughfares shall exceed normal standards and shall not be less than one hundred forty feet (140'). Additional rear yard setback of a minimum forty feet (40') also shall be provided if the lot backs up to a 4-lane thoroughfare or larger and a solid masonry screening wall is not provided as a buffer. 
G.  The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be no foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography or other conditions, in securing building permits to build on all lots in compliance with this Code, Building Code and other applicable ordinances, laws, and regulations. Driveway access shall be provided to buildings on the lots from a street, alley, or public access easement as approved for a development. 
H.  Dimensions of corner lots shall be large enough to allow for erection of buildings. Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for business, commercial, or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street parking, landscaping, and loading facilities required for the type of use and development contemplated, as established in this Code. 
I.  Flag lots are not permitted except under special circumstances upon receiving a recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approval by City Council as described below: 
1.  Lots with greater depth relative to width which posture it for future necessity to create a flag lot shall not be permitted or created through platting or re-platting of an existing lot or lots. 
2.  City Council may, upon a recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission, waive the lot width requirement and permit a flag lot if it finds that either: 
a.  A significant geographical, topographical, or other permanent constraint presents a hardship to subdivision complying with this Code and creation of a flag lot is deemed the optimum solution. 
Or 
b.  The creation of a flag lot is not permanent and will, by means of future planned streets or adjacent development, be eliminated when those streets or adjacent development(s) are completed. 
Or 
c.  When necessary to accommodate the function of hiding or concealing utility buildings/substation, or radio, television or communication towers. 
And 
d.  The pole area of the flag lot is not included for purposes of calculating the minimum lot area under the established zoning district in which it sits. 
e.  The pole dimensions of the flag lot meet or exceed the minimum emergency access standards of the City of Keller.  
Section 5.14 - Water 
A.  Adequate Water Facilities. All development(s) are required to connect to the City's water distribution system. Water systems serving the subdivision, development or addition shall connect with the City's water supply and distribution system in accordance with the City's Water Master Plan. Water facilities shall be installed to adequately serve the development and each lot or tract therein and shall be located and sized to conform to City engineering standards and specifications, in accordance with the City's Water Master Plan. The City may require owners to provide a water study, including adequate engineering data to support water demand projections, before final plans will be approved. 
B.  Design and Construction Requirements. No water system will be constructed unless all plans have been reviewed and released for construction by the City to assure compliance with these requirements. All water facilities shall be designed and constructed under the inspection of the City and in accordance with the City's Water Master Plan and Design Standards and Technical Construction Standards of this UDC. All water facilities designated as transmission shall be placed in a dedicated waterline easement. 
C.  Extension Policy. The developer shall extend all water mains and appurtenances necessary to connect the development with the City's water supply and distribution system and shall extend such mains and appurtenances to all property lines of the subdivision to allow connection to these facilities by adjoining property owners in accordance with the City's Water Master Plan. Authority to extend water mains to serve newly subdivided or platted land shall be granted by the City only upon a determination by the Director of Public Works that all facilities necessary to adequately serve the development are in place or will be in place prior to the issuance of occupancy permits for structures developed on such land. 
D.  Water Wells Provisions. All water wells shall be considered private and shall be owned and maintained by its property owner. All water wells shall meet all regulations and requirements of the City of Keller, The Northern Trinity Groundwater Conservation District, and the State of Texas. Permit for new or replacement water well system shall be obtained from the City of Keller and The Northern Trinity Groundwater Conservation District.  
Section 5.15 - Sanitary Sewer 
A.  Adequate Sewage Wastewater Facilities. All development(s) are required to connect to the City's wastewater collection system. Wastewater systems serving the subdivision, development or addition shall connect with the city's wastewater distribution system in accordance with City's Wastewater Master Plan. Wastewater facilities shall be installed to adequately serve the development and each lot or tract therein and shall be located and sized to conform to City engineering standards and specifications and be in accordance with the City's Wastewater Master Plan. The City may require owners to provide a wastewater study, including adequate engineering data to support projected wastewater discharge before final plans will be approved. The projected wastewater discharge of a proposed development shall not exceed the capacity of the wastewater system based upon required studies. 
1.  Connection to Public Sanitary Sewer System Required for New Construction. 
a.  Single-Family and Two-Family Residential Developments. All new single-family and two-family residential subdivisions of five (5) or more lots, at the owner's or occupant's expense, are required to extend sanitary sewer lines necessary to serve the subdivision as shown on the City's Sanitary Sewer Master Plan. The extension of the sanitary sewer lines shall be in accordance with this Code and all other applicable regulations. Single-family residential developments containing four (4) lots or fewer may be exempted from wastewater requirements if approved by the City. In cases of four (4) lot developments without sanitary sewer, the entire property under one ownership shall be Final platted. The developer/builder is responsible for providing the necessary permits for an on-site sanitary sewer disposal facility. The permit shall be submitted to the Building Inspections Division prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
b.  Non-Residential and Multi-Family Developments. All new non-residential and multi-family developments, at the owner's or occupant's expense, are required to extend sanitary sewer services to the development and connect to the public sanitary sewer prior to the occupancy of the building(s). This provision also applies to building expansions and additions of existing non-residential developments. The extension of the sanitary sewer lines shall be in accordance with this Code and all other applicable regulations. 
B.  On-Site Sewage Systems for Single-Family and Two-Family Residential Uses. 
Installation 
1.  Installation of an approved on-site sewage system is allowed for new residential developments of four (4) lots or less if a public sanitary sewer line is not adjacent to the development. An on-site sewage system shall be approved by the Tarrant County Health Department and the City of Keller prior to its installation. Property owners with on-site sewage systems are required to have the system inspected by the Tarrant County Health Department at the property owner's expense upon installation, alteration, or as a response to complaint(s) related to system malfunction. A copy of the report must be provided to the city of Keller. 
2.  Existing, properly functioning septic systems may continue to be utilized until public sanitary system is available to the property. The Tarrant County Commissioners Court Order Number 42703 (Sewer Regulation) shall be the regulatory authority determining if a septic system is functioning properly. All abandoned septic tanks shall be properly filled with sand. 
3.  If a new or replacement on-site sewage system is needed, and the public sewer is either contained within street rights-of-way or an easement adjacent to the property, the property shall be required to connect to the City's sanitary system. 
4.  Permit for new or replacement on-site sewage system shall be obtained from the Tarrant County Health Department. 
C.  Design and Construction Requirements. All design and construction shall be done under the inspection of the City and in accordance with Design Standards and Technical Construction Standards of this UDC. No wastewater system shall be constructed unless all plans have been reviewed and released for construction by the City to ensure compliance with these requirements. 
D.  Easements. All wastewater facilities designated as interceptors shall be placed in a dedicated sanitary sewer easement on all developments.  
Section 5.16 - Fire Protection 
A.  General Provisions. 
1.  The Fire Marshal of the City of Keller will review all plans and specifications of all proposed commercial and residential development in the City and will determine whether or not adequate fire protection may be afforded the building or buildings situated or proposed to be situated on such property with existing or proposed fire hydrants and water lines. 
2.  If, in the opinion of the Fire Chief, adequate fire protection requires additional fire hydrants and water lines to serve proposed developments, he will direct the owner of the property, in writing, to locate at pre-designated positions on the property a fire hydrant or hydrants and adequate water lines to provide adequate fire protection at the owner's expense. The location and number of fire hydrants and water lines shall be situated as to afford adequate fire protection to all buildings located or proposed to be located on the property. Such installation to be completed in such reasonable period of time as the Fire Chief may direct. 
B.  Fire Hydrant Location and Coverage Requirements. 
1.  Commercial and Industrial Areas. 
a.  Fire hydrants shall be located no more than a five hundred foot (500') truck hose lay distance to all points of any structure or combustible storage area on the lot. 
b.  Fire hydrants located on the opposite side of a street, designated as four lanes or larger on the current City Thoroughfare Plan, shall not be considered acceptable for meeting hydrant coverage requirements. 
c.  Fire hydrants shall be positioned to allow truck hose lays to follow normal traffic access to the site. 
d.  Fire hydrants shall be spaced at no more than three hundred feet (300') intervals. 
2.  Residential Areas. 
a.  Fire hydrants shall be placed on block corners or near the center of the block to place every structure within a five hundred foot (500') truck hose lay distance from fire hydrant coverage. 
b.  Fire hydrants located on the opposite side of a street, designated as four lanes or larger on the current City Thoroughfare Plan, shall not be considered acceptable for meeting hydrant coverage requirements. 
c.  Fire hydrants shall be positioned to allow truck hose lays to follow normal traffic access to the site. 
d.  Fire hydrants shall be spaced at no more than five hundred feet (500') intervals. 
C.  Fire Hydrants Specifications. All fire hydrants must meet required City of Keller Standard Fire Hydrant Specifications. 
1.  All fire hydrants shall have one (1) 5" Hydra-Storz pumper connection and two (2) 2.5" hose outlets with the National Standard hose threads; shall have a main barrel valve opening of not less than 5.25"; shall be placed on mains of not less than six inches (6") in diameter. Six-inch (6") gate valves shall be placed on all fire hydrant leads. All fire hydrants shall have a valve at the main with flange-to-flange fittings. 
2.  All fire hydrants shall be of a "break-away" design in accordance with City of Keller Standard Fire Hydrant Specifications. 
3.  Each hydrant shall have a minimum of two primer coats. The final coat of paint on the body of all hydrants shall be a silver color of an approved aluminum paint. 
D.  Fire Protection Distribution Systems. Water distribution systems shall be of sufficient size to provide adequate water for fire protection to the development and shall conform to the City's Master Water Distribution Plan. 
1.  Residential Areas. 
a.  Sizes and Allowable Dead End Lengths. In residential areas the minimum water line size shall be eight inches (8"). Dead end lines over three hundred feet (300') and up to six hundred feet (600') in length shall be ten inches (10") minimum. Dead end lines over six hundred feet (600') in length will not be allowed. Dead end lines shall terminate at a fire hydrant that shall be installed for maintenance purposes and may not necessarily be considered for fire hydrant density as required. Flush hydrants may be installed in lieu of hydrants at terminating points of dead end lines for maintenance purposes only. 
b.  Valves. Additional isolation valves may be required to be installed depending upon the configuration of the system as determined by the City. 
c.  Construction Standards. All water line construction shall conform to construction standards located in Design Standards and Technical Construction Standards of this UDC. 
2.  Commercial Areas. 
a.  Sizes and Allowable Dead End Lengths. In commercial areas the minimum water line size shall be eight inches (8"). Dead end lines over three hundred feet (300') and up to six hundred feet (600') in length shall be ten inches (10") minimum. Dead end lines over six hundred feet (600') in length will not be allowed. Dead end lines shall terminate at a fire hydrant that shall be installed for maintenance purposes and may not necessarily be considered for fire hydrant density as required. Flush hydrants may be installed in lieu of hydrants at terminating points of dead end lines for maintenance purposes only. 
b.  Valves. Additional isolation valves may be required to be installed depending upon the configuration of the system as determined by the City. 
c.  Construction Standards. All water line construction shall conform to construction standards located in Design Standards and Technical Construction Standards of this UDC.  
Section 5.17 - Drainage 
Developers and builders must refer to the most current Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) and Flood Boundary-Floodway Maps prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for the City of Keller to determine whether their property is within the boundaries of a designated Flood Hazard Area. Keller's Flood Plain Administrator is the Director of Public Works. Plats are reviewed by the Director of Public Works to determine that the potential for flooding in the area will not increase due to the proposed development, and that the proposed development is sufficiently protected from a 100-year frequency storm runoff from a fully developed upstream watershed. If the development area is within a Flood Hazard Area, construction cannot begin until the developer or builder has received an approved Flood Plain Development Permit from the Director of Public Works (see Article Nine for permit form). 
A.  General Requirements. 
1.  Drainage Facilities. Drainage facilities shall be designed and constructed according to Design Standards and Technical Construction Standards of this UDC so that adequate facilities are provided to serve the development and the entire developed watershed. The developer is responsible for construction of all drainage facilities as identified in the drainage study and, in the event that underground water is encountered, a subsurface drainage system shall be installed with discharge of said system being carried to the nearest storm drain system or natural water shed system. The developer shall provide all necessary easements and rights-of-way for drainage facilities. 
2.  Natural Drainage Pathway. The developer shall insure that the Post-Development runoff follows the Pre-Development drainage pathway and that the natural water-course is of adequate size to convey peak runoff. 
3.  No Adverse Effects on Other Properties. The developer shall be responsible for the necessary facilities to provide drainage controls such that properties within the drainage area, whether upstream or downstream of the development, are not adversely affected by runoff from the development. 
4.  Developer and Engineer Responsible For Design. The requirements set forth in Design Standards and Technical Construction Standards of this UDC are considered minimum requirements. The developer and his engineer shall bear the total responsibility for the adequacy of the design. The review of the drainage design plans by the Director of Public Works in no way relieves the developer of this responsibility. 
B.  Design of Facilities. 
1.  Standards. Design and construction of storm sewer systems shall be in accordance with Design Standards and Technical Construction Standards of this UDC. Natural drainage courses, curbs, inlets, manholes, etc., shall be designed and constructed in accordance with these standards. 
2.  Drainage Study. A drainage study shall be provided for each development in accordance with Design Standards and Technical Construction Standards of this UDC. The study shall be provided to insure that all upstream and downstream watershed components are accounted for and will not be adversely impacted. Adverse impact is considered a tenth of a foot (0.1') maximum increase for one (1), ten (10), and one hundred (100) year water surface elevation (WSEL) and four thousandths of a foot (0.004') if the building is impacted. The study shall include a pre-development versus post development runoff analysis and a storm water runoff routing analysis designed to predict the post development runoff rate and the downstream drainage system ability to accommodate post development runoff. 
C.  Dedication of Drainage Easements. 
1.  General Requirements. When a subdivision or addition is traversed by a flood plain as referenced by the current panel number(s) on the FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), or other watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, a drainage easement shall be required. The easement shall substantially conform to the natural alignment of the watercourse, and should be of such width and construction as will be adequate for the purpose (i.e., the easement shall be adequate for an open channel of natural appearance with landscaped banks and sufficient width for maximum potential volume of flow, unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer). Any increased velocity, depth, or flow rate shall be mitigated to predevelopment rates. An improved open drainage system or closed drainage system may be allowed if approved by the Director of Public Works as part of a master drainage study. 
2.  Access Easements. The property owner must provide sufficient access on each side of and parallel to all flood ways and open drainage ways for drainage maintenance purposes by the City. The access shall be above the base flood elevation and have a slope of 6:1 or less and be accessible by vehicles and equipment. Minimum access width and location shall be determined by the Director of Public Works. 
3.  Drainage Easements. Where topography or other conditions are such as to make impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within street rights-of-way, perpetual, unobstructed easements at least fifteen feet (15') in width, depending on slopes, for drainage facilities shall be provided across property outside the street rights-of-way and with satisfactory access to the street. Easements shall be indicated on the plat. Drainage easements shall extend from the street to a natural watercourse or to other drainage facilities. When a proposed drainage system will carry water across private land outside the proposed subdivision, an agreement from the property owner shall be secured by the developer. 
4.  Private Drainage Easements. Private Drainage Easements are to be maintained by the owner of each lot. The maintenance of a private drainage easement shall not be the obligation or liability of the City of Keller. 
D.  Flood Plain Dedication Requirement. 
1.  All areas within any subdivision located in a flood plain as referenced by FEMA FIRM maps or the City's Master Drainage Plan, shall be dedicated to the City, approved property owners association, foundation or conservancy if designated as open space in accordance with the City's Comprehensive Plan or under terms and conditions in an approved open space plan. 
2.  The flood plain and floodway shall remain in their natural state unless improvements are permitted by the City due to the pending development of properties adjacent to or upstream of the required improvements. 
3.  Prior to acceptance of any flood plain by the City, the area shall be cleared of all trash and debris. Flood plains dedicated to the City shall be left in a natural state except those areas designated for recreational purposes. 
4.  Flood plains to be dedicated to the City shall meet the recommendation of City's Drainage Master Plan for drainage facilities. 
E.  Grading. 
1.  Site, street, lot or development grading shall conform to Design Standards and Technical Construction Standards of this UDC. 
2.  A permit for grading is required and issued by the Director of Public Works (see Article Nine for Grading Permit application). 
F.  Plans, Specifications, and Design Calculations. 
1.  The developer shall provide engineered plans, specifications, and design calculations for all drainage facilities. 
2.  All open drainage courses shall be designed in a natural landscaped manner to prevent erosion. 
3.  The types of methods used for erosion prevention shall be shown on the construction plans and Released for Construction by the Director of Public Works or City Engineer. 
4.  Any site graded and not actively worked on for five (5) or more days must have seeded erosion mat installed in the interim time between grading and construction activities.  
Section 5.18 - Erosion Control 
A.  The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) requirements of the Clean Water Act (CWA) prohibit construction activities that cause erosion that may pollute adjacent rivers and streams. The developer/applicant shall indicate the extent to which the construction activities of a project will disturb soil and cause the movement of soil particles off the site. Construction shall meet all requirements established by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). 
B.  The subdivider/developer shall prepare an erosion control plan to minimize the transportation of soil from the site due to storm water runoff during development and to control erosion as part of a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan as provided in Design Standards and Technical Construction Standards of this UDC. 
C.  Such plans shall include current best management practices for the prevention and control of erosion. The plan also shall include the subdivider/developer's proposed measures to deter movement of sediment onto adjacent property or street. 
D.  Any site graded and not actively worked on for five (5) or more days must have seeded erosion mat installed in the interim time between grading and construction activities.  
Section 5.19 - Street Lights 
A.  Before final acceptance of streets, alleys, sewers and other utilities, street light locations and installations shall be coordinated by the developer with the power company and the City of Keller. It shall be the subdivider's responsibility to install street lights with metal poles (or approved similar material) at all intersections not to exceed a maximum distance of six hundred feet (600') apart. The design of all street lights shall conform to Design Standards and Technical Construction Standards of this UDC. The developer shall pay for the electricity for the subdivision for a period of twenty-four (24) months, after which the City shall pay for the electricity. 
B.  If a developer desires to install designer street lights, the design and installation shall be approved by the City. The total cost of designer street lights shall be furnished to the City by the subdivider for all intersections within the subdivision. Designer street lights shall be owned and maintained by that subdivision's PID or Homeowners Association. 
C.  Street Lighting in Public Right-of-Way 
1.  Street lights in all subdivisions shall be installed on approved poles. 
a.  Poles must be approved by a public electric utility holding a City franchise and the Director of Public Works. 
b.  Poles and their installation shall be contracted and paid for by the Developer during the construction phase of a subdivision and before building permits are issued. 
c.  Poles shall be purchased through a public electric utility holding a City franchise to serve the area the subdivision is located in. 
2.  The location of street lights shall be as follows: 
a.  At all intersections. 
b.  Where a new street intersects an existing street. 
c.  Where a block is six hundred (600') feet or longer, a street light shall be installed every six hundred (600') feet or mid-block, whichever is the shortest distance. 
d.  If more than one mid-block light is required, they shall be installed to create an equal balance of light throughout the entire length of the block. 
e.  If a cul-de-sac block is four hundred (400') feet or longer, a street light shall be installed in the end of the cul-de-sac. 
f.  Street lights shall be installed at any other location as may be directed by the Public Works Director for the welfare and safety of the community.  
Section 5.20 - Street Names and Signs 
A.  Street Names. The developer shall name streets in conformance with the following considerations. City staff may deny or recommend alternative street names and reserves the right for final determination. 
1.  Names of new streets shall not duplicate or cause confusion with the names of existing streets, unless the new streets are a continuation of or in alignment with existing streets. New streets that are an extension of existing streets shall bear the names of existing streets and shall be dedicated at equal or greater widths than the existing streets. Where the streets will not be extended or end in a cul-de-sac, new names may be assigned. 
2.  Street names that are spelled differently but sound the same shall be avoided. 
3.  Street name suffixes such as "Place" or "Court" shall be designated on streets that are cul-de-sac streets, and shall take their prefix from the streets from which they originate. Suffixes such as "Boulevard" or "Parkway" shall be confined to designated arterial or collector streets. 
4.  Street name prefixes such as "North", "South", "East", and "West" may be used to clarify the general location of the street, however the prefixes shall be consistent with the existing and established street naming and address numbering system of the general area in which the street is located. 
5.  All street names shall contain only one (1) street suffix. The following are valid street suffixes: 
ALLEY 	Alley 
AVE 	Avenue 
BLVD 	Boulevard 
CIR 	Circle 
CO ROAD 	County Road 
COVE 	Cove 
CR 	Creek 
CT 	Court 
DR 	Drive 
EXPWY 	Expressway 
FWY 	Freeway 
HWY 	Highway 
LN 	Lane 
LOOP 	Loop 
MNR 	Manor 
PASS 	Pass 
PK 	Park 
PKWY 	Parkway 
PL 	Place 
PLZ 	Plaza 
PNT 	Point 
RD 	Road 
RDG 	Ridge 
ROW 	Row 
SQ 	Square 
ST 	Street 
TC 	Trace 
TERR 	Terrace 
TR 	Trail 
WAY 	Way 
WLK 	Walk 
 
B.  Street Signs. 
1.  The total cost of street signs and posts shall be furnished to the City by the subdivider for all intersections within or abutting the subdivision. Such signs shall be of a type approved by the City, and shall be installed by the City as per City of Keller standards. If a developer desires to install designer street signs, the design and installation shall be approved by the City and installed by the developer. 
2.  Street signs shall be installed at all intersections providing access to development on a block prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy on that block. Block numbers are required on all street signs unless otherwise approved by the City. 
3.  Street name signs for "Private" streets shall be distinguished from "Public" street name signs by including the phrase "Private Street" on the sign and using a white background with black letters to construct the street name sign.  
Section 5.21 - Lot Addressing Procedures 
A.  Addressing shall be performed by the designated City Staff in accordance with the adopted addressing procedures as followed. No address shall be issued prior to approval of and submission of final documents for recording of subdivisions. 
B.  Upon recording of a final plat, replat, or amending plat, addresses shall be assigned to each lot created by such plat. Whenever possible, a current or previous address of an unplatted parcel of land shall be assigned if the address meets the following criteria: 
1.  The address is in accordance with Tarrant County 9·1·1 recommended guidelines. 
2.  Address sequencing is not affected. 
C.  Addresses will be assigned in the following manner: 
1.  Even address will be assigned to south and west sides of streets. Where the opposite has occurred for previous addresses, addresses will be continued to provide consistency. 
2.  Odd addresses will be assigned to north and east sides of streets. Where the opposite has occurred for previous addresses, addresses will be continued to provide consistency. 
D.  The Community Development Department is responsible for assigning and distributing assigned addresses to all government offices, including Tarrant County 9·1·1, utility companies both public and private, and the developer or his designee. 
1.  A property owner may request an address change in writing to the Community Development Department stating the purpose of the request. A new address will be considered and assigned if the assigned address is out of sequence or if it is determined that public safety services and delivery services are compromised with the assigned address. 
2.  Notifications for address changes are supplied to all government offices, including Tarrant County 9·1·1, utility companies both public and private, and the owner/developer or his designee.  
Section 5.22 - Private Utility Services 
A.  Utility companies shall submit plans, showing the extent and location of construction, to the City and receive a construction permit when constructing new overhead lines, underground lines, and upgrading existing lines within the rights-of-way. Non-emergency utility work shall be coordinated with the city's capital improvement plan to reduce disruption due to construction to the community. Utility companies are not required to obtain a permit in the event of an emergency in order to restore service. 
B.  From and after the effective date of this Code, all subdivision plats, site plans and construction plans filed and submitted to the City for approval shall provide for utility services such as electrical, gas, telephone, and cable TV utility (lateral and/or service distribution) lines and wires including, but not limited to, street lighting, to be placed underground. Existing feeder and other major transmission lines that could not practically be placed underground may remain overhead. However, a subdivider shall endeavor, and whenever practical (as determined by the Development Review Committee), the City may require that feeder lines are placed away from traffic arteries (Thoroughfare Types A6D, A4D, C4U, C2U, and C3) and/or be placed underground. Overhead feeder lines shall not be placed along both sides of the street rights-of-way. The developer shall be responsible for obtaining verification from the utility companies for easement locations and widths prior to the final approval of construction plans by the City. Any changes during construction shall be approved by the utility companies and the City of Keller. 
C.  Where existing overhead service or lateral/distribution utilities lines are located within the land proposed for development and the lines must be relocated to accommodate the development, the developer is responsible for relocation and placement of the lines underground. 
D.  All new service lines shall be placed underground. 
E.  In special or unique circumstances or to avoid severe hardships that are not strictly financial, the City may authorize exceptions from this requirement and permit the construction and maintenance of overhead electric utility lateral or service lines and of overhead telephone or cable TV lines and may approve any plat or site plan with such approved exceptions. 
F.  Where electrical service is to be placed underground, all other utilities, including circuits for street and site lighting, except street lighting standards, shall also be placed underground. 
G.  All electrical and telephone support equipment (transformers, amplifiers, switching devices, etc.,) necessary for underground installations shall be pad mounted and screened with live screening to block its view from public streets. Installation and maintenance of screening for electrical pad transformers and switching equipment shall be the responsibility and at the cost of the Developer/Owner. The location and depth of the screening material must be coordinated with the utility companies to ensure that safe and efficient access is maintained to the equipment. The location of all new equipment shall be shown on all Site Plans and Construction Plans. 
H.  Each of the utility companies shall be responsible for developing administrative policies and cost reimbursement procedures for the installation and extension of their underground utilities. Each utility company shall have the right to charge or recover costs associated with installing underground utilities in accordance with the respective utility's Tariff for Service and/or Line Extension Policy. No utility company shall be required to begin construction of underground facilities unless and until the owner or developer of the subdivision has made arrangements with the respective utility company for payment in accordance with that respective utility's Tariff for Service and/or Line Extension Policy governing utility installations and their cost. 
I.  Temporary construction service may be provided by overhead electric lines and facilities without obtaining a variance or exception, provided that when the underground utility service to any portion of a subdivision is completed, such overhead electric lines and facilities are promptly removed. 
J.  All installations regulated by this section shall also conform to the standards for utility construction as per Design Standards and Technical Construction Standards of this UDC.  
Section 5.23 - Design and Technical Construction Standards (DTCS) 
A.  Introduction and Purpose. The contents within Sections 5.23, 5.24, 5.25, the Design and Technical Construction Standards, are minimums and due to health, welfare or safety considerations, the Director of Public Works may subject property to additional requirements. 
1.  The following rules and regulations are hereby adopted by the City Council as the Design and Technical Construction Standards of the City of Keller, Texas, and shall be applicable to the filing of plats and the subdivision of land, as that term is defined in the Keller Unified Development Code and in Chapter 212 of Texas Local Government Code, within the corporate City Limits and the Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) of the City of Keller as they may be from time to time as provided by Chapter 42, Texas Local Government Code. 
2.  The latest version of "Public Works Construction Standards" of the North Central Texas Council of Governments, with all amendments thereto, shall govern and shall constitute the technical specifications for all improvements to be dedicated to the City of Keller except as amended by the Keller Design and Technical Construction Standards and is made a part thereof, but is not physically bound within this document. 
3.  It is the responsibility of the Developer and his Project Engineer to comply with all applicable standards, ordinances, and regulations. In the interpretation and application of the provisions of these standards, it is the intention of the City Council that the principles, standards, and requirements provided for herein shall be minimum requirements for (the developing of subdivisions in) the City of Keller (exceeding these requirements is encouraged). Where other ordinances of the City are more restrictive in their requirements, such other ordinances shall control. 
All deviations from the provisions presented herein shall be submitted by the Project Engineer in writing and approved in writing by the Director of Public Works or City Engineer. 
4.  Where specific topographic or other conditions make special requirements in addition to these standards necessary in order to achieve the best overall design, these standards may be modified by the Director of Public Works and/or City Engineer. 
The City of Keller reviews construction plans to ensure compliance with the Design and Technical Construction Standards, Unified Development Code, and all other applicable documents. The proper design of all construction plans is the responsibility of the Project Engineer.  
Section 5.24 - Design Standards 
A.  Design Standards. 
1.  Construction Plans. 
a.  Plan Order. A civil construction plan submittal shall meet the following general sheet requirements and order. 
1)  Cover Sheet with Vicinity Map (to include project title, legal description, city's project number, and date) 
2)  Final Plat (copy of the executed, approved, and filed final plat) 
3)  Site Plan (copy of approved site plan for non-residential projects) 
4)  Dimensional Control Plan 
5)  Paving Plan and Profile 
6)  Grading Plan 
7)  Drainage Area Map 
8)  Storm Sewer Layout 
9)  Storm Sewer Plan and Profile 
10)  Water Layout 
11)  Water Plan and Profile 
12)  Sanitary Sewer Layout 
13)  Sanitary Sewer Plan and Profile 
14)  Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (Erosion Control Plan) 
15)  Tree Protection Plan 
16)  Street Sign and Street Light Plan (plan view of development showing the location for all permanent street signs, traffic control signs, and street lights) 
17)  Traffic Control Plan (to be included for all proposed temporary street closures, existing street connections, and open cut utility crossings of existing streets) 
18)  Standard Construction Details 
Additional plan sheets may be required per the City of Keller Unified Development Code. 
Three (3) copies of complete Construction Plans shall be submitted with the Final Plat. Construction plans must be 100% complete at the time of submittal. Any incomplete sets of construction plans may be returned without City review comments. 
b.  Plan Layout. 
1)  The Construction Plans shall be submitted on standard 22" x 34" sheets. 
2)  Each sheet of the Construction Plans shall include north arrow, scale, date, and benchmark description to sea level datum. Scales shall be 1 inch equal 20, 40, or 50 feet horizontally and 1 inch equal 2, 4, or 5, feet vertically. 
3)  Each sheet shall bear the seal and signature of the Professional Engineer licensed in the State of Texas who prepared the plans (Project Engineer). 
4)  Each sheet of the Construction Plans shall contain a title block, including space for the notation of revisions. This space is to be completed with each revision to the plan sheet and shall clearly note the nature of the revision and the date that the revision was made. 
5)  Include a signature block for a representative of the City of Keller on each plan sheet in the lower right hand portion of the sheet. The signature block should read "Reviewed by the City of Keller and Released for Construction" with a separate line for "Date: __________" and another line for a signature by "Director of Public Works / City Engineer". 
6)  On the Cover Sheet, the project title, legal description, and City's project number shall be placed vertically along the right border in small print. 
2.  Street System Improvements. 
a.  General. The purpose of this section is to provide a set of minimum design standards to be used in the designing of roadways in the City of Keller. These guidelines will be used by consulting engineers employed by the City and engineers for private developments in the City. Each sheet of the plans and profiles will bear the seal, date, and signature of the licensed professional civil engineer who prepared them. Unusual circumstances or special designs requiring a variance from the standards in this manual may be approved by the Director of Public Works or City Engineer. The project engineer shall also refer to the City of Keller Master Thoroughfare Plan and Unified Development Code for additional roadway design criteria not covered in this document. Additionally, any roadway design criteria not addressed in these documents shall conform with the latest edition of AASHTO's Geometric Design of Highways and Streets and the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) published by the Texas Department of Transportation. 
b.  Streets. The scope of this section includes the various design elements, criteria, standards and instructions required to prepare paving plans for the City of Keller Department of Public Works. These guidelines should result in the construction of safe, economical streets and thoroughfares. 
1)  Classification of Streets. As described in the Master Thoroughfare Plan, the classifications of roadways in the City of Keller are as follows: 
a)  Arterial 6-Lane Divided (A6D) 
b)  Arterial 4-Lane Divided (A4D) 
c)  Collector 4-Lane Undivided (C4U) 
d)  Collector 3-Lane Undivided (C3U) 
e)  Collector 2-Lane Undivided (C2U) 
f)  Local /Residential Streets. 
g)  Rural Road. 
Each street is made up of elements which are related to the use of that particular facility. These elements include right-of-way, pavement width, median width if required, arrangement of traffic lanes and parking lanes, curb radii at intersections and other characteristics. Table No. 1 is to be used in the design of the various classifications of streets in Keller. 
Table No. 1 
MINIMUM DESIGN STREET STANDARDS 
DESIGN ELEMENT 	Roadway Type 
	A6D 	A4D 	C4U 	C3U 	C2U 	Local/Residential 	Rural 
Number of Traffic Lanes 	6 	4 	4 	3 	**2 	2 	2 
Lane Width (ft) 	12/14.5 	12/14.5 	14/12 	14/15 	14/8*** 	15 	12 
Curb Offset(ft) 	Remove this line altogether 
Right-of-Way Width (ft) 	125 	100 	80 	70 	70 	50 	60 
Design Speed (m.p.h) 	50 	50 	40 	35 	35 	30 	**** 
Grade (percent) 	0.65-6.0 	0.65-6.0 	0.65-7.5 	0.65-10 	0.65-10 	0.65-10 	**** 
Horizontal Curve Radius (ft) 	800 	800 	400 	400 	400 	200 	**** 
Vertical Clearance (ft) 	16.5 	16.5 	16.5 	16.5 	16.5 	16.5 	**** 
Lateral Clearance (ft) 	Remove this line altogether 
Signal Spacing (ft) 	1600 	1600 	1200 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	**** 
Cross Street Access (ft) 	450 	450 	300 	300 	200 	200 	**** 
Driveway Spacing (ft) 	50 	50 	50 	50 	50 	50 	**** 
Driveway Return Radius (ft) 	30 	30 	25 	20 	20 	10 	**** 
Curb Return Radius (ft) 	75 	75 	50 	40 	40 	30 	**** 
Right-of-Way Corner Clips (ft) 	15×15 	15×15 	15×15 	15×15 	15×15 		**** 
Median Opening Distance (ft) 	600 	600 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 		**** 
Median Width (ft) 	18 	18 	N/A 	*14 	N/A 	N/A 	**** 
Left Turn Storage (ft) 	275 	200 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	**** 
Right Turn Storage (ft) 	150 	150 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	**** 
Capacity (LOS "C-D") (veh/day) 	34,500 	23,00 	17,000 	12,500 	8,500 	N/A 	**** 
 
* Two-way Left Turn Lane 
** Allows on Street Parking 
*** Parking Lanes 
**** Should match the minimum design criteria for the proposed future Roadway Type. 
2)  Geometric Design. 
a)  General. Geometrics of city streets may be defined as the geometry of the curbs or pavement areas which governs the movement of traffic within the confines of the rights-of-way. Included in the geometrics are the pavement, width, degree of curvature, width of traffic lanes, parking lanes, or turning lanes, median width separating opposing traffic lanes, median nose radii, curb radii at street intersections, crown height, cross fall, geometric shapes of islands separating traffic movements and other features. Since city streets are differentiated by their functions and location, there is also a variance in the geometry which describes the path vehicular traffic should follow. 
b)  Design Speed. The design speed is a primary factor in the horizontal and vertical alignment on city streets and thoroughfares. Design features such as curvature, super-elevation, radii for turning movements and sight distance are directly related to the design speed. The design speed also affects features such as lane widths, pavement width, pavement cross-fall, pavement crown, and clearances. 
The design speed is defined as the approximate maximum speed that can be maintained safely by a vehicle over a given section of road when conditions are so favorable that the design features of the roadway govern. The speed limit or posted speed is the maximum legal speed set by local authorities for a certain roadway or area. The design speed should never be less than the likely legal speed limit for arterials and collectors. 
The various street and thoroughfare classifications, which make up the system within the City of Keller, require different design speeds according to their use and location. Refer to Table No. 1 for design speeds for each roadway classification. Lower design speeds will be permitted for all classifications for unusual conditions, terrain or alignment. 
c)  Horizontal Alignment. The horizontal geometrics of the streets and thoroughfares include the segment of geometric design associated with the alignment, intersections, pavement widths, and related geometric elements. The various classifications, utilizing the design speed as a control, must have certain horizontal and vertical geometrics to provide a safe economical facility for use by the public. 
i)  Horizontal Curves and Super-elevation. The alignment of the streets and thoroughfares is usually determined by the alignment of the existing right-of-way or structures which cannot be relocated. Changes in the direction of a street or thoroughfare are minimized by constructing a simple curve having a radius which is compatible with the speed of vehicular traffic. To increase the safety and reduce discomfort to drivers traversing a curved portion of a street or thoroughfare, the pavement may be super-elevated. 
Curvature in the alignment of arterials is allowed under certain conditions, but the greater traffic volume and the higher vehicle speeds which accompany these thoroughfares tend to increase the number of accidents when curving of alignment occurs. Curves in the alignment of minor streets usually provide aesthetic value to residential neighborhoods without affecting the orderly flow of traffic or safety. 
A recommended minimum radius of horizontal curvature for different street types is shown in Table No. 1. These standards are based on traffic consisting of typical present day automobiles operating under optimum weather conditions. There are other important considerations in the design of curves on thoroughfares including the location of intersecting streets, drives, bridges, and other topographic features. 
Minor residential streets intersecting a collector street or major street will have a tangent section of centerline at least fifty feet (50') in length measured from the right-of-way line of the collector or major street; however, no such tangent is required when the minor street curve has a centerline radius greater than four hundred feet (400') with the center located on the collector street or major street right-of-way line. Within a reverse curve, there will be a tangent section of centerline not less than one hundred feet (100') long. 
ii)  Turning Lanes. Turning lanes shall conform to the standards outlined in Section 5.08 of this Unified Development Code. 
iii)  Street Intersections. The intersection at grade of all thoroughfares will be at or near an angle of ninety degrees (90°). Streets shall intersect at no less than an eighty degree (80º) angle. 
Curb radii required for intersections at ninety degrees (90°) are specified in Table No. 1. The radii required for intersections at less than ninety degrees (90°) will be determined using the design data for various vehicles as shown in Table No. 2. 
The location of any median nose will be so located that traffic will clear it while making a left turn. Other considerations include adequate clearance between the median nose and through traffic on the intersecting thoroughfare and location of the median nose to properly clear the pedestrian crosswalks. Reference the City of Keller Standard Construction Details. 
Table No. 2 
DESIGN VEHICLE CRITERIA 
INTERSECTING STREETS 	PASSENGER 
(P) 	SINGLE UNIT TRUCK 
(SU) 	TRACTOR SEMI-TRAILER COMBINATION 
(WB-50) 
Local with Local 	X 		
Local with Collector 		X 	
Local with Arterial 		X 	
Collector with Collector 			X 
Arterial with Collector 			X 
Arterial with Arterial 			X 
Fire Lane and Alley Alignment 		X 	
 
Refer to AASHTO's Geometric Design of Highways and Street for design vehicle information and figures. 
d)  Vertical Alignment. The vertical alignment of all thoroughfares should be designed to insure the safe operation of vehicles by the traveling public and should allow easy access to adjacent property. 
i)  Street Grades. The intersection design of two (2) thoroughfares will include grades which will result in a plane surface or at least a surface which approximates a plane surface. A vehicle traveling on either thoroughfare should be able to traverse the intersection at the design speed without discomfort to accomplish a smooth transition, crossfall toward the median of one lane of each thoroughfare may be required. A storm drainage inlet may also be required in the median. 
In presenting the grades of intersecting thoroughfares in the paving plans, profiles of all four (4) curbs of a thoroughfare will be shown as a continuous grade through the intersection of the other thoroughfare. 
•  Minimum Grades. Minimum longitudinal grades for streets and thoroughfares are required to ensure proper flow of surface drainage toward inlets. The minimum grade required for all roadways shall be 0.65 percent. All valley gutters should be a minimum of eight feet (8') wide and constructed of reinforced concrete and will have a minimum grade of 0.65 percent 
•  Maximum Grades. Maximum longitudinal grades will be compatible with the type of facility and the accompanying characteristics including the design speed, traffic conditions and sight distance. 
Collectors and arterials must move large volumes of traffic at faster speeds, and flatter grades will better accommodate these characteristics. Truck and bus traffic on these type facilities often controls traffic movement, particularly if steep grades prevent normal speeds. The normal maximum street grades allowed for Keller streets are specified in Table No. 1. Steeper grades may be permitted for short lengths where required by topographical features or restricted alignment if approved by the Director of Public Works or City Engineer. 
•  Cross Fall. On undivided streets, the maximum difference in curb elevations will not exceed five-tenths of a foot (0.5'). On divided streets, cross slope of the traffic lanes will be ¼-inch per foot minimum and ½-inch per foot maximum. 
ii)  Vertical Curves. When two (2) longitudinal street grades intersect at a point of vertical intersection (PVI) and the algebraic difference in the grades is one percent (1.0%) or greater, a vertical curve is required. Vertical curves are utilized in roadway design to affect a gradual change between tangent grades and should result in a design which is safe, comfortable in operation, pleasing in appearance, and adequate for drainage. The vertical curve will be formed by a simple parabola and may be a crest vertical curve or a sag vertical curve. 
iii)  Stopping Sight Distance. 
•  Crest Vertical Curve. When a vertical curve is required, it must not interfere with the ability of drivers to see a length of street ahead, should they be required to suddenly stop. This length of street, called the stopping sight distance, should be of sufficient length to enable a person in a vehicle having a height of eye of three and three quarters feet (3.75') above the pavement and traveling at or near design speed to stop, before reaching an object in his path five tenths foot (0.5') in height. 
The minimum stopping sight distance is the sum of two (2) distances; one, the distance traversed by a vehicle from the instant the driver sights an object for which a stop is necessary, to the instant the brakes are applied; and the other, the distance required to stop the vehicle after the brake application begins. 
The minimum safe stopping sight distances for the City of Keller street types are shown in Table No. 3. These sight distances are based on each design speed shown and on wet pavement. The minimum length of crest vertical curve required for the safe stopping sight distance of each street type may be calculated using the formula L = KA and the values of K for a crest vertical curve are also shown in Table No. 3. 
Table No. 3 
MINIMUM LENGTH OF A VERTICAL CURVE 
CREST VERTICAL CURVE 	SAG VERTICAL CURVE 
L = KA where: 
  
L = minimum length vertical curve required for safe stopping sight distance; 
K = horizontal distance in feet required to effect a one percent change in gradient; and, 
A = algebraic difference in grade. 	L = KA where: 
  
L = minimum length vertical curve required for comfort; 
K = horizontal distance in feet required to effect a one percent change in gradient; and, 
A = algebraic difference in grade. 
 
Table No. 3 (Continued) 
STREET CLASSIFICATION 	DESIGN SPEED 
(MPH) 	SAFE STOPPING SIGHT DISTANCE 
(FT) 	NORMAL CREST VERTICAL CURVE K (FT) 	NORMAL SAG VERTICAL CURVE K (FT) 
Arterial (A6D) 	50 	425 	84 	96 
Arterial (A4D) 	50 	425 	84 	96 
Collector (C4U) 	40 	305 	44 	64 
Collector (C3U) 	35 	250 	29 	49 
Collector (C2U) 	35 	250 	29 	49 
Local/Residential 	30 	200 	19 	37 
 
Based on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets (2001) by AASHTO 
•  Sag Vertical Curve. When a sag vertical curve is required, the vertical curve will be of sufficient length to provide a comfortable ride during the change in vertical direction. The minimum length of sag vertical curve required to provide a comfortable ride may be calculated using the formula L = KA and the values of K for a sag vertical curve are shown in Table No. 3. 
•  Sight Distance at Intersections. An important consideration in the design of thoroughfares is the vehicle attempting to cross the thoroughfare from the side street or drive. The operator of the vehicle attempting to cross should have an unobstructed view of the whole intersection and a length of the thoroughfare to be crossed sufficient to permit control of the vehicle to avoid collisions. The minimum sight distance considered safe under various assumptions of physical conditions and driver behavior is related directly to vehicle speeds and to the resultant distance traversed during perception and reaction time and during braking. This sight distance, which is termed intersection sight distance, can be calculated for different thoroughfares and for various grades upwards and downward. Intersection sight distances are shown in Table No. 4. Figure No. 1 shows the method for measuring the intersection sight distance. 
Table No. 4 
SIGHT DISTANCES 
(see Figure No. 1) 
DESIGN SPEED (MPH) 	STOPPING SIGHT DISTANCE (FT) 	THOROUGHFARE CLASSIFICATION 	INTERSECTING SIGHT DISTANCE (FT) 
			NEAR SIDE 	FAR SIDE 
30 	200 	Local/Residential 	290 	335 
35 	250 	Collector - (C2U) 	335 	390 
35 	250 	Collector - (C3U) 	335 	390 
40 	305 	Collector - (C4U) 	385 	445 
50 	425 	Arterial - (A4D) 	480 	555 
50 	425 	Arterial - (A6D) 	480 	555 
 
Based on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets (2001), by AASHTO 
Table No. 4 (Continued): 
DESIGN SPEED (MPH) 	UPGRADES (DECREASE FEET) 	DOWNGRADES (INCREASE FEET) 
	3 	6 	10 	3 	6 	10 
25 	5 	10 	15 	5 	15 	25 
30 	10 	15 	20 	10 	20 	30 
35 	15 	20 	—- 	15 	25 	—- 
40 	20 	25 	—- 	20 	35 	—- 
45 	25 	30 	—- 	25 	50 	—- 
 
iv)  Intersection Grades. The grade of an intersecting street with the principal street gutter should not be generally more than four percent (4%) either up or down within the first twenty feet (20') beyond the curb line of the principal street except that in very hilly terrain a maximum intersecting grade of six percent (6%) can be considered. Grade changes of one percent (1%) or more require vertical curves. 
e)  Openings. The following standards for median and curb openings are established to facilitate traffic movement and promote traffic safety. Additional standards are found in the Master Thoroughfare Plan, Unified Development Code and Standard Construction Details. Figure No. 2 shows typical values for distances and angles required for openings. 
i)  Median Openings. Median openings will normally be permitted at all intersections with dedicated City of Keller Streets. Exceptions would be at certain minor streets where, due to unusual conditions, a hazardous situation would result. Normal spacing between median openings should be no more than 1,200 feet. 
Mid-block median openings or other openings with left turns permitted into adjacent property will not normally be permitted unless all the following conditions exist: 
•  The property to be served is a significant traffic generator with demonstrated or projected trip generation of not less than two hundred fifty (250) vehicles in a twelve (12)-hour period. 
•  The edge of the median opening is not less than four hundred feet (00') from the edge of an intersection with a collector or arterial thoroughfare. 
•  The median width is sufficient to permit the construction of a left turn storage lane. 
Median openings will not be permitted in left turn storage lanes. Wherever possible, median openings should serve both sides of a thoroughfare. 
ii)  Driveway and Curb Openings. Design of driveway and curb openings shall be as specified in Section 5.07 of this Unified Development Code. 
Driveway return radii shall meet the design vehicle requirements as specified in Table No. 2 or as shown in Table No. 1, whichever is more restrictive. 
In all cases, driveway locations must conform to minimum safe sight distance and stopping sight distance standards. 
Driveway approaches shall not be located in street intersections or at established pedestrian crossings. 
Driveways shall be kept at a minimum of five feet (5') away from obstructions such as street light posts, fire hydrants, traffic signals, etc. 
Driveway approaches shall not occupy more than forty percent (40%) of the frontage of a lot or tract. 
Minimum distances of driveways from intersections shall be as specified in Figure No. 3 or Section 5.07 of this Unified Development Code, whichever is more restrictive. 
All driveway approaches shall be constructed six inches (6") thick with No. 4 rebar on eighteen-inch (18") centers each way. Concrete for approaches to have three thousand six hundred (3,600) p.s.i compressive strength at twenty-eight (28) days (minimum). 
iii)  Drive Approach on Rural Roads. 
•  Culvert Size - The developer/property owner shall provide a drainage study by a Professional Engineer licensed in the State of Texas that determines the size of culvert needed. The minimum culvert pipe size shall be 18" diameter. The ends of all culvert pipes shall be cut at a 6:1 slope and require a reinforced concrete sloping headwall. 
•  Radius - Driveways shall be constructed with the return curbs joining the edge of pavement at the street with a minimum ten-foot (10') radius. 
•  Slope - The maximum slope from the edge of driveway to the top of the culvert pipe shall be 4:1. The sloped area around the end of the culvert pipe headwall shall be sodded or hydro-mulched to resist erosion. 
•  Cross Slope - The minimum cross slope on the drive shall be 1/8 inch per foot. The minimum longitudinal slope between the existing pavement edge at the street and the valley over the culvert pipe shall be ¼ inch per foot down and away from the street. 
•  Maintenance - Future maintenance of the drive approach and culvert pipe is the responsibility of the property owner. 
•  Grading - During the drive approach installation, all ditch grading upstream and downstream of the proposed driveway culvert is the responsibility of the property owner. 
f)  Driveway and Alley Grades. 
i)  Driveway Grades. The normal driveway grade within the street right-of-way is set at one-quarter inch per foot rise above the top of curb to the property line. The minimum elevation of a driveway at the right-of-way line is two and one half inches (2.5") above the top of curb. Barrier free sidewalk construction requires a maximum driveway grade as grade measured from the gutter of eight percent (8%). 
Where driveway construction or reconstruction must occur off the street right-of-way, the usual maximum grade is fourteen percent (14%). The maximum change in grade without vertical curve is twelve percent (12%) for any ten feet (10') in distance. Driveways should be profiled for a distance of at least twenty-five feet (25') outside the right-of-way to ensure adequate replacement design. 
Due to state laws requiring barrier free construction of sidewalks, steps or other abrupt changes in sidewalk grades are prohibited at driveways. 
ii)  Alley Grades. The minimum width of residential alleys in the City of Keller is fifteen feet (15') of pavement with a right-of-way of twenty feet (20'). Alleys are constructed with a 5-inch inverted crown for drainage. The maximum grades for alleys are eight percent (8%) within thirty feet (30') of an intersection with a street and fourteen percent (14%) elsewhere, unless otherwise approved by the Director of Public Works or City Engineer. The minimum grade for alleys is six and one-half tenths percent (0.65%). Changes in grade, including intersections with streets, may not exceed three percent (3%) without providing vertical curves. 
g)  Pavement Design. All streets will be constructed of reinforced Class 'C' concrete with the minimum strength and thickness as shown in Table No. 6 of this section. Table No. 6 also calls for a minimum amount of lime or cement to be mixed with the subgrade soils for stabilization. A geotechnical investigation to determine the level of lime or cement to be added for soil stabilization may be required if deemed necessary by the Director of Public Works. The Developer or Contractor will be responsible for all costs associated with this geotechnical investigation and tests. 
Standard pavement sections are established and are included in this manual in Table No. 6, "Minimum Standard Street Pavement Design." Unusual design conditions may be encountered which will preclude the use of Table No. 6. The proposed pavement will be designed in accordance with the geotechnical investigation or Table No. 6, whichever is more restrictive. 
Table No. 5 
MINIMUM STANDARD STREET PAVEMENT DESIGN 
TYPE OF STREET 	CONCRETE THICKNESS (IN) 	COMPRESSIVE PAVEMENT STRENGTH AT 28 DAYS (PSI) 	REBAR SIZE AND SPACING 	MINIMUM SUBGRADE TREATMENT * 
Alley 	6 	3,600 	No. 3 
18" longitudinal 
12" traverse 	6" lime or cement treated material 
Driveway (Commercial Drive and Residential Approaches) 	6 	3,600 	No. 3 
18" longitudinal 
18" traverse 	6" lime or cement treated material 
Fire Lanes 	7 	3,600 	No. 4 
18" longitudinal 
18" traverse 	8" lime or cement treated material 
Residential (local) 	6 	3,600 	No. 3 
18" longitudinal 
18" traverse 	6" lime or cement treated material 
Collector 	7 	3,600 	No. 4 
18" longitudinal 
18" traverse 	8" lime or cement treated material 
Arterial 	8 	3,600 	No. 4 
18" longitudinal 
18" traverse 	9" lime or cement treated material 
 
* Site specific per geotechnical report, subject of review and approval by the Public Works Director. 
The developer or contractor will be required to furnish a geotechnical report indicating soil tests on the subgrade soils at four hundred foot (400') intervals, or more frequently if material changes are encountered. Such data will include, but is not necessarily limited to Liquid Limit, Plasticity Index (P.I.), and Percent Passing No. 200 sieve. All soil tests will be performed by an independent testing laboratory, approved by the City of Keller, at the developer's or contractor's expense. 
All subgrade soils will be stabilized with lime or cement treated base material to at least one foot behind the proposed curb, regardless of the type of soil encountered. The amount and type of stabilization will be in accordance with the geotechnical investigation recommendation or as shown in Table No. 6, whichever is more restrictive. Subgrade stabilization of residential driveways is recommended but shall be considered optional and the decision to comply with this recommendation shall be at the discretion of the builder or developer. 
The street curb will not be more than six inches (6") wide at the top and seven and one-half inches (7-1/2") wide at the base and six inches (6") high. The gutter will be a minimum of twenty-four inches (24") wide. Mountable curbs do not create an acceptable side roadway barrier and will not be allowed. 
h)  Sidewalks. 
i)  The purpose of the public sidewalk is to provide a safe area for pedestrians to walk. The City of Keller requires that sidewalks be constructed with the paving of streets or when building construction occurs, in all residential areas and wherever pedestrian traffic may be generated and that all sidewalks conform to state laws for barrier free construction. Refer to Section 5.06 of this Unified Development Code and the Standard Construction Details for design requirements not covered in this section. 
ii)  Concrete sidewalks will have a thickness of not less than four inches (4") and will be constructed of three thousand six hundred pounds per square inch (3,600 psi) compressive strength concrete on both sides of all streets and thoroughfares. Sidewalks will be constructed within the right-of-way and will extend along the street frontage including the side corner lots and block ends. 
All concrete for sidewalks will be placed on a two-inch (2") sand cushion and will be reinforced with a minimum of No. 3 rebar on eighteen-inch (18") centers each way. 
iii)  All sidewalk intersections with street curbs shall be constructed so as to provide a curb ramp that complies with the Architectural Barriers Act. Barrier free curb ramps shall be provided for access to the street. The following specifications shall apply: 
•  Ramp to be a minimum four feet (4') in width. 
•  Ramp to be constructed with Class "C" concrete. 
•  Minimum ramp concrete thickness shall be six inches (6"). 
•  #3 bars shall be used for reinforcement on eighteen-inch (18") centers both ways. 
•  Curb return shall match existing curb height of the street and taper to the connecting walk with a 1-foot radius. 
•  Street shall be blocked out (max. twelve (12") inches) and dowels installed. 
•  Saw joints shall be made one and a half (1 ½") inch minimum depth and sealed with silicone joint sealant material. 
iv)  Surface of walk shall be coarse and ribbed to provide extra traction. Where the above specifications do not apply or do not have jurisdiction, refer to the specifications in the American Disabilities Act (ADA). 
i)  Trails. 
i)  The purpose of the public trail is to provide a safe area for recreational walking, jogging, biking, and in some cases, equestrian use. The City of Keller requires that trails be constructed when building construction occurs on sites that have trails in accordance with the Parks and Trails Master Plan. Refer to Section 5.06 of this Unified Development Code and the Standard Construction Details for design requirements not covered in this section. 
ii)  Concrete trails will have a thickness of not less than six inches (6") and will be constructed of three thousand six hundred pounds per square inch (3,600 psi) compressive strength concrete. Trails will be constructed within dedicated right-of-way and will extend the length of the property, in accordance with the Parks and Trails Master Plan. 
All concrete for trails will be placed on a two-inch (2") sand cushion and will be reinforced with a minimum of No. 3 rebar on eighteen-inch (18") centers each way. 
iii)  All trail intersections with street curbs shall be constructed so as to provide a curb ramp that complies with the Architectural Barriers Act. Barrier free curb ramps shall be provided for access to the street. The following specifications shall apply: 
•  Ramp shall match the width of the trail. 
•  Ramp to be constructed with Class "C" concrete. 
•  Minimum ramp concrete thickness shall be six inches (6"). 
•  #3 bars shall be used for reinforcement on eighteen-inch (18") centers both ways. 
•  Curb return shall match existing curb height of the street and taper to the connecting trail with a one (1)-foot radius. 
•  Street shall be blocked out (max. twelve (12") inches) and dowels installed. 
•  Saw joints shall be made one and a half (1-½") inch minimum depth and sealed with silicone joint sealant material. 
iv)  Surface of trail shall be coarse and ribbed to provide extra traction. 
Where the above specifications do not apply or do not have jurisdiction, refer to the specifications in the American Disabilities Act (ADA). 
3.  Drainage System Improvements. 
a.  General. The following contains minimum storm drainage design criteria and outlines the design procedures to be employed on drainage projects in the City of Keller. 
Plans, profiles, and specifications will be prepared for storm sewer improvements to be constructed. The plans will show the appropriate watershed areas, drainage through the site and/or discharge point, storage volume calculations, run-off coefficient calculations, hydraulic gradients, flow arrows, and other details for the proposed pipe, inlets, manholes, culverts, outlet structures, and other appurtenances for the one (1), ten (10) and one hundred (100) year events. The plans will also show any proposed low impact design (LID) system plans including pervious pavement, bioretention areas, bioswales, etc. Each sheet of the plans and profiles will bear the seal and signature of the licensed professional civil engineer who is responsible for the design. 
The developer will pay for the cost of all drainage improvements connected with development of the subdivision, including any necessary off-site channels or storm sewers and acquisition of any required easements. 
Discharge of storm drainage will be at a point of adequate capacity or no adverse impact (as previously defined). This will require the developer to provide off-site drainage improvements if an adequate discharge point (defined an outlet of storm water, acceptable to the City Engineer, which does not create adverse impact) does not exist on-site as determined by the provisions provided herein. 
b.  Residential Grading and Drainage. 
1)  Surface runoff from residential lots shall cross no more than one additional lot before being discharged to an adequate discharge point in a public right-of-way (R.O.W.) or drainage easement. When the flow reaches the second lot, side lot swales shall be in place to direct the flow to the street or to a drainage system within a public easement in the rear yard. 
2)  Three types of residential lot grading and drainage design plans are allowed within the City of Keller, as shown in Appendix Part B, Figure No. 1.a. Specific deviations from these three plans will be considered on an individual basis. 
3)  Individual lot grading plans are required to be submitted with the building permit application for all platted lots. An example of a Lot Grading Plan and a checklist of items required on the plan are shown on Appendix Part B Figures 1.02 and 1.03. 
c.  Buildings. When adjacent to the floodplain, the finished floor (FF) elevation of commercial and residential buildings shall be a minimum of 2 feet above the 100-year frequency storm water surface elevation based on runoff from a fully developed (based on the Future Land Use Plan or Zoning Map, whichever is more restrictive) upstream watershed. 
d.  Detention. 
1)  The developer or builder shall develop the property so that the rate of runoff created by the development as it leaves the property does not exceed the rate of runoff currently generated by the undeveloped site during one (1), ten (10), and one hundred (100) year frequency storm events. The runoff coefficient for the existing site will be based on the existing surface cover and land use, not the zoning designation. 
2)  Runoff computations shall be based upon fully developed watershed conditions in accordance with the land use projections in the latest comprehensive land use plan for the City of Keller and upstream cities. The design engineer shall size drainage facilities by disregarding the detention effects of upstream property and calculating the runoff as if the off-site property was developed without any detention. If an approved regional detention/retention facility is in operation, the design engineer may size downstream drainage facilities based on consideration of the detention effects of the regional facility. 
3)  Detention calculations for single basins shall be designed with HEC-1, HEC-HMS, XPSWM, or the Modified Rational Method for contributing basins up to one hundred (100) acres. All basins with contributing areas greater than one hundred (100) acres or with multiple detention basins (in series or parallel) shall be designed with HEC_HMS or XPSWM. 
4)  Detention outflow hydraulics shall be designed as broadcrested weirs, orifices, or closed conduit systems. 
5)  Weir calculations will be based on the following equation if the weir is trapezoidal with side slopes of three (3) horizontal with one (1) vertical or milder: H=( Q / 2.9(BW) ) 2/3 . If the side slopes are steeper, it shall be considered a contracted weir and the effective bottom width (BW) shall be reduced by two-tenths (0.2) H. 
6)  Orifice calculations will be based on the following orifice equation: H = ( Q / 64.4(A) ) 2 . 
7)  Culvert or closed conduit calculations shall be as customary or as described in this Unified Development Code. 
8)  Storage calculations will begin at the discharge invert on the basin side of the control structure; or at the hydraulic grade line (created from the downstream surcharge) at the same location, whichever is greater. Volume below this elevation will not be used for the detention volume necessary. 
9)  All detention facilities shall include landscaping corresponding to that of the development. 
e.  Hydrology. 
1)  Construction plans shall include a topographic layout of pre-development conditions and a layout of the proposed site grading. Each sheet shall clearly indicate points where runoff exits the site and include detailed calculations. 
2)  Rational Method. The design of storm drainage improvements for watersheds less than one hundred (100) acres may be based on flood discharges determined from the Rational Formula. The Rational Formula for calculating storm flow is: 
Q = CIA 
Where: 
Q = the maximum storm flow rate at a given point in c.f.s.; 
C = runoff coefficient which varies with the topography, land use and moisture content of the soil at the time. The runoff coefficient will be based on the ultimate use of the land. If weighted C is used for non-residential use, a CAD file shall be submitted; 
I = the average intensity of rainfall in inches per hour for a period equal to the time of concentration of flow from the farthest point of the drainage area to the point under consideration; and, 
A = the drainage area, in acres, tributary to the point under design calculated from the drainage map of the area. This drainage map will be submitted with any drainage plans submitted for consideration by the City of Keller. 
a)  Runoff Coefficients. The runoff coefficient, which considers the slope of the terrain, the character of the land use, the length of overland flow, and the imperviousness of the drainage area, will be determined from the ultimate land development plan of the City of Keller. The runoff coefficient for the appropriate land uses will be as follows: 
Business Areas (Commercial and Retail) 	0.90 
Industrial & Institutional areas 	0.70 
Residential areas 	
Single Family (Lots > 0.5 acres) 	0.50 
Single Family (Lots < 0.5 acre) 	0.55 
Apartments/Multi-Family 	0.70 
Parks and open space 	0.30 
Razed for redevelopment and left to vegetate 	0.20 
RAZED and covered with impervious material 	0.95 
 
b)  Rainfall Intensity. The rainfall intensity duration frequency curves, (IDF) shall be those included for Tarrant County in the 2010 iSWM Hydrology Technical Manual (See Figure 10). 
The intensity, I, in the formula Q = CIA, is determined from these curves by arriving at a time of concentration and adapting a storm frequency upon which to base the drainage improvements. 
i)  Time of Concentration. The time concentration is the time required for a drop of water to flow from the upper limits of a drainage area to the point of concentration. The time of concentration includes the time required to flow overland plus the time required to flow in the gutter to the inlet, plus the time of flow in the storm sewer. 
When designing inlets and laterals, the time of concentration is equal to the inlet time. The design engineer will compare the below specified inlet times to the actual calculated inlet time by computing the flow time overland and along the gutter to the first inlet. Manning's equation shall be used to determine flow time to the inlet. The design engineer may use the actual calculated or specified inlet time. In no case shall a longer inlet time be used than ten (10) minutes for multi-family, commercial, churches, schools, industrial and business areas and fifteen (15) minutes for parks, cemeteries, agricultural, and single-family areas. A nomograph, shown on Figure No. 3 of Part 8, is attached for estimating the time of concentration. The design engineer will consider overland flow channelized at such time as the distance traveled exceeds one hundred (100') feet. 
ii)  Storm Frequency. The design storm frequencies for storm drainage improvements in Keller are shown in Table No. 1 
Table No. 1 
DESIGN STORM FREQUENCY 
TYPE OF FACILITY 	DESCRIPTION OF AREA TO BE DRAINED 	MAXIMUM TIME OF CONCENTRATION (MIN) 	DESIGN FREQUENCY (YEARS) 
Parallel Storm Sewers 	Residential, Commercial and Industrial 	30 	10 
Street Right-of-Way 	Including parallel underground drainage system 	30 	100 
Culverts, Channels, and Creeks 	Any type of area less than 100 acres 	30 	100 
Culverts, Channels, and Creeks 	Any type of area greater than 100 acres but less than 1,000 acres 	45 	100 
Culverts, Channels, and Creeks 	Any type of area greater than 1,000 acres 	60 	100 
 
All bridges are to be designed for the one hundred (100)-year frequency regardless of drainage area. 
•  When an inlet is located in a sump and runoff in excess of the inlet capacity is designed to flow between houses, a reinforced concrete flume will be required to be installed above the storm sewer. The flume will be a minimum of four (4') foot wide with six (6") inch curbs. 
•  The underground storm drain and sump inlet will be designed to carry the 100-year frequency storm runoff. 
•  All sump inlets will have a path for overland relief to flow across in case the sump clogs. The overland relief path will be lined with reinforced four-foot (4') concrete flume with curb, gabions, or rock riprap to control erosion. 
•  Whenever storm sewer is to be installed under an arterial or collector street, the parallel storm sewer shall be sized to carry the combined one hundred (100)-year storm (above and below ground). 
c)  Area. The area used in determining flows by the Rational Method will be calculated by subdividing a map into drainage areas within the basin contributing storm water runoff to the system. 
d)  The plans shall include a table that shows the following: 
i)  Drainage area designation (name) for each delineated basin. 
ii)  Basin area, A. 
iii)  Runoff coefficient, C (current and post-project conditions). 
iv)  Time of Concentration, Tc. 
v)  Rainfall Intensity, I. 
vi)  Discharge at each concentration/design point, Q (current and post-project conditions). 
3)  Unit Hydrograph Method. 
Method: For hydrology performed by the Unit Hydrograph Method, use HEC-1, HEC-HMS or XPSWM computer models and the Soil Conservation Service (SCS) Method. If XPSWM is used for the models, a triangular hydrograph (such as those used with the Rational Method) will not be allowed. The models will be constructed by defining the watershed areas as noted above for the Rational Method and as further defined herein. 
Sub-areas used for determining the runoff at a specific design point should not exceed a ratio of 6:1. In some cases the area ratio may not effectively define the parameters of the existing or proposed watershed. In those cases, the ratio may be increased but will not exceed 10:1. In both cases, the intent is to limit the size of the largest sub-area in the analysis to be no larger than 10 times the smallest sub-area. In cases where flow timing is a concern which might otherwise increase the ratio, the larger sub-areas will be further subdivided so as not to exceed the 10:1 ratio. 
Lag Time: The model Lag Times will be 60% of the composite Time of Concentration (Tc). The composite Tc will be composed of three (3) elements: 
Sheet Flow: This element is calculated using the following equation: 
Tc = 1.8 x (1.1-C) x L 1.5 /S 0.33 
Where: 
Tc = Time of Concentration (min) 
C = surface runoff coefficient 
Paved Surface = 0.016 
Grass = 0.24 
Woods = 0.60 
Additional values may be approved by City Engineer 
L = distance traveled (ft.) 
S = slope (%) 
Shallow Concentrated Flow: This element will use the following equations: 
Tc = L / (V x 60) and; 
for paved areas  V = 20.3282 x S 0.5 
for unpaved areas  V = 16.1345 x S 0.5 
Where: 
Tc = Time of Concentration (min) 
V = velocity (fps) 
L = distance traveled (ft) 
S = slope (%) 
Channelized Flow: This element will use Manning's equation to calculate the approximate velocity or a hydraulic model as noted below to calculate actual flow time. 
Soil Type: The soil types for the pervious areas will be determined from the USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service Soil Survey. The data will be used to determine the hydrologic soil group for each of the sub-areas. The following Curve Numbers (CN) will be assigned for each group to determine a weighted CN for the sub-area. 
Group A  CN = 39 
Group B  CN = 61 
Group C  CN = 74 
Group D  CN = 80 
*Areas containing water year round will be included with the Percent Impervious. 
Percent Impervious: This factor will be calculated assuming that all impervious areas are ultimately connected to the drainage system. The actual percent impervious may be calculated using a Geographical Information System (GIS) or vector based drawing file such as AutoCAD. Alternately the percent impervious may be selected from the table: 
Residential > 2 ac. 	12% 
SF-LD & SF-30 	20% 
SF-25 & SF-20 	25% 
SF-15 	30% 
SF-12, 10 & 8.4 	38% 
2F & MF 	65% 
NS, O, R, TC & C 	85% 
IP & LI 	72% 
All others will be calculated from drawing files as noted above. 
 
Precipitation: The meteorological data will be input as "Frequency Storms" from the Rainfall-Intensity-Duration data described with the Rational Method noted above. The initial loss rate will be set to zero to represent a saturated watershed. 
All storms will be modeled for a 24-hour occurrence. 
f.  Hydraulics. 
4)  Spread of Water. During the design storm, the quantity of storm water that is allowed to collect in the streets before being intercepted by a storm drainage system is referred to as the "spread of water". In determining the limitations for carrying the storm water in the street, the ultimate development of the street will be considered. The portion of the street for carrying storm water will be limited as shown in Table No. 2. 
Table No. 2 
SPREAD OF WATER 
MAJOR THOROUGHFARES (DIVIDED) 	One (1) traffic lane each way on each side to remain clear. 
MAJOR THOROUGHFARES (UNDIVIDED) 	Two (2) traffic lanes each way to remain clear. 
COLLECTOR STREETS 	One (1) traffic lane each way to remain clear. 
MINOR RESIDENTIAL STREETS 	Depth of flow to top of curb, or no lanes completely clear. 
 
a)  Flow in Gutters. The City of Keller requires a storm drain conduit to begin at a point where the depth of flow based on the 10-year storm frequency reaches the top of curb. Inlets are then located as necessary to remove the flow based on a 10-year storm frequency, as well as contain the 100-year storm within the street right-of-way. If, in the judgment of the engineer, the flow in the gutter would be excessive under either of these conditions, then the storm sewer should be extended upgrade to a more appropriate point for the inlet locations. Multiple inlets at a single location are permitted in extenuating circumstances. Where possible, inlets should be placed upstream from an intersection to prevent large amounts of water running through intersections. Inlets should also be located on the approach street to an intersection and in alleys where necessary to prevent water from entering these intersections in amounts which would cause the allowed street capacity to be exceeded. 
b)  Capacity of Street. Curves are provided on Part B, Figure No. 4 for determining the spread of water for certain gutter slopes, gutter discharge, and pavement crown. Also provided is Part B, Figure No. 5 for determining the capacity of parabolic gutters for various width of streets. 
5)  Valley Gutters. The use of valley gutters to convey storm water across a street intersection is subject to the following criteria: 
a)  Valley gutters will not be allowed on arterial thoroughfares. 
b)  Wherever feasible, a collector street will not be crossed with a valley gutter. 
c)  At any cross intersection between a collector street and a residential street, perpendicular valley gutters on a collector street will not be permitted, and parallel valley gutters should cross only the lower classified street. 
6)  Sizing and Locating Inlets. 
a)  Inlets in sumps are inlets in low points of surface drainage to relieve ponding. The capacity of inlets in sumps will be based on the following weir equation: 
Q = 3.0LH 3/2 ;Q/L or Q/P = 3.0H 3/2 
Where: 
Q = Capacity in c.f.s. of curb opening or capacity in c.f.s. of drop inlet; 
H = Head at the inlet in feet; 
L = Length of curb opening inlet in feet; and, 
P = Length of portion of perimeter of opening which water enters the drop inlet in feet. 
Maximum allowable capacity for sump inlets is 2.0 cfs/foot. 
Inlets should be placed such that the inlet openings do not become submerged. In cases where this is not possible and the inlet is completely submerged, the following orifice equation shall be utilized to determine capacity: 
Q = 4.84 AH 1/2 
Where: 
A = Area of Inlet Opening 
The Curves shown in Figure Part B, No. 6 provide for a direct solution to the above equations. 
b)  Curb inlets may be depressed, recessed or nonrecessed. Depressed inlets should be used on continuous grades that exceed one percent (1%). For roadways with high traffic volumes, depressed inlets should also be recessed. Undepressed curb inlets will not be used when the street grade exceeds one percent (1%) without the approval of the Director of Public Works or City Engineer. The capacity of curb inlets will be based on the following equation: 
 
Where: 
Q = the discharge into inlet in c.f.s 
L = the length of inlet opening in feet 
a = the gutter depression in feet (0 for undepressed) 
y = the depth of flow in approach gutter in feet 
H = the sum of gutter depression and flow depth (a + y) in feet 
The curve shown in Part B, Figure No. 7 provides for the direct solution of the above equation when the value of y is known. 
The curve shown in Part B, Figure No. 8 provides for the determination of the ratio of the intercepted flow by the inlet to the total flow in the gutter. 
7)  Design of Closed Conduits. Storm water runoff in excess of that allowed to collect in the streets will be intercepted in inlets and carried away in a storm sewer system. Storm sewer capacity will be calculated by Manning's Formula: 
 
Where: 
Q = the discharge in c.f.s; 
A = the cross-sectional area of flow in square feet; 
R = the hydraulic radius in feet; 
S = the slope of the hydraulic gradient in feet per foot; and, 
n = the coefficient of roughness (n = 0.013 for concrete pipe and 0.015 for poured culverts). 
In the design of the storm sewer system where the design is for the ten (10)-year flood event, the elevation of the hydraulic gradient of the storm sewer will be a minimum of one and one half feet (1.5') below the elevation of the adjacent street gutter. Where the system is designed for the one hundred (100)-year flood event, this may be reduced to half foot (0.5') below the elevation of the adjacent street gutter. 
Storm sewer pipe will be a minimum of eighteen inches (18") in diameter. Storm sewer pipe material shall be reinforced concrete tongue and groove pipe meeting specifications for ASTM C-76, Class III. 
a)  Hydraulic Gradient. After the computation of the quantity of storm runoff entering each inlet, the size and gradient of pipe required to carry off the design storm are to be determined. The City of Keller requires the hydraulic gradient for all drainage design to be shown and tabulated. All hydraulic gradient calculations shall begin at the outfall of the system. The following is the criteria for the starting elevation of the hydraulic gradient: 
i)  The 100-year water surface elevation in a creek, stream or other open channels will be calculated for the time of peak pipe discharge in the same storm and that elevation used for beginning the hydraulic gradient. 
ii)  In lieu of separate calculations for the difference in time to crest on the creek compared to the closed conduit time of concentration, Table 1.10 Frequencies For Coincidental Occurrences from the 2010 iSWM Hydraulics Technical Manual may be used. 
iii)  For pipes that flow into storm water storage areas, the design flood elevation for that storage area will be based on the 100-year storm. 
iv)  When a proposed storm sewer is to be connected to an existing storm sewer system that has a design flow less than the proposed, the hydraulic gradient for the proposed storm sewer will start at the elevation of the existing storm sewers' hydraulic gradient or the top inside elevation of the pipe, whichever is greater. 
b)  Velocity in Closed Conduits. 
Table No. 3 is a tabulation of minimum pipe grades which will produce a velocity of not less than 2.5 f.p.s. when flowing full. Grades less than those shown will not be allowed. Only those pipe sizes shown in Table No. 3 should be used in designing pipe storm sewer systems. 
Table No. 3 
MINIMUM SLOPES FOR PIPES 
(n=0.013) 
PIPE DIAMETER (INCHES) 	SLOPE (FEET/100 FEET) 	PIPE DIAMETER (INCHES) 	SLOPE (FEET/100 FEET) 
18 	0.180 		
21 	0.150 	54 	0.041 
24 	0.120 	60 	0.036 
27 	0.110 	66 	0.032 
30 	0.090 	72 	0.028 
33 	0.080 	78 	0.025 
36 	0.070 	84 	0.023 
		90 	0.021 
42 	0.056 	96 	0.019 
		102 	0.018 
48 	0.048 	108 	0.016 
 
Table No. 4 shows the maximum allowable velocities in closed conduits: 
Table No. 4 
MAXIMUM VELOCITY 
Type of Conduit 	Maximum Velocity (f.p.s.) 
Culverts and Storm Sewers 	15.0 
Inlet Laterals 	10.0 
 
Discharge velocities cannot exceed the maximum velocity of the channel or conduit at the outfall. Velocity dissipaters shall be used at all outfall points to prevent erosion. 
c)  Roughness Coefficients for Closed Conduits. 
Values for the roughness coefficient "n" are tabulated in Table No. 5. Where engineering judgment indicates values other than those shown should be used, the appropriate adjustments should be made in the calculations and the variance noted and approved by the Public Works Director or City Engineer. 
Table No. 5 
ROUGHNESS COEFFICIENTS FOR CLOSED CONDUITS 
Materials of Construction 	Roughness Coefficient 
"n" 
New Monolithic Concrete Conduit 	0.013 
Concrete Pipe Storm Sewer 
Good Alignment, Smooth Joints 	0.013 
Concrete Pipe Culverts 	0.013 
Monolithic Concrete Culvert 	0.013 
 
d)  Head Losses in Closed Conduits. Head losses for wyes will be calculated by the formula: 
 
Head losses for pipe size changes will be calculated by the formula: 
 
and, 
V 1 = upstream velocity (f.p.s.); 
V 2 = downstream velocity; and, 
g = acceleration due to gravity 
d 1 = upstream diameter 
d 2 = downstream diameter 
Head losses and gains for manholes, bends, and junction boxes will be calculated by the formulas shown below. 
Manholes on Main Line with Laterals: 
90° Lateral hj = (V 2 2 - 0.25V 1 2 ) / 2g; 
60° Lateral hj = (V 2 2 - 0.35V 1 2 ) / 2g; and, 
45° Lateral hj = (V 2 2 - 0.50V 1 2 ) / 2g. 
no Lateral hj = (V 2 2 - 0.75V 1 2 ) / 2g. 
Bends where Radius = Diameter of Pipe: 
90° Bend hj = 0.50 V 2 2 / 2g; 
60° Bend hj = 0.43 V 2 2 / 2g; 
45° Bend hj = 0.35 V 2 2 / 2g; and 
22.5° Bend hj = 0.20 V 2 2 / 2g. 
Bends are not to be used without the approval of the Director of Public Works or City Engineer. 
The head loss due to friction in the closed conduit will be the product of the hydraulic gradient and the length of conduit. The hydraulic gradient is the slope of the frictional gradient such that the pipe, when flowing full, will carry an amount of flow equal to or greater than the necessary discharge. 
e)  Junction Boxes. 
i)  A junction box will be installed on all storm sewers whenever two (2) or more laterals join the main line at the same location or every 500 feet, whichever is less. 
ii)  Maximum spacing between junction boxes shall be 500 feet. Junction boxes may be required at shorter intervals to meet maintenance requirements. 
8)  Design of Open Channels. All open channel design will be in accordance with all federal and state laws. 
Open Channels will be allowed only if the design flow is greater than 200 cfs or cannot be contained in a 72-inch circular conduit. 
Storm water runoff in excess of that allowed to collect in the streets in developed areas and runoff in undeveloped areas may be carried in open channels (not in the street right-of-way). 
Open channel capacity will be calculated by Manning's Formula, and roughness coefficients will be as follows: 
Table No. 6 
CHANNEL DESIGN 
TYPE OF LINING 	ROUGHNESS COEFFICIENT 	MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE MEAN VELOCITY 
(feet per second) 	Minimum Slope 
Earth (Bermuda Grass) 	0.035 	8 	1.25 
Earth (Non-Vegetated) 	0.020 	5 	Must be vegetated 
Concrete Lined 	0.015 	15 	0.5 
Weathered Rock 	0.030 	15 	0.5 
 
Where federal and state laws allow, open channels will be constructed with a trapezoidal cross-section and will have sides sloped no steeper than 4:1. 
All open channels having a design quantity of runoff less than four hundred (400) c.f.s will be lined with reinforced concrete. Open channels having a quantity greater than four hundred (400) c.f.s. may be either earthen channel or concrete-lined. Earthen channels will not be allowed without channel armoring for erosion control as well as concrete pilot channels and two feet (2') of gabion rip-rap along each side of the pilot channel. The width of the pilot channel shall be no less than one-half of the total bottom width of the channel. 
Where the grade of the open channel must be sixteen hundredths percent (0.16%) or less, the channel will be concrete-lined, regardless of the amount of runoff. 
Concrete lining in channels will have a minimum thickness of six inches (6") of NCTCOG Class C concrete and will be reinforced with #4 bars at eighteen inches (18") on center each way. 
The ends of concrete-lined channels will have a reinforced concrete toe wall constructed along the base and side slopes of the lined channel and will have a minimum vertical depth of three feet (3') and two feet (2'), respectively. A horizontal concrete section, one-foot (1') in width, will be constructed between the top of the channel lining and the top toe wall. 
The design water surface in an open channel is to include one-foot (1') of freeboard to the top of bank. Water surface elevations for all channels shall be provided by submitting a Hec-RAS or XPSWM model for review and acceptance by the Public Works Director. 
Special care must be taken at entrances to closed conduits and culverts to provide for the headwater requirements. The water surface elevation, which is coincident with the hydraulic gradient, will be calculated and shown on the construction plans for all channels. 
9)  Design of Driveway Culverts. Design of driveway culverts will include the determination of upstream backwater conditions as well as downstream velocities and flooding conditions for the 100-year storm. Consideration will be given to the discharge velocity from culverts, and the following limitations are allowed. 
Table 7 
DRIVEWAY CULVERT DISCHARGE - VELOCITY LIMITATIONS 
Culvert Discharging Onto 	Maximum Allowable Velocity (f.p.s.) 
Earth 	5 
Sod earth 	8 
Paved or rip rap apron 	15 
Shale 	10 
Rock 	15 
 
Generally, all culverts will be designed with a free outfall, and the following head losses will govern the design of the culvert. 
a)  Frictional Head Loss. 
h f = SfL 
Where: 
S f = Slope of frictional gradient in feet per foot; and, 
L = Length of culvert in feet 
b)  Head Loss Due to Change in Velocity 
h v = (V 2 2 - V 1 2 ) / 2g 
Where: 
V 2 = Velocity in culvert (f.p.s.); 
V 1 = Velocity in channel upstream from culvert (f.p.s.); and, 
g = acceleration due to gravity 
c)  Head Loss at Upstream Entrance to Culvert Due to Entrance and Change in Section 
h e = V 2 2 / 2g 
Where V 1 is equal to or less than six (6) f.p.s. 
h e = (V 2 2 - K e V 1 2 ) / 2g 
Where V 1 is greater than six (6) f.p.s. 
Headwalls are used to protect the embankment from erosion and the culvert from displacement. The headwalls, with wingwalls and aprons, will be constructed in accordance with the standard drawings as required by the physical conditions of the particular installation. Special headwalls and wingwalls may be required where approach velocities are in excess of twelve (12) to fifteen (15) f.p.s. This requirement varies according to the axis of the approach velocity with respect to the culvert entrance. 
Velocity dissipaters shall be installed at culvert outfalls where the outlet velocity exceeds ten (10) f.p.s. 
A table of culvert entrance data is shown on Table No. 8. The values of the entrance coefficient, Ke, are a combination of the effects of entrance and approach conditions. It is recognized that all possible conditions may not be tabulated, but an interpolation of values should be possible from the information shown. Where the term "round" entrance edge is used, it means a 6-inch radius on the exposed edge of the entrance. 
Table No. 8 
CULVERT ENTRANCE COEFFICIENTS 
ENTRANCE 	K e 
Box culvert with Flare Angles 
 0 0 - Square 
 0 0 - Round 
 15 0 - 30 0 - Square 
 15 0 - 30 0 - Round 
 30 0 - 75 0 - Square 
 30 0 - 75 0 - Round 	  
0.7 
0.5 
0.5 
0.3 
0.4 
0.3 
Pipe with Headwall 
 Spigot End 
 Bell End 	  
0.5 
0.2 
Pipe without Headwall 
 Spigot End 
 Bell End 	  
0.6 
0.3 
 
Velocities in culverts are limited to the maximum allowed in the downstream channel or protection for erosion control will be provided. 
10)  Design of Bridge Hydraulics. All span bridges and culverts under roadways, or pedestrian bridges shall be analyzed using Hec-RAS or XPSWM. 
a)  In general, excavation of the natural channel is not allowed as compensation for loss of cross sectional area due to the bridge structure. 
b)  Channelization upstream or downstream of the proposed bridge will normally not be permitted. 
c)  A two-foot (2') freeboard is required between the 100-year water surface elevation and the lowest chord for a span bridge. The freeboard for a culvert is two feet (2') from the top of the roadway of the top of the bank, whichever is more restrictive. 
f.  FEMA Criteria for Flood Plain and Floodway Development. 
The developer or owner who wants to develop or build in the floodplain is required to meet all FEMA regulations, all requirements of the City's Flood Hazard Prevention Ordinance, and all sections of the Unified Development Code. When submittal to FEMA is required, the submittal must be submitted to and accepted by the City Engineer or Director of Public Works prior to submitting to FEMA. Conditional Letter of Map Revisions (CLOMRs) and Letter of Map Revisions (LOMRs) are required for any modifications to a floodplain or floodway. FEMA written approval of a CLOMR is required prior to beginning construction of the development within the floodplain. 
Submittal of the CLOMR to FEMA for their approval is not required for work in the floodway fringe if an appropriate detailed drainage study (reviewed and approved by the Director of Public Works) determines that the proposed development construction in the floodway fringe will not cause any rise in the stream's water surface elevation for the 100-year frequency storm runoff from a fully-developed watershed. All construction on the project will be done by the developer and owner at their own risk pending FEMA's approval of the LOMR submittal. If any modifications are required by FEMA as part of their approval of the LOMR, the developer and owner will be responsible for all costs associated with making these modifications. 
A building permit will not be issued by the City for lots in the existing 100-year floodplain until a copy of the FEMA approval letter for the required LOMR is received by the City. In the typical development of a site, a CLOMR precedes site development, and a LOMR follows site development and is based on as-built conditions. 
4.  Water System Improvements. 
a.  General. 
1)  This section pertains to general design requirements for water distribution system construction in the City of Keller. All water lines shall be sized and designed in accordance with the City of Keller Water Distribution System Master Plan or as determined by the City Engineer or Public Works Director. In the absence of specific standards, all water supply, distribution, pumping, and storage improvements shall be designed in accordance with the most current standards of the American Water Works Association, the Public Works Construction Standards of the North Central Texas Council of Governments, and criteria adopted by the Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 290, "Water Hygiene". 
2)  All components of the water system must comply with ANSI/NSF Standard 61. 
3)  Refer to Section 5.14 of this Unified Development Code and Standard Construction Details for additional water system requirements not covered in this document. 
b.  Water Lines. 
1)  Standard water line sizes to be used for design purposes are 8-inch, 12-inch, and 16-inch diameter. Use of pipe sizes other than these must be approved by the City Engineer or Public Works Director. 
2)  All water lines shall be a minimum of eight (8") inches in diameter. All water lines shall be looped where possible. Dead end lines shall have an automatic flushing valve and shall not exceed 600 feet, unless approved by the City Engineer or Director of Public Works. 
3)  Water lines shall be located in the parkway behind the back of curb. Along State Highways and divided streets, water lines are required to be constructed on both sides of the roadway. New water lines crossing existing streets shall be installed by the boring method. A casing pipe shall be required under all arterial and collector roadways. Open cut excavation will not be allowed to cross existing streets unless approved by the City Engineer or Director of Public Works. 
4)  All water lines located down lot lines between proposed houses shall be installed in casing pipe from ten (10') feet in front of the front building line to ten (10') feet past the back building line. 
5)  Easements for water line construction shall meet the following requirements: 
a)  The minimum width of water line easements shall be in accordance with Section 5.11 of this Unified Development Code. Greater widths may be required based on site conditions. 
b)  If the water line is less than 12 feet deep, the outside diameter of the water line shall be located a minimum distance of 6 feet from the edge of the easement, and if other utilities are located in the same easement, the outside diameter of the water line shall be located a minimum distance of 3 feet from the outside diameter of the other utilities. 
c)  If the water line is greater than 12 feet deep, the outside diameter of the water line shall be located a minimum distance of 9 feet from the edge of the easement, and if other utilities are located in the same easement, the outside diameter of the water line shall be located a minimum distance of 6 feet from the outside diameter of the other utilities. 
d)  Transmission lines shall be within a dedicated water line easement. 
6)  Water lines for multi-family, commercial and industrial fire protection lines shall be private and isolated from the public system by a double detector check placed at the property line. All water lines shall be 8 inches minimum diameter and looped when possible. Dead end lines shall not exceed 50 feet on multi-family, commercial, or industrial sites. All public water lines located on private property shall be centered in a minimum 15-foot wide easement. Larger easements may be required by the City Engineer to provide adequate space for maintenance. Public water lines shall not be located under paved surfaces unless approved by the City Engineer or Director of Public Works. 
Multi-family developments may be supplied fire protection and domestic service by the same water line provided that a fire-rated master meter is used along with a double detector check. 
If residential developments require fire suppression systems, the developer is responsible for the design and specifications for said fire suppression system. 
7)  The developer shall furnish, install, construct, or extend, at his own expense, water distribution facilities necessary for the proper development of the subdivision. All water mains constructed within a proposed subdivision shall be extended to the perimeter of the proposed subdivision to allow for future extension of the water system into adjacent properties. The water system shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the specifications contained in these Standards. Where considered necessary by City Staff, the facilities shall be sized in excess of that dictated by these Standards to provide for the future growth and expansion of the City's water distribution system. 
8)  All water line piping with mechanical couplings, push-on, or similar joints subject to internal pressure shall be designed with blocking, anchors, and restraining harnesses to preclude separation of joints. All fittings will be restrained with anchoring couplings or restraining harnesses 
9)  Pipeline markers shall be used to locate water line road crossings and water line alignments across undeveloped property. 
10)  Materials. 
a)  Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Pipe. 
i)  PVC pipe shall be designed, manufactured, and tested in accordance with the applicable requirements of AWWA C-900 (6-inch through 12-inch diameter water pipe), AWWA C-905 (16-inch diameter and larger water pipe), and AWWA C-605. 
ii)  All PVC water pipe shall be blue in color. 
iii)  Water pipe with diameters of 6 inches through 12 inches shall be pressure Class 150, DR 18. Pressure Class 200, DR 14 pipe may be required by the City Engineer in areas to high distribution system pressures induced by booster pump operations. 
b)  Ductile iron, HDPE (high density polyethylene pipe), or CSCP (concrete steel cylinder pipe) may be used only if initially approved by the Director of Public Works or City Engineer. 
c)  Fittings. 
i)  Fittings shall be made from ductile iron in accordance with AWWA C110 or AWWA C153. 
ii)  Gasketed joints shall be in accordance with ANSI/AWWA C111/A21.11, except gaskets shall be neoprene or other synthetic rubber and factory installed. Natural rubber will not be acceptable. 
iii)  All buried metal shall be wrapped in 8-mil thick polyethylene film as specified in ANSI/AWWA C105/A21.5 
11)  Installation. 
a)  General. 
i)  All installations shall conform to the latest NCTCOG Specifications, as amended by these standards. 
ii)  Separation of Water and Wastewater Line installations shall conform with the criteria outlined in the Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 290.44, "Water Distribution", (e) "Location of Water Lines." 
iii)  All 8-inch diameter water pipe shall be installed with a minimum of 42 inches of cover over the top of pipe, 12-inch diameter water pipe shall be installed with a minimum of 48 inches cover, and pipe 16 inches in diameter and larger shall be installed with a minimum of 60 inches of cover over the top of pipe. 
iv)  Where dead end lines occur, sampling taps terminating with a ¾-inch hose bib at lease 3 feet above grade shall be located at the end of the line. The sampling lines and corporation stops will be removed after bacteriological testing has been completed and the line accepted by the City. 
v)  All backflow installations shall conform with the backflow regulations outlined in the Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 290.44 "Water Distribution" (h), "Backflow, Siphonage" as well as the City ordinances. 
vi)  The amount of trench excavation per pipeline crew shall not exceed two hundred (200') feet from the end of the pipe laying operations, and no more than three hundred (300') feet of total open trench per crew will be allowed. At the end of each work day, all trench excavation shall be backfilled to the end of the pipe laying operation. Barricades with lights will be required around any open trench left overnight. 
vii)  All connections to existing water mains shall be made under pressure unless dry connections will not cause any loss of service. Under special conditions, connections that cause an interruption of service may be performed with approval of the Director of Public Works. 
viii)  Coated tracer wire shall be installed in the embedment material above the PVC pipe with the tracer wire terminating in in-line gate valve boxes accessible by City Staff. Blue underground water line tape of a minimum 4-inch width shall be installed above the embedment material. 
ix)  Density tests shall be taken one every two hundred (200') feet per twelve (12") inch lift. The density reports shall be submitted daily to the City's inspector. 
x)  All field density reports shall be completed and delivered to the City's inspector before paving is allowed to begin. 
b)  PVC Water Pipe. PVC water pipe and appurtenances shall be installed as specified in AWWA C605 and in accordance with the pipe manufacturer's recommendations. 
c)  Fittings. 
i)  Fittings shall be installed in accordance with AWWA C-600. 
ii)  All mechanical joint valves, bends, crosses, tees, and reducers which require blocking shall be additionally restrained with EBAA mega-lug retainer gland or approved equal. 
iii)  All fittings must be wrapped with 8 mil thick polyethylene film as specified in ANSI/AWWA C105/A21.5. 
c.  Fire Hydrants. 
1)  Fire hydrants in commercial and industrial areas shall generally be at street intersections and so located that there will be a fire hydrant every three hundred (300) feet and within a five hundred foot (500') truck hose lay distance from all points of any structure or combustible storage area on the property. Fire hydrants in residential areas shall generally be at street intersections and so located that there will be a fire hydrant every five hundred (500') feet and within a five hundred foot (500') truck hose lay distance from all points of any structure or combustible storage area on the property. Fire hydrants in a multi-family complex shall be generally located on street intersections and meet the same requirements noted for commercial areas. Refer to the Section 5.16 of this Unified Development Code for additional requirements. 
2)  Materials. 
a)  Fire hydrants shall be manufactured in accordance with AWWA C-502, Dry-Barrel Fire Hydrants. 
b)  Hydrants shall be manufactured such that all maintenance and adjustments can be performed without excavation and such that hydrants may be faced in any direction in relation to the base. 
c)  Threads on hose and pumper nozzles shall meet the requirements of National Fire Protection Association, NFPA 1963, "Standard for Screw Threads and Gaskets for Fire Hose Couplings" as follows: 
	HOSE NOZZLE 	PUMPER NOZZLE 
Nominal Size of Coupling Waterway 	2 1/2" 	4" 
Number of Threads per inch 	7 1/2 	4 
Thread Designation (NH=Fire Hose) 	2.5 - 7.5 NH 	4 - 4 NH 
Approximate Outside Diameter of External Thread 	3 1/16" 	5" 
Length of Nipple 	1" 	1 1/4" 
Length of Pilot to Start of Second Thread 	1/4" 	7/16" 
Depth of Coupling 	15/16" 	1 3/16" 
Diameter of Gasket Seat in Coupling 	3 3/16" 	5 1/8" 
Length of Coupling Internal Thread 	11/16" 	7/8" 
From Face of Coupling to Start of Second Thread 	3/16" 	3/8" 
Refer to the Standard Construction Details for additional requirements. 
 
d)  Outlet nozzles shall be fastened into the nozzle section by threads or mechanical means and secured in place by a pin, a set screw or other acceptable method to prevent the nozzle from turning or backing out. Connecting the nozzle to hydrant by leading is not acceptable. All fire hydrants shall be equipped with a 5" Hydra-Storz ® Quick Connect Hydrant System or approved equal. 
e)  Nozzle cap harnessing and gaskets shall be furnished. 
f)  Shut off: 
i)  The hydrants shall be of the compression type, with the main valve opening against the pressure and closing with the pressure. 
ii)  The valve action shall provide positive shut-off at minimum closing torque. 
iii)  Wedge action closing gates shall be 5" Hydra-Storz ®. Quick Connect Hydrant System or approval equal. 
iv)  The fire hydrant operating nut shall be pentagon-shaped. 
g)  Bury Length: The standard fire hydrant bury length from ground to bottom of the connecting pipe shall be 3 feet 6 inches. The hydrant shall be of a design that will permit extensions without disturbing the bottom section of the hydrant. 
h)  Hub Type: Inlet connection shall be mechanical joint unless otherwise specified, and shall be for 6-inch diameter ductile iron pipe. The nominal diameter of the fire hydrant main valve opening is to be 5¼ inches. 
i)  Hydrant Body: The body of the hydrant between the elbow and the top cap must be made in two parts connected by a swivel flange, or breakable flange which will permit facing of the nozzles in any desired direction in increments of 45 degrees or less. The complete hydrant shall be of such design that when the hydrant barrel is broken through traffic collision or otherwise, it may be replaced without disturbing the bottom section of the hydrant. Extension sections, where required, shall include barrel extension section, extension rod with connectors provided for lengthening the complete unit. These units shall be available in increments of six inches (6") in length. 
j)  Bollards shall be placed around fire hydrants in high traffic areas. The bollards shall be placed at 45-degree angles to the fire hydrant with a minimum spacing of thirty inches (30"). 
3)  Installation. 
a)  Fire hydrants will be located a minimum of three (3') foot behind the curb to a maximum of eight (8') behind the curb. 
b)  Location Markers. A location marker shall be placed in the center of the roadway opposite the fire hydrant. If the fire hydrant is located near the intersection of at least two streets a marker shall be placed on all streets. The installation of this reflector shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendation. Location markers shall be Stemsonite 1-88-55A or approved equal. 
4)  Manufacturers. Approved fire hydrants manufacturers are Mueller, CLOW, American Darling, and M&H. 
d.  Valves. 
1)  Resilient seated gate valves shall be used for 6-inch through 16-inch diameter water lines. Butterfly valves shall be allowed for 16-inch and larger water lines when approved by the City Engineer. 
2)  Valves of approved design shall be installed at the intersections of all water mains so as to provide for proper maintenance and operation of the system and to provide a means of shutting off the supply to portions of the system for repairs. Valves shall be spaced such that only one fire hydrant is out of service at any one time. Three (3) valves shall be used on a water line cross intersection and a minimum of two (2) valves shall be used on a tee intersection. 
3)  Materials. 
a)  Resilient Seated Gate Valves. 
i)  Resilient seated gate valves shall meet or exceed the latest revisions of AWWA C509 and these standards. 
ii)  Resilient seated gate valves for buried service shall be furnished with a square 2 inch operating nut. The valve box shall be as shown and described in the Standard Construction Details. The valve box lid shall be painted safety blue. The paint shall be Glidden or approved equal. 
b)  Butterfly Valves. Butterfly valves shall meet or exceed the latest revision of AWWA C504 for Class 150B butterfly valves and these standards. 
4)  Installation. 
a)  Refer to the Standard Construction Details for valve installation requirements. 
b)  Valves located within a right-of-way shall be indicated on the face of the curb, or where curbs do not exist, on a conspicuous location adjacent to the valve location. Markings are to be the stamping of a four (4) inch high letter "V" with the point of the "V" pointing towards the valve location. 
c)  Valve markers shall be provided in rural areas or as directed by the Director of Public Works. 
5)  Manufacturers. 
a)  Approved manufacturers of resilient seated gate valves are Mueller, CLOW, and M&H. 
e.  Air Release and Flushing Valves. 
1)  Adequate number of combination air valves and flushing valves shall be provided for flushing, disinfection, daily operation requirements, and repairs where required by the City Engineer. Combination air release/vacuum valves shall be required on 12 inch diameter and larger water lines. Water lines shall be designed so that each section of the water line can be flushed at its lowest and highest points. 
2)  All dead end lines shall have an automatic flushing valve installed for flushing purposes. 
3)  A fire hydrant shall be required at high points on water lines smaller than 12 inches for air relief and flushing. 
4)  Materials. Air release valves and air/vacuum valves shall meet or exceed the latest revision of AWWA C512. 
f.  Tapping Sleeve. A tapping sleeve and valve shall be used when connecting a new water line to an existing line. A resilient seated gate valve shall be flanged to the tapping sleeve. Approved manufacturers of tapping sleeves are Romac Industries (only Stainless Steel sleeves) or approved equal. 
g.  Water Service. 
1)  Meter and service sizes will be determined by the developer prior to requesting service from the City. The minimum water service and meter size shall be in accordance with the Standard Construction Details. 
2)  Materials. Size and materials for service lines, service saddles, corporation and curb stops and meter boxes shall be as shown in the Standard Construction Details. 
3)  Installation. 
a)  General. 
i)  All water service shall be installed in accordance with these standards. 
ii)  Each individual service location shall be sawed or stamped into the face of the curb with a four (4) inch high blue "W" painted by the Contractor. If no curb exist, a similar mark should be placed in the pavement near the edge of the roadway. 
b)  Meters. Residential and commercial meters shall be supplied by the City. 
4)  Acceptable Manufacturers for Corporation Stops, Curb Stops, and Service Saddles shall be in accordance with the Standard Construction Details. 
h.  Water Line Bore. 
1)  All water line bores under collector or arterial streets will be cased. All casings will be pressure grouted in place. Both ends of the casing will be grouted shut. Minimum casing thickness shall be 1/4 inch. Casings shall be required under collector and arterial streets, highway crossings, and railroad crossings. Casings may also be required were deemed necessary by the City Engineer. The construction bore pit shall be located at a minimum distance of four feet (4') behind the back of curb or edge of pavement where no curb is present. 
2)  The design engineer shall design the water line pipe casing for the following loading conditions and applicable combinations thereof: 
a)  Cooper's E-80 Railway loading or AASHTO HS20 loading as applicable. 
b)  Earth loading with the height of fill above the casing as shown on the plans. 
c)  Loads applied during jacking, including axial load from jacking. 
d)  All other applicable loading conditions, including loads applied during transportation and handling. 
3)  Materials. 
a)  Steel Casing Pipe. Steel casing pipe shall be new (or used if approved by the City Engineer) and suitable for the purpose intended and shall have a minimum yield strength of 35,000 psi. Casing shall meet ASTM A-36, ASTM A-570, ASTM A-135, ASTM A-139, or approved equal. Pipe shall be coated with coal tar epoxy (15 mils min.) in accordance with AWWA C-210. Pipe joints shall be welded in accordance with AWWA C-206. After pipe is welded, coating shall be repaired. 
b)  Cement Mortar. Cement mortar shall consist of one (1) part cement to two (2) parts clean sand with sufficient water to make a thick, workable mix. 
c)  Pressure Grout Mix. Grout shall be comprised of 1 cubic foot of cement and 3.5 cubic feet of clean fine sand with sufficient water added to provide a free flowing thick slurry. If desired to maintain solids in the mixture in suspension, one cubic foot of commercial grade bentonite may be added to each twelve to fifteen cubic feet of the slurry. 
d)  Casing Insulators (Spacers). Use casing insulators on all carrier pipe. Insulators shall be high density polyethylene. Insulators shall fit snug over the carrier pipe and position the carrier pipe approximately in the center of the casing pipe to provide adequate clearance between the carrier pipe bell and the casing pipe. Acceptable manufacturers are RACI Spacers or as noted in the Standard Construction Details. 
4)  Installation. 
a)  Excavation and Backfill of Access Pits. 
i)  No excavation over the limits of the bore or tunnel as specified will be permitted. Trench walls of access pits adjacent to the bore or tunnel face shall be truly vertical. Shore the trench walls as necessary to protect workmen, the public, structures, roadways, and other improvements. 
ii)  Excavations within the right-of-way and not under surfacing shall be backfilled and consolidated by mechanical methods as specified in these standards for compaction of trenches under roadways. Surplus material shall be removed from the right-of-way and the excavation finished to original grades. Backfill pits immediately after the installation of the carrier pipe is completed. If carrier pipe is not installed immediately after casing pipe installation, the City may require the access pits be temporarily backfilled until installation of carrier pipe. 
iii)  Where seeding or sodding is disturbed by excavation or backfilling operations, such areas shall be restored to as near original condition as possible. 
5.  Wastewater System Improvements. 
a.  General. 
1)  This section pertains to general design requirements for wastewater collection system construction in the City of Keller. All sanitary sewer lines shall be sized and designed in accordance with the City of Keller Waste Water System Master Plan or as determined by the City Engineer. In the absence of specific standards, all collection, treatment, and disposal systems shall be designed in accordance with the most current criteria adopted by the Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 317, "Design Criteria for Sewerage Systems". 
2)  Refer to Section 5.15 of this Unified Development Code and the Standard Construction Details for additional sanitary sewer requirements. 
b.  Sanitary Sewer Lines. 
1)  All sanitary sewer lines shall be a minimum of eight (8") inches in diameter. Standard sanitary sewer line sizes are 8-inches, 12-inches, 15-inches, and 18-inches in diameter. Other sizes of sewer lines must be approved by the City Engineer. 
2)  Sanitary sewer lines shall be located in the parkway and are required to be constructed on both sides of a State Highway or Farm to Market Road. No sewer service lines will be allowed to cross a State highway unless approved by the Director of Public Works. 
3)  Easements for sanitary sewer line construction shall meet the following requirements: 
a)  The minimum width of sanitary sewer easements shall be in accordance with the Sections 5.11 and 5.15 of this Unified Development Code. Greater widths may be required based on site conditions. 
b)  If the sanitary sewer line is less than 12 feet deep, the outside diameter of the sanitary sewer line shall be located a minimum distance of 6 feet from the edge of the easement, and if other utilities are located in the same easement, the outside diameter of the sanitary sewer line shall be located a minimum distance of 3 feet from the outside diameter of the other utilities. 
c)  If the sanitary sewer line is greater than 12 feet deep, the outside diameter of the sanitary sewer line shall be located a minimum distance of nine feet (9') from the edge of the easement, and if other utilities are located in the same easement, the outside diameter of the sanitary sewer line shall be located a minimum distance of 6 feet from the outside diameter of the other utilities. 
d)  Interceptor lines shall be within a dedicated sanitary sewer line easement with a minimum width of twenty feet (20'). 
4)  All sanitary sewers shall be designed with consideration for serving the full upstream service area. The service area may be modified only with written permission from the Director of Public Works. 
5)  Sanitary Sewers should be designed with straight alignment whenever possible. When horizontal curvatures must be used, the pipe should be laid on a curve with a minimum radius of eight hundred feet (800'). No vertical curves will be allowed. 
6)  The developer shall furnish, install, construct, or extend, at his own expense, wastewater collection facilities necessary for the proper development of the subdivision. The wastewater collection system shall provide individual service to every lot in the subdivision. All sewer mains constructed within a proposed subdivision shall be extended to the perimeter of the proposed subdivision to allow for future extension of the wastewater collection system into adjacent properties. The wastewater collection system shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the current City Wastewater System Master Plan and the specifications contained in these Standards. Where considered necessary by City Staff, the facilities shall be sized in excess of that dictated by these Standards to provide for the future growth and expansion of the City's wastewater collection system. 
7)  All sewers shall be designed with hydraulic slopes sufficient to give mean velocities, when flowing full or half full, of no less than two (2) feet per second on Kutter's or Manning's formulas using an "n" value of 0.013. Minimum grades for sewer pipe shall conform to that noted in the Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 317, Sewage Collection System. 
8)  When a pressure rated sanitary sewer line is required due to its proximity to a water line, the pipe will be pressure rated for one hundred fifty pounds per square inch (150 psi) and shall terminate at a manhole on each end. The pipe shall be extended to the interior wall of the manhole. No external boot connection will be allowed. 
9)  Materials. 
a)  Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Pipe. 
i)  All sanitary sewer pipes shall be PVC pipe type SDR-35 for sewer lines constructed less than fifteen (15') feet deep. SDR-26 shall be provided where sewer lines exceed fifteen (15) feet. PVC pipe will not be allowed for depths greater than twenty-four (24') feet unless approved by City Engineer. If service connections are needed on sewer pipe constructed below fifteen (15') feet in depth, a parallel line shall be constructed at a shallower depth, specifically for service connections. 
ii)  All PVC sanitary sewer pipe shall be green in color. 
iii)  PVC sewer pipe and fittings shall conform to the current ASTM Designation D 3034 for four inches (4") through fifteen inches (15") and ASTM Designation F 679 for greater than fifteen inches (15"). 
b)  High-Density Polyethylene (HDPE) pipe may be used only if approved prior to the initial construction plan submittal by the Director of Public Works or City Engineer in writing. 
10)  Installation. 
a)  General. 
i)  All installations shall conform to ASTM Designation D2321, and the latest NCTCOG Specifications as amended by these standards. 
ii)  Sanitary sewer lines shall not be installed within nine feet (9') horizontally of any water main or fire hydrant. Reference Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 317.13 (Appendix E - Separation Distances). 
iii)  Construction shall begin at the downstream end of the project and continue upstream with the bell facing upstream. No upstream piping shall be installed before downstream piping unless approved in writing by the City Engineer. 
iv)  Minimum cover on a sanitary sewer line will be five (5') feet or as approved by the City Engineer. 
b)  Excavation and Backfill. 
i)  When PVC pipe is used, green marker tape with the wording "Buried Sanitary Sewer" shall be installed in the backfill material no more than twelve (12") inches above the top of the pipe. 
ii)  The amount of trench excavation per pipeline crew shall not exceed two hundred (200') feet from the end of the pipe laying operations, and no more than three hundred (300') feet of total open trench per crew will be allowed. At the end of each workday, all trench excavation shall be backfilled to the end of the pipe laying operation. Barricades and lights will be required around any open trench left overnight. 
iii)  Density tests shall be taken every two hundred (200') feet for each twelve (12") inch lift. The density reports shall be submitted daily to the City's inspector. 
iv)  All density reports shall be completed and delivered to the City's inspector before paving is allowed to begin. 
c)  Inspection. All sanitary sewer lines shall be inspected using television inspection methods prior to acceptance by the City. 
i)  The Contractor is responsible for cleaning the sanitary sewer pipe. If the inspection shows debris or evidence that the line has not been properly cleaned, the review will cease and the tape will be returned to the Contractor. 
ii)  The City may have an inspector present during the television inspection process. In the event that the City cannot have an inspector present, the company performing the television inspection and the builder or developer will be required to provide a written statement certifying that a television inspection in accordance with the City's Televised Inspection Criteria was performed on all sanitary sewer line sections within the development or improvement area. 
iii)  The televised inspection shall commence only after the line has passed both air and mandrel test. 
d)  Televised Inspection Criteria. 
i)  All sanitary sewer mains must be flushed with water just prior to televised inspection. Water is to be provided at the Contractor's expense. A City representative shall be present during the flushing of the main. 
ii)  All television equipment used shall have a minimum of 220 lines of horizontal resolution. The picture shall be in color. 
iii)  Camera shall be capable of pan and tilt functions. 
iv)  All video information on tape must have good picture quality. 
v)  As a title heading on the tape and during the televising, the operator must: 
•  Note the project name and Contractor name. 
•  Note the name of the company and the operator performing the video inspection. 
•  Note line size and material, joint type and length. 
•  Line segment to be televised including beginning and ending station numbers. 
•  Note page of plans used and year plans were stamped. 
•  Note date and time of inspection. 
•  A footage counter must be displayed on the tape during the filming. 
•  Show the above title block before and after each line segment. Show the title block at 100 foot intervals while filming the line segment. 
•  All defects should be shown on film for a minimum of 10 seconds before proceeding with the televising. 
vi)  The Contractor shall provide a certified inspection log, supplied by the camera contractor, and used in conjunction with the videotape for written documentation. All written information gathered must be legible and clearly understandable. 
•  The certified inspection log shall indicate that the inspection is accurate and has followed the inspection guidelines of the City. Each inspection log shall contain a cover sheet that indicates the location of each defect found during the inspection process, including sags, open joints, debris, damaged pipe, inappropriate pipe material and misalignment. The Camera Contractor is to be registered with the City. 
•  Note the project name, Contractor name, and contract number. 
•  Note the name of the company and the operator performing the video inspection. 
•  Note pipe size and material, joint type and length between joints. 
•  Note the VCR tape footage counter, start to end. 
•  Note line segment to be televised, station numbers from and station numbers to length of line segment as indicated on plans. 
•  Note page of plans used and year plans were stamped. 
•  Note date and time of inspection. 
•  Indicate by sketch the line segment to be televised in relation to surrounding road intersections and street addresses. Identify manhole station numbers. Show direction of flow with arrows and direction the camera is going. Indicate direction of north on the sketch. 
•  Note the water depth at the beginning, every 50 foot station, every change in grade, and at the end of the line segment. 
•  Identify the clock location, direction, size and type of laterals entering the main. Indicate laterals as saddles, punched, or glued fittings. 
•  Indicate final footage televised at end of the log sheet. 
vii)  One tape per visual televised inspection project shall be furnished to the Director of Public Works. 
viii)  Tapes must be at minimum VHS format, 1" wide T-120, high quality tape. Tapes are to be recorded on SP (2 hours) play. 
ix)  All tapes and run sheets shall be submitted to the City. All tapes and log sheets shall become the property of the City. 
e)  Criteria for Repair. The Contractor shall make repairs if the inspection reveals any deficiency in the sanitary sewer line. If repairs are required, another television inspection shall be made after the repairs are complete on a new tape from manhole to manhole at the Contractor's expense. Repairs shall be made to the satisfaction of the City Engineer and Director of Public Works. 
11)  No connection will be made to any sanitary sewerage system within the City which will permit the entrance of surface water or waste of other than domestic sewage characteristics without specific authorization by the City Council. 
c.  Manholes. 
1)  Manholes shall be located at all intersections of sanitary sewer lines and at intermediate spacing along the line. Generally the maximum spacing should not exceed five hundred feet (500'). Manholes should be located at all changes in grade and at the ends of all sanitary sewer lines that will be extended. 
2)  A manhole is required at the junction of sanitary sewer lines with different inside pipe diameters. 
3)  A drop of at least 0.1 feet is required through the manhole when a change in flow direction occurs. 
4)  The flow line into a manhole should not be greater than six inches (6") above the flow line out of the manhole. Where the flow line in is greater than two feet (2') above the flow line out, a drop manhole is required. 
5)  Minimum manhole inside diameter is four feet (4'). Manholes greater in depth than ten feet (10') shall be a minimum of five feet (5') in diameter. 
6)  Drop-manholes shall have a minimum inside diameter of five (5) feet. 
7)  Minimum cast-in-place manhole wall thickness is eight (8) inches. For depth's greater than twelve feet (12') add an extra four inches (4") of thickness for each additional six feet (6') of depth. 
8)  Minimum pre-cast wall thickness is five inches (5"). 
9)  A manhole is required where a sanitary sewer line enters and exits private property. 
10)  All manholes shall be constructed of concrete. 
11)  Manholes located in all flood-prone areas will be constructed with water-tight covers or with the elevation of the top manhole cover a minimum of one foot (1') above the 100-Year Flood Plain water surface elevation, whichever is the most reasonable for maintenance purposes. 
12)  Installation. 
a)  Use the following table to determine sanitary sewer manhole sizes: 
Pipe Sizes 	Depth of Cover 	Maximum Diameter of Manhole 	Number of Pipe Connections Allowed in Manhole 
Under 12" 	<12' 	4' 	3 
	>12' - 20' 	5' 	3 
12" to 18" 	<12' 	5' 	3 
	>12' - 20' 	6' 	4 
	(See Note #1) 		
 
Note: If the proposed design requires the sanitary sewer line to be placed at depths greater than shown above, the design will require approval in writing by the Director of Public Works. 
b)  Cast-in-place. 
i)  The manhole foundation shall be poured on undisturbed soil and shall have a minimum thickness of twelve (12") inches. The concrete used for the cast-in-place manhole will be a minimum of Class C (3,600 psi compressive strength). 
ii)  The inlet and outlet pipes shall be poured into the foundation of the manhole. The pipe shall extend one and one half (1½) inches into the manhole. When straight through flow occurs, the pipe shall not be laid continuously through the manhole. 
iii)  The invert shall be shaped and smoothed so that no projections will exist and the invert shall be self-cleaning. The invert floor shall have a minimum slope of one (1) inch per foot. 
iv)  Concrete work shall conform to all requirements of ACI 301, Standard Specification for Structural Concrete, published by the American Concrete Institute, except as modified herein. 
v)  Detailing of concrete reinforcement and accessories shall be in accordance with ACI Publication 315. 
vi)  Portland Cement shall be Type II, low-alkali and conform to ASTM Designation C-150. 
vii)  The manhole can be backfilled only after 12 hours has elapsed since the concrete placement. 
viii)  The face of curb shall be sawed or stamped with an "MH" to mark the location of all manholes. The location of the stamp shall be a line that intersects the center of the manhole cover and the curb perpendicular to the centerline of the street. For manholes located in intersections, the curb shall be stamped at the closest location to the manhole. If no curb exist, a similar mark should be placed in the pavement near the edge of the roadway. 
c)  Precast Manhole. 
i)  Precast manholes shall be constructed in accordance to ASTM Designation C-478. The concrete used for the precast manhole will be a minimum of Class F (4,200 psi compressive strength). 
ii)  Manhole base shall have a spread footing and be placed on a minimum of twenty-four (24") inches of compacted crushed rock. 
d.  Manhole Frame and Cover. 
1)  Cover. 
a)  Materials. All manhole covers shall conform to the Standard Specifications for Grey Iron Castings, ASTM A-48, Class 30 B. 
b)  Installation. Installation shall be in accordance with the Standard Construction Details and the latest NCTCOG Specifications. 
c)  Manufacturers. Approved manhole cover manufacturers are Certain-Teed, Bass & Hayes, or City approved equal. 
2)  Frames. 
a)  Materials. All manhole frames shall conform to the Standard Specifications for Grey Iron Castings, ASTM A-48, Class 30 B. 
b)  Installation. All manhole frames shall provide 24-1/4 inch opening to assure proper fit of the manhole cover. 
c)  Manufacturers. Approved manhole frame manufacturers are Certain-Teed, Bass & Hayes, or City approved equal. 
3)  Extension Ring. 
a)  Materials. Concrete extension rings shall conform to ASTM C-478. 
b)  Installation. 
i)  The number of extension ring sections shall be kept to a minimum (i.e. use 1-12 inch extension ring instead of 2-6 inch extension rings) and shall not exceed 24 inches. 
ii)  A 1-inch by 3-1/2-inch bitumastic gasket shall be used to seal the extension ring at both joints. 
4)  Rain Pan. Rain pans shall be installed in every manhole unless manhole cover is sealable with a gasket and latch and approved by the Director of Public Works to not require a rain pan. 
a)  Materials. Rain pans shall be high density polyethylene plastic with a synthetic strap handle for removal by hand or pick. 
e.  Sanitary Sewer Service. 
1)  No sanitary sewer service line (lateral) shall be less than 4 inches in nominal diameter. Commercial sanitary sewer laterals shall be 6 inches minimum diameter. 
2)  Sanitary sewer laterals shall be located at the center of the lot extend to the property line, and be a minimum of 10 feet downstream of the water service. 
3)  Sanitary sewer service laterals shall be designed to have no more than 6 feet of cover at the property line unless noted otherwise on the construction plans. 
4)  A cleanout shall be installed on the service lateral at the property line on the city side prior to the time of connection to the home. 
5)  Materials. 
a)  All lateral sanitary sewer service lines shall be PVC pipe type SDR-35. 
b)  All PVC sanitary sewer pipe used for lateral services shall be green in color. 
6)  Installation. All service laterals shall be installed in accordance with the Standard Construction Details and the latest NCTCOG Specifications. 
f.  Main Line Cleanouts. Main line permanent cleanouts will not be allowed. Consideration will be given to the installation of temporary cleanouts on short sewer mains (200 feet or less) stubbed out to provide service for future phases of the same subdivision development. 
g.  Aerial Crossing. 
1)  The piers for the aerial crossing shall be designed in accordance with the guidelines of the Ductile Iron Pipe Research Association and submitted for approval by the City Engineer. 
2)  Aerial sanitary sewer crossings shall be located in areas where the sanitary sewer line cannot be constructed with the appropriate minimum cover. The design engineer shall design the aerial crossing in accordance with these standards. 
3)  Pier placement and spacing shall be determined according to soils analysis performed by a geotechnical engineer. Piers shall be placed at a maximum span distance as indicated by the design engineer's calculations. 
4)  Pier placement and spacing along with a soils report shall be submitted to the City Engineer with the proposed construction plans. 
5)  Materials. 
a)  Pipe. 
i)  All above ground sanitary sewer installations shall be ductile iron, minimum Class 150, utilizing restrained joints and shall have a wall thickness required for the size and span as designed. The pipe shall have an internal polyurethane coating. The exterior of all ductile iron piping shall be painted as directed by the City Engineer. 
ii)  The aerial pipe shall be connected to the underground sanitary sewer pipe by means of a manhole on each side of the aerial crossing. 
b)  Piers. Piers to be constructed with a minimum of Class C (3,600 psi compressive strength) reinforced concrete. 
6)  Installation. 
a)  Pipe. The design engineer shall submit an aerial pipe installation design for approval by the City Engineer. 
h.  Piers. The design engineer shall submit a pier design for approval by the City Engineer. 
i.  Sanitary Sewer Line Boring. 
1)  All sanitary sewer line bores requiring casing pipe will be pressure grouted in place. Both ends of casing will be grouted shut. 
2)  The design engineer shall design the sanitary sewer line pipe casing for the following loading conditions and applicable combinations thereof: 
a)  Cooper's E-80 Railway loading or AASHTO HS20 loading as applicable. 
b)  Earth loading with the height of fill above the casing as shown on the plans. 
c)  Loads applied during jacking, including axial load from jacking. 
d)  All other applicable loading conditions, including loads applied during transportation and handling. 
3)  Materials. 
a)  Steel Casing Pipe. Steel casing pipe shall be new (or used if approved by the City Engineer) and suitable for the purpose intended and shall have a minimum yield strength of 35,000 psi. Casing shall meet ASTM A-36, ASTM A-570, ASTM A-135, ASTM A-139, or approved equal. Pipe shall be coated with coal tar epoxy (15 mils min.) in accordance with AWWA C-210. Pipe joints shall be welded in accordance with AWWA C-206. After pipe is welded, coating shall be repaired. 
b)  Cement Mortar. Cement mortar shall consist of one (1) part cement to two (2) parts clean sand with sufficient water to make a thick, workable mix. 
c)  Pressure Grout Mix. Grout shall be comprised of 1 cubic foot of cement and 3.5 cubic feet of clean fine sand with sufficient water added to provide a free flowing thick slurry. If desired to maintain solids in the mixture in suspension, one cubic foot of commercial grade bentonite may be added to each twelve to fifteen cubic feet of the slurry. 
d)  Casing Insulators (Spacers). Use casing insulators for any type of carrier pipe. Insulators shall be high density polyethylene. Insulators shall fit snug over the carrier pipe and position the carrier pipe approximately in the center of the casing pipe to provide adequate clearance between the carrier pipe bell and the casing pipe. Approved manufacturers are RACI Spacers or as noted in the Standard Construction Details. 
4)  Installation. 
a)  Tolerances. 
i)  All bores shall be installed at a grade no less that the minimum indicated by Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 317 for the required pipe size. 
ii)  All bores shall maintain grade enough to ensure desired clearance distances between existing utilities and bore. 
b)  Excavation and Backfill of Access Pits. 
i)  Bore pits must be a minimum of four (4) feet from the back of curb when located for boring under roadways. 
ii)  Do not allow excavation over the limits of the bore or tunnel as specified. Trench walls of access pits adjacent to the bore or tunnel face shall be truly vertical. The trench walls shall be shored as necessary to protect workmen, the public, structures, roadways, and other improvements. 
iii)  Excavations within the right-of-way whether under pavement or not shall be backfilled and consolidated by mechanical methods as specified in these standards for compaction of trenches under roadways. Surplus material shall be removed from the right-of-way and the excavation finished to original grades. The bore pits shall be backfilled immediately after the installation of the carrier pipe is completed. If carrier pipe is not installed immediately after casing pipe installation, the right-of-way Owner may require the access pits be temporarily backfilled until installation of carrier pipe is ready to begin. 
Where seeding or sodding is disturbed by excavation or backfilling operations, such areas shall be restored to as near original condition as possible. 
j.  Lift Stations. 
1)  Lift stations shall be installed only if approved by the Director of Public Works. 
2)  Lift stations shall be designed by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Texas. Construction plans submitted for the lift station shall include: wet well design, vault designs, pump specifications, pipe design and applicable instrumentation including approved telemetry equipment. 
3)  Lift stations must be designed in accordance with 30 Texas Administrative Code, 317.3. 
4)  Instrumentation and Control. 
a)  The voltage supplied for pump operation shall be 3 phase, 480 volts. Converting single phase power to three phase power using additional mechanical equipment shall not be allowed. 
b)  Wet-well level control shall be achieved through the use of an ultrasonic level indicating transmitter. 
c)  All lift stations dedicated to the City shall have SCADA telemetry equipment installed, at the expense of the developer, that interfaces with the City's SCADA system and meets the City's protocol and specifications. 
d)  Submersible pumps shall be provided with moisture and motor over-temperature sensors. 
5)  Site Requirements. 
a)  A reinforced concrete pad will be required at the front of the control cabinet. The pad shall provide a 3-foot working area away from the face of the cabinet and extend the width of the enclosure mounting structure. The reinforced concrete pad will be a minimum of four inches (4") thick. 
b)  A 1-inch minimum potable water service is required. The water service may be set in a standard 18-inch galvanized water meter box with a 1-inch brass angle stop. 
c)  The site shall be graded to drain away from the station to prevent storm water inflow or infiltration into the wet-well. 
d)  The site shall be located outside of the 100-year flood plain. 
e)  The site shall not be located within 100 feet of an existing or proposed residence, unless approved by the Director of Public Works. 
f)  If applicable, the lift station site driveway shall include driveway area for maintenance vehicles to park off public roadway while performing maintenance. The minimum driveway length shall be 15 feet off the back of curb line of the proposed street per the City's Master Thoroughfare Plan. 
g)  A concrete driveway turning area is required where access drives extend more than twenty feet (20') from main roads. The driveway area shall be "T" shaped with the applicable turning radius. The minimum driveway width shall be fifteen feet (15'). 
6.  Miscellaneous (Erosion Control, Tree Protection, and Retaining Walls). 
a.  Erosion Control. 
1)  An erosion control plan or Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) shall be provided with each construction plan submittal for review by the City Engineer. 
2)  Each erosion control plan shall clearly identify all erosion and sediment control measures to be installed and maintained throughout the duration of the project. 
3)  The erosion control plan or SWPPP shall meet the requirements outlined in the most recent version of NCTCOG's Storm Water Quality Best Management Practices for Construction Activities as well as the EPA's Storm Water Phase II Rule. 
b.  Tree Protection. Design of construction projects shall conform to the guidelines stated in Article Eight-"Tree Preservation" in this Unified Development Code. 
c.  Retaining Walls. Retaining walls three feet (3') or greater in height shall be designed and sealed by a professional structural engineer licensed in the State of Texas. The retaining wall design engineer will be required to issue an approval letter with his seal stating the wall was installed in strict accordance with the plans. This signed and sealed approval letter from the engineer must be submitted to the City Engineer prior to final acceptance of the development. Retaining wall height is the dimension from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall.  
Section 5.25 - Technical Construction Standards 
A.  Construction Standards. 
1.  City Inspection. The City inspects construction projects to ensure compliance with the Design and Technical Construction Standards, Unified Development Code, and all other applicable documents. The proper design of all construction plans is the responsibility of the Project Engineer. 
2.  Material Testing. All material testing services shall be provided during construction on City or Developer projects by an independent testing laboratory company approved by the City Engineer or Director of Public Works. The company shall have been in business under its current name for at least five years and have at least one full-time Professional Engineer on staff licensed in the State of Texas and experienced in this type of material testing for construction operations. All cost for the material testing will be the developer's or contractor's responsibility to pay. 
3.  Traffic Control. A Traffic Control Plan shall be submitted with the Construction Plans whenever traffic is expected to be disrupted as defined in the latest version of the Texas Manual for Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways by the Texas Department of Transportation. If a traffic plan is submitted after construction begins, it shall be submitted at least seventy-two (72) hours prior to any activities affecting traffic. 
4.  Erosion control. 
a.  Prior to the start of construction, the contractor shall submit for acceptance to the City schedules for accomplishment of the storm water pollution control measures in accordance with the erosion control plan or the Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP). Work on the project shall not begin until the schedules for implementation of the controls and methods of operations have been reviewed and accepted, in writing, by the City. 
b.  The contractor shall provide all control measures necessary to prevent and control soil erosion, sedimentation, and water pollution which may degrade receiving waters including rivers, streams, lakes, reservoirs, groundwater, and wetland. These control measures shall be installed and maintained throughout construction as specified on the plans and in the specifications to assure effective and continuous water pollution control throughout the construction and post construction periods. The controls may include silt fences, straw bale dikes, rock berms, diversion dikes, interceptor swales, sediment traps and basins, pipe slope drains, inlet protection, stabilized construction entrances, seeding, sodding, mulching, soil retention blankets, or other structural or non-structural storm water pollution controls. Additional information regarding these controls can be found in NCTCOG's guidance manual entitled Storm Water Quality Best Management Practices for Construction Activities-North Central Texas. 
c.  Proper erosion control shall be the responsibility of the developer. The builder shall assume responsibility after the property is sold. 
5.  Utility Service Interruption. In the event that existing utility service is to be interrupted during construction, official notice as well as a meeting with the City and all other applicable parties shall be held seventy-two (72) hours prior to interruption. 
6.  Right-of Way Restoration. 
a.  Prior to construction or re-construction of any roadway or other public facility whose right-of-way or easement abuts or is on private property, all public right-of-way and/or easements shall be televised or photographically documented as to condition, type, placement of existing materials (mailboxes, grass, fences, irrigation systems, etc.). Documentation shall be used to determine the extent and type of right-of-way/easement restoration required. 
b.  The City or it's Contractor shall restore the right-of-way or easement as follows: 
1)  Urban Streets (Curb & Gutter) - Right-of-way shall be restored to its original or as near to its original condition as possible including the matching of the type of grass. All irrigation systems shall be restored to their original operating condition. If existing flora is subject to dying without an operating irrigation system to supply water, the City or its contractor shall ensure that the existing irrigation system is modified to provide a reliable source of water for this flora during the construction period. 
2)  Rural (County Road Cross-section) - Right- of- way shall be restored to its original or as near to its original condition as possible. If the abutting property owner has developed the roadway ditch line to a condition conducive to reasonably easy mowing and maintenance, the ditch line shape and type of sod or grass shall be used to restore the ditch line and right-of-way. However, all ditch lines that are not easily mowed and regularly maintained by the abutting property owner shall be restored to a safe cross-section capable of reasonably easy mowing by the abutting property owner. These ditch lines shall be hydro-mulched with common Bermuda or a common Bermuda and Winter Rye mix depending on the season of the year. 
c.  Prior to Final Acceptance of the construction project, the video and/or photographically documented right-of-way shall be reviewed to assure its restoration has met the above standards. 
7.  Development and Construction Sequence. 
a.  Pre-Construction Sequence: 
1)  City Council reviews and releases the Final Plat; 
2)  City Engineer reviews and releases the construction plans; 
3)  Developer submits cost of all public improvements; 
4)  Development agreement executed and fees paid; 
5)  Plat recorded. 
b.  Construction Operations Sequence: 
1)  Pre-construction meeting; 
a)  Prior to the meeting, submit two (2) full size (22" x 34") sets and three (3) half size (11" x 17") sets of approved Construction Plans. 
b)  Submit Trench Safety Plan sealed by a licensed professional engineer. 
c)  Submit copy of Contract Documents may be electronic or hard copy. 
d)  Receive Authorization to Proceed from City. 
2)  Begin cut/fill procedures; 
3)  Install utilities; 
4)  Install streets and curb inlets; 
5)  Install street lights; 
6)  Install street signs; 
7)  Install screens and irrigation; 
a)  Screening wall. 
b)  Irrigation system. 
c)  Landscaping (seasonal). 
8)  Acceptance of subdivision; 
9)  Issuance of Building Permits.  
Section 5.26 - Appendix 
 
Part A - Street System Improvements 
FIGURE 1 - Sight Distance at Intersections 
 
Part A - Street System Improvements 
FIGURE 2 - Required Distances and Radii for Openings 
 
Part A - Street System Improvements 
FIGURE 3 - Minimum Distance of Driveways from Intersections 
 
Part A - Street System Improvements 
FIGURE 4.01 - Trip Generation Data Form (Part 1) 
 
Part A - Street System Improvements 
FIGURE 4.02 - Trip Generation Data Form (Part 2) 
 
Part B - Drainage System Improvements 
FIGURE 1.01 - Allowable Lot Grading Designs 
 
Part B - Drainage System Improvements 
FIGURE 1.02 - Example of Lot Grading Plan 
 
Part B - Drainage System Improvements 
FIGURE 1.03 - Lot Grading Plan Checklist 
 
Part B - Drainage System Improvements 
FIGURE 2 - IDF Curve 
 
Part B - Drainage System Improvements 
FIGURE 3 - Time of Concentration Nomograph 
 
Part B - Drainage System Improvements 
FIGURE 4 - Triangle Channel Nomograph 
 
Part B - Drainage System Improvements 
FIGURE 5.01 - Gutter Flow Curves - 24' Street, No Curb Split 
 
Part B - Drainage System Improvements 
FIGURE 5.02 - Gutter Flow Curves - 24' Street, 0.25' Curb Split 
 
Part B - Drainage System Improvements 
FIGURE 5.03 - Gutter Flow Curves - 24' Street, 0.50' Curb Split 
 
Part B - Drainage System Improvements 
FIGURE 5.04 - Gutter Flow Curves - 30' Street, No Curb Split 
 
Part B - Drainage System Improvements 
FIGURE 5.05 - Gutter Flow Curves - 40' Street, No Curb Split 
 
Part B - Drainage System Improvements 
FIGURE 5.06 - Gutter Flow Curves - 44' Street, No Curb Split 
 
Part B - Drainage System Improvements 
FIGURE 5.07 - Gutter Flow Curves - 60' Street, No Curb Split 
 
Part B - Drainage System Improvements 
FIGURE 6 - Capacity of Inlets in Sumps 
 
Part B - Drainage System Improvements 
FIGURE 7 - Capacity of Curb Inlet on Grade 
 
Part B - Drainage System Improvements 
FIGURE 8 - Ratio of Intercepted to Total Flow 
 
Part B - Drainage System Improvements 
FIGURE 9 - Manning's Full Pipe Flow Chart (n=0.013) 
FIGURE 10 - Storm Frequency Chart 
(iSWM TM Technical Manual Hydraulics TxDOT, 2002) 
Area ratio 	2-year design 	5-year design 
	Main Stream 	Tributary 	Main Stream 	Tributary 
10,000:1 	1 	2 	1 	5 
	2 	1 	5 	1 
1,000:1 	1 	2 	2 	5 
	2 	1 	5 	2 
100:1 	2 	2 	2 	5 
	2 	2 	5 	5 
10:1 	2 	2 	5 	5 
	2 	2 	5 	5 
1:1 	2 	2 	5 	5 
	2 	2 	5 	5 
Area ratio 	10-year design 	25-year design 
	Main Stream 	Tributary 	Main Stream 	Tributary 
10,000:1 	1 	10 	2 	25 
	10 	1 	25 	2 
1,000:1 	2 	10 	5 	25 
	10 	2 	25 	5 
100:1 	5 	10 	10 	25 
	10 	5 	25 	10 
10:1 	10 	10 	10 	25 
	10 	10 	25 	10 
1:1 	10 	10 	25 	25 
	10 	10 	25 	25 
Area ratio 	50-year design 	100-year design 
	Main Stream 	Tributary 	Main Stream 	Tributary 
10,000:1 	2 	50 	2 	100 
	50 	2 	100 	2 
1,000:1 	5 	50 	10 	100 
	50 	5 	100 	10 
100:1 	10 	50 	25 	100 
	50 	10 	100 	25 
10:1 	25 	50 	50 	100 
	50 	25 	100 	50 
1:1 	50 	50 	100 	100 
	50 	50 	100 	100 
 
TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS AND MITIGATION 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of a traffic impact analysis is to assess the effects of specific development activity on the existing and planned roadway system. 
A Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) is intended to adequately assess the traffic-related impacts of a zoning and/or development proposal on the existing and planned thoroughfare system. The purpose of this Section is to: 
1.  Provide the safest and most efficient transportation system in conjunction with the development review process; 
2.  Inform the applicant of the City's requirements and expectations; 
3.  Provide standard guidelines for the preparation and review of a TIA; and 
4.  Establish equitable mitigation measures for the accommodation of identified impacts. 
B.  Applicability of Requirements. Initial analysis to determine if TIA is required for all zoning requests. Prior to a traffic impact analysis, a Trip Generation Form must be completed on all projects. 
1.  Zoning. 
a.  These TIA requirements shall apply to all zoning requests for land uses, which will generate five hundred (500) or more vehicle trips per day for residential traffic and, more than two thousand (2,000) or more vehicle trips per day for commercial traffic or arterial streets not appearing on the City's approved Thoroughfare Plan. 
b.  Special circumstances, including but not limited to development with no case history, which do not meet the daily trip generation threshold may also require a TIA. Such circumstances, as determined by the City's Director of Public Works and/or the Planning Manager may include, but are not limited to; impacts to residential neighborhoods from non-residential development, inadequate site accessibility, the implementation of the surrounding Thoroughfare Plan is not anticipated during the estimated time period of the proposed development, the proposed land use differs significantly from that contemplated in the Comprehensive Plan, the internal street or access is not anticipated to accommodate the expected traffic generation. 
c.  The analysis periods for a zoning TIA shall be the opening year of development, two (2) years after development opening, and five (5) years after opening with full build out of the site. The analysis shall include all adjacent signalized and/or unsignalized intersections within one and a half (1½) miles of the site boundary. 
d.  Depending upon specific site development characteristics of the proposed development, as determined by the Director of Public Works, one or more of the following elements may also be required as part of the TIA: an accident analysis, sight distance survey, traffic simulation, queuing analysis and/or turn lane analysis. 
C.  Responsibility of TIA Preparation and Review. 
1.  A TIA must be prepared in accordance with all the guidelines of this code and submitted in accordance with the Development Review Schedule set by the City of Keller. The responsibility for TIA preparation shall rest with the applicant, and must be performed by a licensed Professional Engineer (PE) in the State of Texas with experience in traffic and transportation engineering. The final TIA report must be signed and sealed by the PE responsible for the analysis to be considered for review by the City. City staff shall serve primarily in a review and advisory capacity, and will only provide data to the applicant when available. If the City does not have the data, it is not grounds for omission, but will necessitae that the applicant's traffic engineer must perform additional tests to acquire the data. 
2.  It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to submit four (4) draft TIA reports, final reports, and executive summaries with the zoning and/or development submission. The proper number of reports, the timing for submission, and the review of these reports shall be based on standard City development review procedures. Applications submitted with incomplete TIAs (or failure to submit a TIA with the application) shall be deemed incomplete and delay consideration of zoning and development requests. Should it be determined during the review of the zoning and/or development plans that a TIA is required, consideration shall be deferred until the applicant submits a completed TIA and the City has reviewed the assessment. 
3.  An initial review of the TIA by the City shall be available to the applicant fifteen (15) working days from the submittal date. Should additional analysis be required of the applicant, re-submission shall be within five (5) working days from when the initial review is available. Longer review periods may be needed if the Texas Department of Transportation (TXDOT) is involved in the review process. 
D.  Traffic Impact Assessment Standards. It is the objective of the City to determine whether the existing and planned thoroughfare system can accommodate the impact of the proposed development. To achieve uniformity in the evaluation process, the following standards shall apply: 
1.  Design Level of Service. The minimum acceptable level of service (LOS) within the City shall be defined as LOS "C" in peak hours for all critical movements and links. All development impacts on both thoroughfare and intersection operations must be measured against this standard. 
2.  Trip Generation Resources. The City's standard for trip generation rates for various land use categories shall be those found in the latest edition of Trip Generation published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) or other published or recognized sources applicable to the region. Alternate trip generation rates may be accepted on a case-by-case basis if the applicant can provide current supporting data substantiating that their development significantly differs from the ITE rates. A written request for acceptance of alternative trip generation rates must be submitted to the City's Director of Public Works or designated representative in advance of the TIA submission. . 
Trip reductions for passer-by trips and mixed-use developments will be permitted, subject to analytical support provided by the applicant and approval by the City's Director of Public Works or designated representative, on a case-by-case basis. Assumptions relative to auto occupancy, transit mode share, or percentage of daily traffic to occur in the peak hour must be documented and will be considered subject to analytical support provided by the applicant. 
3.  Study Horizon Years. The TIA must evaluate the impact of the proposed development on both existing traffic conditions and future traffic conditions for the horizon year(s) of two (2) years after initial phase opening and five (5) years with full build out conditions. 
E.  Methodology. The TIA for zoning and development applications shall comply with the following methodology and be formatted as outlined in this section. 
1.  Site Location/Study Area - a brief description of the size, general features, and location of the site, including a map of the site in relation to the study area and surrounding vicinity; 
2.  Existing Zoning - a description of the existing zoning for the site and adjacent property, including land area by zoning classification and density, square footage the number of dwelling units (as appropriate); 
3.  Existing Development - a description of any existing development on the site and adjacent to the site and how it would be affected by the development proposal; 
4.  Proposed Zoning / Site Development - a description of the proposed zoning/development for the site, including land area by zoning classification and density, square footage and number of dwelling units (as appropriate); identify other adjacent land uses that have similar peaking characteristics as the proposed land use and the most impactful use allowed in the requested zoning category; identify recently approved or pending land uses within the area; 
[5]  Thoroughfare System - a description and map of existing planned or proposed thoroughfares and traffic signals for horizon year(s) within the study area; 
6.  Existing Traffic Volumes - recent traffic counts for existing thoroughfares and major intersections within the study area; 
7.  Projected Traffic Volumes - horizon year(s) background traffic projections for the planned thoroughfare system within the study area; 
8.  Existing Site Trip Generation - a table displaying trip generation rates and total trips generated by land use category for the AM and PM peak hours and on a daily basis, assuming full development and occupancy based on existing zoning (if applicable), and including all appropriate trip reductions (as approved by Staff); 
9.  Proposed Site Trip Generation - a table displaying trip generation rates and total trips generated by land use category for the AM and PM peak hours and on a daily basis, assuming full development and occupancy for the proposed development, and including all appropriate trip reductions (as approved by Staff); 
10.  Net Change in Trip Generation (zoning) - possible trip generation (based i=on most impactful use) minus existing trip generation (if applicable) and proposed trip generation minus existing trip generation (if applicable); the net increase in trips to be added to base volumes for the design year to produce a range of net change; 
11.  Trip Distribution and Traffic Assignment - tables and figures of trips generated by the proposed development (or net change in trips, if applicable) added to the existing and projected volumes, as appropriate, with distribution and assignment assumptions, unless computer modeling has been performed; 
12.  Level of Service Evaluations - capacity analyses for weekday AM and PM peak hours of the roadway and peak hour of the site, if different from the roadway, for both existing conditions and horizon year projections for intersections, thoroughfare links, median openings and turn lanes associated with the site, as applicable; 
13.  Traffic Signal Evaluations - the need for new signals based on warrants, the impact on transportation system performance; 
14.  Evaluation of Proposed/Necessary Mitigation - capacity analyses for weekday AM and PM peak hours of the roadway and peak hour of the site, if different from the roadway, for intersections, thoroughfare links, median openings and turn lanes associated with the site under proposed/necessary traffic mitigation measures; 
15.  Conclusions - identification of all thoroughfares, driveways, intersections, and individual movements that exceed LOS D, degrade by one or more LOS, the percentage of roadway volume change produced by the proposed development, and any operational problems likely to occur; 
16.  Recommendations - proposed impact mitigation measures consistent with this section; and 
17.  Other information required for proper review - as requested by the City's Director of Public Works or designated representative. 
F.  Report Format. The TIA report must be prepared on 8½" x 11" sheets of paper. However, it may contain figures on larger sheets, provided they are folded to this size. All text and map products shall be computer-based and provided in both a computerized and published format compatible with Microsoft Word and ArcView GIS (geographic information system). 
The various sections of the report should be categorized according to the subject areas below: 
Executive Summary 
I.  Introduction 
A.  Purpose 
B.  Methodology 
II.  Existing and Proposed Land Use 
A.  Site Location/Study Area 
B.  Existing Zoning 
C.  Existing Development 
D.  Proposed Zoning (if applicable) 
III.  Existing and Proposed Transportation System 
A.  Thoroughfare System 
B.  Existing Traffic Volumes 
C.  Projected Traffic Volumes 
IV.  Site Traffic Characteristics 
A.  Existing Site Trip Generation (if applicable) 
B.  Proposed Site Trip Generation 
C.  Net Change in Trip Generation (if applicable) D. Trip Distribution and Traffic Assignment 
V.  Traffic Analysis 
A.  Level of Service Evaluations 
B.  Traffic Signal Evaluations 
VI.  Traffic Mitigation 
VII.  Conclusions 
VIII.  Recommendations 
APPENDICES 
G.  Mitigation. Mitigation of impacts shall be required if the proposed development would cause a facility or traffic movement to exceed LOS C, or where it already exceeds LOS C and the development would contribute 5% or more of the total traffic during any projected horizon year. If mitigation is required, the applicant must only mitigate the impact of the proposed development, and would not be responsible for alleviating any deficiencies in the thoroughfare system that may occur without the proposed development. Acceptable mitigation measures shall include: 
1.  Staging of development in order to relate site development to the construction of the required thoroughfare system; 
2.  Off-site improvements, including the provision of right-of-way and/or the participation in funding for needed thoroughfare and intersection improvement projects; and 
3.  On-site improvements, including access controls and site circulation adjustments.  
Article Six - GENERAL DEVELOPMENT GUIDELINES 
 
Section 6.01 - Development Agreements 
After approval of Paving, Drainage, Utility Plans, and Park and Trail Construction Plans (when applicable), the developer must enter into an agreement with the City to delineate responsibility for construction of public improvements and related expenditures, if applicable. 
A.  City-Developer Agreement. 
1.  For all subdivisions that require public improvements (i.e., streets, water, wastewater, drainage, park improvements, screening, landscaping, etc.), the developer shall enter into an agreement with the City of Keller to ensure proper construction and completion of the subdivision. The agreement to be executed shall include the following: 
a.  City-developer agreement, plus but not limited to, street and drainage participation, oversizing agreements, fees that may include inspections, impact, parks, street lights, street signs, and also may include phasing requirements. 
b.  Two (2) year maintenance bonds for one hundred percent (100%) of the construction cost are to be submitted with the executed Development Agreement and prior to a preconstruction meeting. 
2.  The agreement and applicable attachments shall be approved prior to the final plat being filed by the City. The agreement shall be executed on forms available from the City. The appropriate fees will be submitted prior to construction or improvements to the subdivision and recordation of the final plat. Fees are to be paid prior to the Pre-construction meeting. 
B.  Construction Permit. A permit is required from the Public Works Department prior to any work in the City that affects erosion control, vegetation removal, tree removal, or the floodplain. 
C.  Pre-construction Conference. 
1.  A pre-construction meeting with the Public Works Department is required prior to any single-family residential infrastructure construction. The Development Agreement shall be executed and all applicable fees paid prior to this meeting. 
2.  A joint Community Development/Public Works/Fire Department meeting will be arranged following the execution of the Development Agreement for non-single family residential developments. The Building Permit will be issued at the meeting. The Director of Public Works or his/her designee may require that all contractors participating in the construction meet for a pre-construction conference to discuss the project prior to release of a grading permit (in accordance with Section 5.02) and before any filling or removal of vegetation and trees. Developer must have an approved tree removal permit for this conference. 
D.  Conditions Prior to Authorization to Proceed with Construction. 
1.  Prior to authorizing notice to proceed for construction, the Director of Public Works shall be satisfied that the following conditions have been met: 
a.  All plans, including the Final Plat, Building Plans if applicable, have been approved and the Civil Construction Plans have been reviewed and released for construction by the Director of Public Works or City Engineer, evidenced by their signature. 
b.  All required contract documents shall be completed and filed with the Director of Public Works 
c.  An approved Development Agreement with all applicable development fees paid to the City. 
d.  All contractors participating in the construction shall be presented with a set of construction plans bearing the stamp of "Reviewed and Released for Construction" from the Public Works Department. These stamped plans shall remain on the job site at all times. 
e.  A complete list of the contractors (including general contractors, subcontractors and independent contractors), their representatives on the site, and telephone numbers where a responsible party may be reached at all times must be submitted to the Director of Public Works.  
Section 6.02 - Inspection and Final Acceptance of Public Improvements 
A.  General Procedure. Construction inspection shall be supervised by the Director of Public Works or City Engineer. Construction shall be in accordance with the approved Plans, Standard Specifications and Standard Details of the City of Keller. Any change in design required during construction should be made by the Engineer whose seal and signature are shown on the plans. Another engineer may make revisions to the original engineering plans if so authorized by the owner of the plans and if those revisions are noted on the plans or documents. All revisions shall be reviewed by the Director of Public Works or City Engineer. If the Director of Public Works finds upon inspection that any of the required public improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the City's construction standards and specifications, the property owner shall be responsible for completing and/or correcting the public improvements. All revisions shall be reflected on the "as-built" construction plans. 
B.  Certificate of Satisfactory Completion or Letter of Acceptance. 
1.  The City will not accept dedication of required public improvements until the applicant's engineer has certified to the Director of Public Works, through submission of a detailed "as-built" plans of the property indicating location, dimensions, materials, and other information required by the City, that all required public improvements have been completed. The "as-built" shall also include a complete set of drawings of the paving, drainage, water, sanitary sewer, park and/or trails improvements or other public improvements, showing the layout of the line and grade of all public improvements is in accordance with construction plans for the plat, and all changes made in the plans during construction and containing on each sheet an "as-built" stamp bearing the signature of the Engineer and the date. Two (2) full-size sets of blueline or blackline Construction Plans and one (1) set of mylar Construction Plans showing the project "as-built", and a Computer Aided Design (CAD) electronic file in appropriate electronic format (see Article Nine - Keller CAD Standard Manual). The project engineer must sign, date, and certify that these Plans show the project as it has actually been constructed. When such requirements have been met, the Director of Public Works or City Engineer, on behalf of the City, shall thereafter accept the public improvements for dedication in accordance with the established procedure. 
2.  Acceptance of the development shall mean that the developer has transferred all rights to all the public improvements to the City for use and maintenance. The Director of Public Works may, at his discretion, accept dedication of a portion of the required public improvements, if the remaining public improvements are not required for health and safety reasons and the owner has posted a performance bond, letter of credit or cash bond in the amount of one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated cost of those remaining improvements for a length of time to be determined by the Director of Public Works. If the remaining public improvements are greater than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and are not completed within the determined length of time, the City will impose a ten percent (10%) penalty of letter of credit, or cash bond. The obligation to complete the improvements remains with the developer and all future building permits or certificates of occupancy will be withheld until the improvements are complete. If the remaining public improvements are less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), the developer shall pay the actual dollar amount. The length of time may be extended due to inclement weather or unforeseen delays by mutual agreement between the developer and the City. 
3.  Upon acceptance of the required public improvements, the Director of Public Works or City Engineer shall provide a letter of acceptance stating that all required public improvements have been satisfactorily completed. 
C.  Withholding Improvements Until Approved. 
1.  City services or improvements, including the maintenance of streets and provision of sewer and water services shall be withheld from all additions, until all public improvements have been inspected and accepted by the City. 
2.  The City shall withhold the issuing of a building permit for any building in the City on a newly subdivided parcel of land until all the requirements of these subdivision regulations have been complied with, including installation and acceptance by the City of all water, sewer, drainage, paving, sidewalks, hike/bike trails, street lights, underground electric, and erosion control improvements for the area designated including all planned development requirements imposed as part of the zoning approval, except as herein provided. 
3.  For residential subdivisions, the Building Official may release up to ten percent (10%) of the building permits, provided that all public improvements relating to said land are complete and have been inspected and accepted by the City, indicated by a letter of acceptance (in accordance with Section 4.12.G of this code) from the Director of Public Works or his/her designee. The screening wall, landscaping, irrigation and private amenities may be under construction upon acceptance of the subdivision. The remaining ninety percent (90%) of building permits will be released following the completion of the screening wall, landscaping, irrigation, and private amenities. The Building Official has the discretion to release additional permits as progress is made toward completion. 
4.  The electric, cable, gas, and telephone companies shall coordinate with the Developer/Owner and the Public Works Department to arrange the installation of their respective utility service lines and "drops" before the street right-of-way is placed in final condition for acceptance by the City. All damage to the streets, street right-of-way, drainage and erosion control features and improvements after acceptance by the City shall be the responsibility of the respective utility installing service lines and "drops". Utility installations after the acceptance of public improvements by the City must be individually permitted by the Public Works Department. Whenever practicable, private utility installations shall be coordinated with public improvements/installations to minimize community impact and disruption.  
Section 6.03 - Escrow Policy for Public Improvements 
A.  Request for Escrow. Whenever these regulations require a property owner to construct a public improvement, the property owner may petition the City for deposit of escrow in exchange for constructing the improvements as established in this section. The Director of Public Works shall determine whether the escrow is to be accepted in lieu of the obligation to construct the improvement. 
B.  Deposit with the City. Whenever the City agrees to accept escrow deposits in lieu of construction by the owner of the property under these regulations, the property owner or developer shall deposit an amount equal to his share of the costs of design and construction in escrow with the City. This amount shall be paid prior to release of construction plans by the Director of Public Works. The obligations and responsibilities of the property owner shall become those of the property owner's transferees, successors, and assigns; and the liability therefore shall be joint and several. 
C.  Determination of Escrow Amount. The amount of the escrow shall be determined by using the average of the comparable bids awarded by the City in the preceding six (6) months or, if none exist, then current market value of construction as determined by an estimate by the Director of Public Works. The determination shall be made as of the time the escrow is due. 
D.  Termination of Escrow. Escrows placed with the City under this section that have been held for a period of ten (10) years from the date of the payment or agreement, and in the event that the City has not commenced construction of such improvements for which the escrow was made, shall upon written request by the original applicant be returned to the original party establishing the escrow account, with accrued interest, as limited by Section 6.03 (F). Such return does not remove any obligations of the owner for construction of the required improvement(s) if a building permit is applied for. 
E.  Refund. If any public improvement for which escrow is deposited is constructed or is reconstructed by another governmental authority at no cost to the City, the escrow funds and accrued interest shall be refunded to the property owner or developer after completion and acceptance of the public improvements. In the event that a portion of the cost is borne by the City and the other portion of the cost by another governmental authority, the difference between the owner's actual proportionate cost and the escrow funds, including accrued interest, if any, shall be refunded after completion and acceptance of the improvements. 
F.  Interest Limitation. If money is refunded within six (6) months of deposit, only the principal will be refunded. Monies returned after this date will be refunded with interest accrued calculated at one percent (1%) less than the rate of actual earnings received on the escrowed funds. In the event that the rate of actual earning received on escrowed funds is less than one percent (1%), only the principal will be refunded.  
Section 6.04 - City Participation Policy 
A.  General Standards. 
1.  City's Share of Improvement. 
a.  The City shall participate in the costs of public improvements that are not for the primary benefit of the development and that have been oversized to serve developments other than that for which the plat has been submitted for approval, only to the extent and according to the standards stated in this Article and pursuant to the procedures herein set forth, and only if a Development Agreement is entered between the City and owner, as provided in these regulations, which conforms to the requirements of Texas Local Government Code, Section 252, and Sections 212.071 through 212.074. In no event shall the City participate in the cost of facilities that have not been oversized. 
b.  The City also may participate in the dedication of public open space corridors pursuant to Article Seven of this Ordinance. 
2.  Owner's Responsibility. 
a.  Improvements Serving the Subdivision or Addition. The property owner or developer shall be responsible for the entire costs of designing and installing all public improvements that primarily serve the subdivision or addition. Facilities required by these regulations, unless listed in Section 6.04 (A.2.b) below, shall be considered as primarily serving the subdivision or addition unless otherwise determined by the City. 
b.  Oversized Improvements. The property owner or developer also shall be responsible for its share of the costs of oversized or off-site public improvements needed to assure adequacy of public facilities and services for the addition or subdivision, subject to participation and escrow policies contained in this Article. 
c.  Extension of Utilities. The property owner shall be responsible for extending streets, water, wastewater, or drainage facilities off-site to his property in accordance with the Master Thoroughfare Plan and Water/Waste Water Master Plan as required by the City Council and/or required to ensure adequacy of public facilities. 
B.  Facilities Eligible for City Participation. The developer shall be responsible for the entire initial cost of installing public facilities, including over-sizing. As funds become available, the City shall participate in the costs of installing public improvements as followed: 
1.  Generally. The City will pay only the cost of over-sizing facilities larger than those required to serve the development alone in accordance with the Water/Waste Water Master Plan. Payments over fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) will not be made for oversize facilities unless the over-sizing has been approved by the City Council. Over-sizing participation of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or less may be approved by the City Manager. 
2.  Streets. The City may participate in the cost of street improvements to alleviate traffic problems on a case-by-case basis. 
3.  Water and Sanitary Sewer Lines. Any water and sanitary sewer line that exceeds eight inches (8") in diameter and is required by the Public Works Department or city policy to be sized above eight inches (8") in diameter in order to serve properties beyond the boundaries of the subdivision or property being developed may be eligible for oversize reimbursement. In the event the City determines that a water or sanitary sewer line size greater than eight inches (8") in diameter is required to serve the development alone, no oversize reimbursement will be paid. 
4.  Drainage Facilities. The City may participate in the costs of drainage facilities required pursuant to Section 5.17 to accommodate potential runoff from an upstream drainage area. This may include additional detention storage or the increase in capacity of downstream drainage structures. 
5.  Proportionate Share Studies. Where a traffic impact analysis, water study, wastewater study, drainage study has been required by these regulations and accepted by the City in order to determine the proportionate costs of facilities attributable to the development, participation by the City in the costs of such facilities will be limited to those costs not attributable to impacts from the subdivision. 
6.  Criteria. Eligibility and the terms of payment will be made in accordance with the City's Impact Fee Ordinance, pro rata ordinance, Keller Park and Open Space Master Plan, or facilities studies as provided in Section 6.04 (B.5) above, and shall be incorporated in a developer's agreement prior to Final Plat approval. 
C.  Limitations and Exceptions. Notwithstanding Section 6.04 (B) above, the City shall not participate in the following cost: 
1.  Those portions of the costs of any public improvements not expressly described in Section 6.04(B). 
2.  Costs of construction for streets built wider than called for in the Keller Thoroughfare Plan. 
3.  Costs of street lights, decorative finishes, or other similar expenses. 
4.  Costs of retention/detention ponds or slope protection. 
5.  When reimbursing the property owner or developer pursuant to this Article, the City shall have the discretion to pay up to a maximum of twelve percent (12%) of the cost for engineering fees, which includes surveying, design, and construction staking. The City shall not be responsible for any other costs associated with surveying, design, geo-technical investigations, quality controls or other construction costs. 
D.  Procedures for City Participation. 
1.  Subdivision Improvement Agreement. The developer must enter into a Development Agreement in which the following information must be provided by the developer: 
a.  Owner's name, address, phone number. 
b.  Contractor's name, address, phone number. 
c.  Three lowest competitive bids, prepared in accordance with State law regarding competitive bidding, Texas Local Government Code, Section 252. 
2.  Director of Public Works Determination. The Director of Public Works shall determine the City's participation in the cost of public improvements, in accordance with the criteria in Section 6.04 (A) through 6.04 (C) in this Article. 
3.  Final Determination of City Participation. Upon completion of the work and acceptance by the City, final construction costs will be determined. City participation will then be calculated based on measurements in the field and applying the standards in Section 6.04(A) through 6.04(C) in this Article. 
4.  Reimbursement. Reimbursement of the City's share of the public infrastructure improvements will be made as funds become available from allocated resources or assessments on the first in, first out process.  
Section 6.05 - Main Extension Policy 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the Water and Sanitary Sewer Main Extension Policy is to provide a method for individuals and developers to recover reasonable costs when the installation of a water or sanitary sewer main extension is required, and to establish a methodology for calculating and collecting fees from individuals and developers who wish to connect to the main extension. 
B.  Policy. It is the policy of the City of Keller to reduce barriers to development and to decrease the financial burden on developers without increasing the financial burden on utility ratepayers. Therefore, this procedure is established to provide for a fair reimbursement of developer-financed water and sanitary sewer main extensions through fees collected from other developers and individual property owners as new utility services are connected to the main systems. 
C.  Procedure. 
1.  Council Action. A development agreement shall be approved by the City Council for each project on a case- by-case basis. All requests shall meet the guidelines set forth in this policy. All requirements within a site specific Main Extension Development Agreement shall be subject to City Council approval. The Agreement shall be non-transferable, unless otherwise stated in the Development Agreement or if the Agreement is later amended by the City Council. 
2.  Criteria. This policy applies to requests that meet the following criteria: 
a.  The property to be served must be platted and the property owner must follow all development guidelines including the Water and Sanitary Sewer Master Plan. 
b.  All easements and public rights-of-ways necessary to construct the main extension must be acquired by the developer at the developer's expense and filed by the City of Keller. The City may elect to use its Power of Eminent Domain to acquire the easements or rights-of-way, the cost of which shall be the responsibility of the developer. 
c.  On-site utility lines shall not be included in the Main Extension Reimbursement Policy. 
d.  This policy applies only to off-site main extensions exceeding five hundred feet (500') for any development. If the extension from an existing main to the development's property line is greater than the above linear foot criteria, the extension policy may be utilized if authorized by the City Council. 
3.  Engineering Requirements. 
a.  The mains shall be extended through a development at the developer's cost as determined by the Director of Public Works to allow for utility connections and/or extensions to other developments. 
b.  The engineering design must be performed by a registered professional engineer licensed in the State of Texas, at the expense of the developer or applicant (see Section 6.04 (C)). All engineering and construction standards must be approved by the City of Keller and must meet the City of Keller's Standard Specifications for Public Works. The developer/applicant is responsible for any cost relating to a change order and or improper design that results in an increase in the initial project cost. 
c.  The developer/applicant must extend any required on-site utility lines at their expense for the proposed development to the utility main extension. 
d.  Over-sizing of water or sanitary sewer mains will be determined and paid for by the City of Keller following the construction and acceptance of the project. The developer/applicant will provide funding for a minimum of eight-inch (8") main or the portion of the main extension that meets the capacity needs of the development, whichever is greater. The City may utilize this policy to recoup the cost of over-sizing a main extension. 
e.  The developer/applicant shall provide a parcel map of the area identifying all parcels and acreage to be served by the main extension. 
4.  Reimbursement. 
a.  The City shall maintain a record of total cost for each project. A fee of $5,000 for management of the program shall be paid by the developer/applicant prior to the construction of the main extension. 
b.  The length of time for collection (recovery) and distribution of funds shall not exceed five (5) years from the date of the utility main acceptance by the City of Keller. Reimbursement shall be based upon total acreage, which can be served by the main extension according to the Water and Sanitary Sewer Master Plan. All properties on either side of the line that can reasonably connect to the line shall be included in the acreage calculations. All properties at the terminus of the line that can be served by the line with an extension of three hundred feet (300') or less shall also be included in the calculations. 
c.  The reimbursement amount shall be assessed on a per acre basis. The parcel map of all properties that may be served by the main extension shall be provided by the developer/applicant prior to the issuance of notice to proceed for the construction of the main. 
d.  Public properties, which are not subject to development, shall not be included in the acreage calculation. If a natural barrier exists in which service cannot be provided, that area shall not be included in the determination of the acreage. 
e.  If a transmission main and a distribution main are located along the frontage of the property, the fee will be based upon the distribution main only. 
f.  Funds will be collected from property owners who will be served by the main extension prior to the approval of their final plat or site plan, or issuance of their building permit, whichever is first. 
g.  Reimbursements will be made to the original signing party of the Agreement of any funds that have been collected pertaining to their main extension, within said five (5) year period. The Agreement is not transferable, unless otherwise stated within the Agreement. Reimbursements will be made within thirty (30) days following the City's receipt of the reimbursement money from a developer. The original signing party shall maintain a current address on file with the City. Following the completion and acceptance of the facilities constructed in accordance with this policy, all facilities shall be dedicated to the City and become the City's property thereafter. The City's standard maintenance bond requirement will apply to each project.  
Article Seven - PUBLIC PARK AND TRAIL SYSTEMS LAND DEDICATION REQUIREMENTS AND IMPROVEMENTS 
 
Section 7.01 - Purpose 
A.  This section is adopted to provide parks, open spaces, and recreational areas in accordance with the Keller Park and Open Space Master Plan and the Citywide Trail System Master Plan in the form of parks, open spaces, and/or trails as a function of land development in the City of Keller. The City Council has determined that parks, open spaces, and recreational areas in the form of parks, open spaces, and trails are necessary and in the public welfare, and that the only adequate procedure to provide for same is by integrating such a requirement into the procedures for planning and developing property in the City. 
B.  Parks include public areas providing for a variety of outdoor recreational opportunities within convenient distances from a majority of the residences to be served thereby. Open spaces include preservation and conservation of land for wildlife habitat or areas of natural significance. Trails include a public Citywide system of off-road hike and bike trails and equestrian trails. Proposed parks, open spaces, and trail systems established by the City Council and shown in the City of Keller Park and Open Space Master Plan and the Citywide Trail System Master Plan shall be prima facie proof that any parks and/or trails located therein is within such a convenient distance from any residence located therein.  
Section 7.02 - General Requirements 
A.  These requirements shall apply to all single-family, two-family, and multi-family residential developments in the City of Keller. 
1.  Whenever a final plat is filed on record with the County Clerk of Tarrant County for development of a residential area in accordance with this Ordinance of the City, such plat shall contain a clear fee simple dedication of an area of land to the City for park, open space, and/or trail purposes in accordance with the Parks and Open Space Master Plan and the Citywide Trail System Master Plan. The area shall be determined by City Council in the amount set forth in the City of Keller Code of Ordinances, Chapter 2, Administration, Article 1, In General, Section 2-270, Administrative fees. Any proposed plat submitted to the City for approval shall identify the proposed park land to be dedicated and designate the area with a lot and block number. Trails shall be designated as either hike and bike or equestrian trail right-of-way. A trail easement will be accepted if said land is adjacent to a drainage easement and bisecting a piece of property. The required dedication herein may be met by a payment of money in lieu of land or capital improvements in lieu of land when permitted or required by other provisions of this Code. 
2.  The obligation of the applicant/developer to dedicate park land or make payments or improvements in lieu thereof shall be in addition to and independent of the requirements of the applicant/developer to provide open space with a Planned Development (PD) zoning case. However, if the open space in the Planned Development (PD) exceeds twenty percent (20%) of the project area and is dedicated and accepted by the City as public park land, the required dedication or payment in lieu of may be reduced by the amount of excess acreage. 
3.  The City Council has determined that development of an area smaller than five (5) acres for a public park is impractical. Therefore, if fewer than one hundred fifty (150) units are proposed by a plat filed for approval, the developer shall be required to pay the applicable cash in lieu of land provided by this Code. An exception will be made if the dedication will increase the size of an existing park adjacent to the proposed plat or provide a trail location and/or connection. 
4.  In instances where land is required to be dedicated, the City Council shall have the right to accept the dedication for approval on the final plat, or to refuse same, after consideration of the recommendation of the City Manager based on the Development Review Committee's findings. The City may refuse the land dedication if the City determines that sufficient park and/or trail area is already in the public domain in the area of the proposed development, if the proposed dedication is subject to frequent flooding or of topography that is undesirable, or if the recreation potential for said park zone would be better served by expanding or improving existing parks. If the City refuses the land dedication, the applicant/developer is required to make a payment of cash in lieu of land in the amount provided in Keller Code of Ordinances Chapter 2, Administration, Article 1, In General, Section 2-270, Administrative Fees. 
5.  In instances where land dedication for trail development is required, the City Council shall have the right to require construction of the trail in accordance with the Citywide Trail System Master Plan standards for trail construction. In instances where a sidewalk and hike/bike trail are in the same location, the hike/bike trail shall replace the sidewalk. Park Development Fees will be only credited for the difference of the required width and depth (see Open Space Master Plan and DTCS for trail and sidewalk design specifications). The applicant/developer shall receive a credit of Park Development Fees equal to the cost of construction up to the amount of Park Development Fees required. Reimbursement will not be made to applicant/developer for any amount of construction above the Park Development Fees credited. If the applicant/developer constructs the hike and bike trail, the hike and bike trail layout and construction plans shall be prepared by a Texas Licensed Landscape Architect or Professional Engineer and must be reviewed for approval by the Parks Manager or his/her designee prior to approval and release of the construction documents by the City. The location of the hike and bike trail shall be considered for approval by the Parks Manager or his/her designee prior to construction. Final acceptance of the hike and bike trail infrastructure shall be considered by the Parks Manager or his/her designee based on the requirements of this UDC and formal action taken by the City Council. All improvements or construction on or within the dedicated land to be installed by the applicant/developer shall be completed in accordance with the approved Construction Plans to be reviewed jointly by both Parks Manager and the City Engineer. Retaining wall three feet (3') or taller shall be designed by a Texas Licensed Professional Structural Engineer and will include drainage designed by a Texas Licensed Professional Engineer or Landscape Architect. Where retaining walls are constructed adjacent to existing or future hike and bike trails and/or hike and bike trail rights-of-way, the developer/builder shall construct the retaining wall with a subdrain system behind the wall and under the trail and/or trail rights-of-way to prevent concentrated weep hole drainage. No concentrated run-off (swales or drainage structure outfalls) will be allowed to cross over the hike and bike trail rights-of-way. Finished project shall be maintainable and acceptable as determined by the City. 
6.  The dedication required by this Code shall be made by filing of the final plat or contemporaneously by separate instrument unless additional dedication is required subsequent to the filing of the final plat. If the actual number of completed dwelling units exceed the figure upon which the original dedication was based, such additional dedication shall be required, and shall be made by payment of the cash in lieu of land amount provided by Section 7.02 or by the dedication of additional park land to the City. Any dedication and/or cash in lieu of dedication shall be made within six (6) months of the associated development's final plat approval. 
B.  Payments in Lieu of Land Dedication for all single-family, two-family, and multi-family residential developments in the City of Keller. The dedication requirement shall be met by a payment in lieu of land at a per dwelling unit price set by the City Council, sufficient to acquire land and provide for adjacent streets and utilities for a neighborhood park and/or trail to serve the park zone in which such development is located. As adopted by the City Council, the per unit price shall be determined as defined in the City of Keller Code of Ordinances Chapter 2, Administration, Article 1, In General, Section 2-270, Administrative Fees. Cash payments may be used only for park, open space, and/or trail acquisition, development, and/or improvements. 
C.  These requirements shall apply to all non-residential developments in the City of Keller: 
1.  In instances where land is required for trail construction in accordance with the City Wide Trail System Master Plan, the City shall have the right to require the land dedication for approval on the final plat, or to refuse same. 
2.  The City Council shall have the right to require construction of the trail in accordance with the City Wide Trail System Master Plan standards for trail construction. In instances where a sidewalk and hike/bike trail are in the same location, the hike/bike trail shall replace the sidewalk. If the applicant/developer constructs the hike and bike trail, the hike and bike trail layout and construction plans must be reviewed and approved by the Parks Manager or his/her designee prior to approval and release of the construction documents by the City. The hike and bike trail construction must be accepted by the Parks Manager or his/her designee and be completed in conjunction with all other public improvements/infrastructure approved by the City for release of the Building Permit. All improvements or construction on or within the dedicated land to be installed by the applicant/developer shall be completed in accordance with the approved Construction Plans. Where retaining walls are constructed adjacent to existing or future hike and bike trails and/or hike and bike trail rights-of-way, the developer/builder shall construct the retaining wall with a subdrain system behind the wall and under the trail and/or trail rights-of-way to prevent concentrated weep hole drainage. No concentrated run-off (swales or drainage structure outfalls) will be allowed to cross over the hike and bike trail rights-of-way. Finished project shall be maintainable and acceptable as determined by the City.  
Section 7.03 - Options in Lieu of Land 
A.  Money in Lieu: Subject to approval of the City Council, an applicant/developer responsible for dedication under Section 7.01 may elect to meet the requirements of Section 7.02 in whole or part by a cash payment in lieu of land, in the amount set forth in the City of Keller Code of Ordinances Chapter 2, Administration, Article 1, In General, Section 2-270, Administrative fees. Such payment in lieu of land shall be made prior to plat recording with the County, prior to issuance of a Building Permit, or as specified in the Development Agreement. 
B.  Capital Improvements in Lieu of Land: Subject to approval of the City Council, an applicant/developer responsible for dedication under Section 7.01 may elect to meet the requirements of Section 7.02 in whole or part by constructing or completing capital improvements in existing City parks or dedicated park land in lieu of land. These improvements should be made in accordance with the Parks and Open Space Master Plan. Should any of these options be exercised, the City and the applicant/developer shall enter into a written agreement for credit of expenses equal to the cost of construction, prior to initiation of work on such improvements. Reimbursement will not be made if the applicant/developer chooses to improve park lands at a greater amount than required. Such agreements for improvements shall be made prior to plat recording with the County or as specified in the Development Agreement.  
Section 7.04 - Suitability and Design Standards 
A.  Any land dedicated to the City under Section 7.01, must be suitable for park and recreation purposes. In instances where land is required to be dedicated, the City Council shall have the right to accept the dedication for approval on the final plat, or to refuse same, after consideration of the recommendation of the City Manager based on the Development Review Committee's findings based on the need of either open space or recreational space as established in the Park and Open Space Master Plan or Citywide Trail System Master Plan. 
B.  Drainage areas may be accepted as part of a park and/or trail if the channel is constructed in accordance with City engineering standards, and if no significant area of the park is cut off from access by such channel. 
C.  Each park shall have ready access to a public street. 
D.  Unless provided otherwise herein, an action by the City shall be by the City Council, after consideration of the recommendations of the Parks and Recreation Board and the Planning and Zoning Commission respectively. 
E.  All park and trail land dedication shall be consistent with the standards as set forth in the Park and Open Space Master Plan and Citywide Trail System Master Plan, or approved exceptions by the City Council. 
F.  For more than five (5) acres of land, an environmental study (at minimum, a Phase I), audit or assessment may be required demonstrating that the property is in a condition that would allow the City to utilize the property for park purposes without expenditures to remove environmental waste or hazardous materials, that the property is suitable and safe for use as a park and is free from environmentally-related problems. Additionally, the applicant/developer shall permanently mark each corner of the park site with a three-quarter inch (3/4") iron pin set in concrete. 
G.  All rubbish, trash, junk and other offensive materials shall be removed from all dedicated lands and the property returned to its natural condition except as to approved construction and improvements thereon.  
Section 7.05 - Amendments of Connectivity to the Citywide Trail System Master Plan 
A.  Requests to Amend the Citywide Trail System Master Plan. 
1.  Amendments to the Citywide Trail System Master Plan Initiated by the City of Keller. The City Council may from time to time, after receiving a final recommendation thereon by the Parks and Recreation Board and after public hearings at both the Parks and Recreation Board, Planning & Zoning Commission, and City Council, amend, supplement, or change proposed locations of the trails on the Citywide Trail System Master Plan included in the Park and Open Space Master Plan. Public hearings will be held at the Parks and Recreation Board and City Council and the notification thereof shall be met in accordance with Chapter 551 of the V.T.C.A. Government Code. 
2.  Amendments to the Citywide Trail System Master Plan Initiated as Part of a Development. Amendments may be requested by the owner of real property, or the authorized representative of an owner of real property affected, during the development process at the time of zoning, platting, site planning or building permit application. 
B.  General Procedures for Amendments Initiated as Part of a Development. 
1.  Public Hearing and Notice. Prior to making its recommendation to the City Council, the Parks and Recreation Board shall hold a public hearing on each requested amendment, supplement, or change to the trails on the Citywide Trail System Master Plan. Upon receipt of the recommendation from the Parks and Recreation Board, the City Council shall conduct a public hearing. Written notice of all public hearings shall be sent to the owners of real property located within two hundred feet (200') of any proposed amendment, supplement, or change to the trails on the Citywide Trail System Master Plan, which notice shall be deposited in the mail not less than ten (10) days before such public hearing is held. Such notice may be served by using the last known address as listed on the latest approved tax roll and depositing the notice, postage paid, in the United States mail. Further, notice of the public hearing on the proposed amendment, supplement, or change to the trails on the Citywide Trail System Master Plan shall be by one publication not less than fifteen (15) days prior thereto in the official newspaper of the city. 
2.  Sign Posting for Amendments, Supplements or Changes to the Trails on the Citywide Trail System Master Plan. The City will place at least one (1) sign on the property proposing the amendment, supplement, or change. Such sign shall, if possible, be located adjacent to a public street. Such sign shall be erected not less than fifteen (15) days before the first public hearing. The City will remove the sign(s) immediately after final action by the City Council, or upon withdrawal of the request of the applicant, whichever comes first. The erection or continued maintenance of the sign shall not be deemed a condition precedent to the granting of any proposed amendment of connectivity or the holding of any public hearing. 
3.  Study of Connectivity. The applicant shall conduct a study of connectivity on the proposed amendment, supplement, or change to the trails on the Citywide Trail System Master Plan. The study shall include how the proposed amendment, supplement, or change to the trails on the Citywide Trail System Master Plan affects connectivity of the trail to major points of interests and the preservation of creek corridors and greenbelts. 
4.  Failure to Appear. Failure of the applicant or his representative to appear before the Parks and Recreation Board and City Council for more than one (1) hearing without an approved delay by the Parks Manager shall constitute sufficient grounds for the Parks and Recreation Board to table or deny the proposed amendment, supplement, or change to the trails on the Citywide Trail System Master Plan. 
5.  Board Consideration. The Parks and Recreation Board, after the public hearing is closed, shall make its recommendations on the proposed amendment, supplement, or change to the trails on the Citywide Trail System Master Plan to the City Council stating, among other things, its findings, its evaluation of the request and of the relationship of the request to the Citywide Trail System Master Plan. 
6.  City Council Considerations. 
a.  Process for Consideration: Every application or proposal that is recommended for approval or denial by the Parks and Recreation Board shall be automatically forwarded to the City Council for consideration. 
b.  Resubmission of Applications: A request that has been denied by the City Council may be resubmitted at any time for reconsideration by the City. The City Council may deny any request with prejudice. If a request has been denied with prejudice, the same or similar request may not be resubmitted to the City for six (6) months from the original date of denial. 
c.  City Council Hearings and Notice for Trail Plan Amendments: Notice of the City Council public hearing and publication thereof shall be made in accordance with Section 7.05 (B.1) and Section 7.05 (B.2). 
7.  Final Approval and Resolution Adoption. Upon approval of the trail plan amendment, supplement, or change by the City Council, the applicant shall submit a metes and bounds description and an instrument of dedication to the City to be attached to the Resolution approving the amendment, supplement, or change to the trails on the Citywide Trail System Master Plan.  
Article Eight - ZONING DISTRICTS, DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS, TREE PRESERVATION 
 
Section 8.01 - Zoning Regulations 
A.  Purpose. The zoning regulations and Districts as herein established have been made in accordance with Texas Local Government Code and an adopted set of coordinating plans collectively serving as the Comprehensive Plan for the purposes of promoting sound development; promoting the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the City; and to protect, preserve, and promote places and areas of historical, cultural, or architectural importance and significance. They have been designed to lessen the congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to ensure adequate, quality light and air; to protect and preserve the natural groundwater; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, parks, and other public requirements. They have been made with reasonable consideration, among other things, for the character of the district, and its peculiar suitability for the particular uses specified; and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city. 
B.  Zoning District Map. 
1.  The boundaries of zoning districts set out herein are delineated upon a zoning district map of the City, adopted as part of this Code as fully as if the same were set forth herein in detail. 
2.  One original of the Zoning District Map shall be filed in the Community Development Department. This copy, together with amending ordinances, shall be the controlling document governing the zoning districts in Keller. The zoning district map shall be revised no less than once every twelve (12) months to reflect any changes or amendments approved by the City Council. 
C.  Zoning District Boundaries. The district boundary lines shown on the Zoning District Map are usually along streets, alleys, property lines, or extensions thereof. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply: 
1.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerline. 
2.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
3.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following city limits. 
4.  Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the right-of-way lines. 
5.  Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to follow such shore lines, and in the event of change in the shore line shall be construed as moving with the actual shore line; boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of all bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerline, and in the event of change in the centerline, shall be construed to move with such centerline. 
6.  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in Sections 8.01 (C.1) through 8.01 (C.5) above shall be so construed. The scale of the map shall determine distances not specifically indicated on the original zoning maps. 
7.  Whenever any street, alley, or other public right of way is vacated by official action of the City Council or whenever such area is franchised for building purposes, the zoning district line adjoining each side of such street, alley, or other public way shall be automatically extended to the centerline of such vacated street, alley, or way and all areas so involved shall then and henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended districts. 
8.  The zoning classification applied to a tract of land adjacent to a street shall extend to the centerline of the street, unless as a condition of zoning approval, it is stated that the zoning classification shall not apply to the street. 
9.  Where physical features on the ground are at variance with information shown on the official zoning district map or when there arises a question as to how or whether a parcel of property is zoned and such question cannot be resolved by the application of Sections 8.01(C.1) through 8.01(C.8), the property shall be considered as classified, SF-36, in the same manner as provided for newly annexed territory. 
D.  Compliance Required. All land, buildings, structures, or appurtenances thereon located within the City of Keller, Texas which are hereafter occupied, used, constructed, erected, removed, placed, demolished, or converted shall be occupied, used, erected, altered, removed, placed, demolished, or converted in conformance with the zoning regulations prescribed for the zoning district in which such land or building is located. All of the standards and regulations prescribed herein shall be considered as the minimum requirement unless explicitly stated otherwise. 
E.  Zoning Upon Annexation. All territory hereinafter annexed to the City of Keller shall be classified as Single-Family Low Density (SF-36) as a holding district until other zoning is established by the City. The procedure for establishing zoning other than SF-36 for annexed territory shall conform to the procedure set forth in this Code. 
1.  In an area classified as SF-36: 
a.  No permit for the construction of a building or use of land shall be issued by the Planning Manager other than a permit which will allow the construction of a building or use permitted in the SF-36 District, unless and until such territory has been classified in a zoning district other than the SF-36 District, by the City Council in the manner prescribed in this Code. 
b.  An application for a building permit for any proposed use other than those specified in the SF-36 District must be made to the Planning Manager of the City of Keller within three (3) months after annexation. If the applicant shows that plans and other preparation for developing the property commenced prior to annexation by the City, the City Council may authorize the construction of the project by a majority vote. The action of the City Council concerning any such permit shall take into consideration the Comprehensive Plan and the appropriate land use for the area. Upon approval by the City Council, the Building Official shall issue the permit.  
Section 8.02 - Administration 
A.  Nonconforming Uses and Structures. 
1.  Intent of Provisions. 
a.  Within the districts established by this Code or amendments thereto, there exist lots, structures, uses of land and structures, and characteristics of use which were lawful before this Code was enacted, amended, or otherwise made applicable to such lots, structures or uses, but which do not now conform to the regulations of the district in which they are located. It is the intent of this Code to permit such nonconforming uses to continue, as long as the conditions within this Section and other applicable sections are met. 
b.  It is further the intent of this Code that nonconforming uses shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, and not be used as a basis for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
c.  Nonconforming uses are hereby declared to be incompatible with the permitted uses in the districts involved. 
2.  Nonconforming Status. Any use, platted lot, or structure which does not conform with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located shall be deemed a nonconforming use or structure when: 
a.  Such use, platted lot, or structure was in existence and lawfully operating at the time of the passage of the previous Code or this Code, and has since been in regular and continuous use; or 
b.  Such use, platted lot, or structure is a lawful use at the time of the adoption of any amendment to this Code but by such amendment is placed in a district wherein such use, platted lot, or structure is not otherwise permitted and has since been in regular and continuous use; or 
c.  Such use, platted lot, or structure was in existence and lawfully operating at the time of annexation to the City and has since been in regular and continuous use. 
3.  Continuing Lawful Use of Property and Existence of Structures. 
a.  The lawful use of land or lawful existence of structures at the time of the passage of this Code, although such do not conform to the provisions hereof, may be continued; but if said nonconforming use or structure is discontinued or abandoned, any future use of said premises shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Code. 
b.  Discontinuance of a nonconforming use shall consist of the actual act or date of discontinuance of a use previously operational in a building. Abandonment of a nonconforming structure shall consist of the act or date of abandonment. 
c.  When a nonconforming use or structure which does not meet the development standards in this Code ceases to be used for a period of six (6) months, such use shall not be resumed and proof of such event shall constitute prima facie evidence of an act of abandonment. Any nonconforming use which does not involve a permanent type of structure or operation and which is moved from the premises shall be considered to have been abandoned. 
d.  No nonconforming use or structure may be expanded, reoccupied with another nonconforming use, or increased as of the effective date of this Code except as provided herein. 
e.  Conforming single-family residential uses on platted lots or unplatted tracts approved prior to this Code, which may now be nonconforming due to stricter standards or right- of-way dedications/takings, shall be deemed in conformance with this Code as long as the use of the lot is allowed in the respective district. Only the lot size, depth, width, and setbacks shall be allowed to be less than the regulations prescribed in the zoning district in which it is located. All other regulations of this Code shall be met or the lot shall be considered nonconforming. 
4.  Changing Nonconforming Uses. 
a.  Any nonconforming use may be changed to a conforming use, and once such change is made, the use shall not be changed back to a nonconforming use. 
b.  Where a conforming use is located in a nonconforming structure, the use may be changed to another conforming use by the process outlined herein. 
c.  A nonconforming use may not be changed to another nonconforming use. 
5.  Expansion of Nonconforming Uses and Buildings. An expansion of a nonconforming use or structure is allowed in accordance with the following: 
a.  A non-conforming use located within a building may be extended throughout the existing building, provided; 
1)  No structural alteration may be made on or in the building except those required by law to preserve such building in a structurally sound condition. 
2)  The number of dwelling units or rooms in a nonconforming residential use shall not be increased so as to exceed the number of dwelling units or rooms existing at the time said use became a nonconforming use. 
b.  No nonconforming use within a building may be extended to occupy any land outside the building. 
c.  No nonconforming use of land or building shall be enlarged, increased, or extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the time the land became a nonconforming use, except to provide off-street loading or off-street parking space, if required by City ordinances; and except where adaptive re-use is proposed, in which case the proposal shall be presented to both the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council for consideration. 
d.  The minimum residential lot areas for the various zoning districts shall be in accordance with their respective districts except that a lot having less area than herein required which was an official "lot of record" prior to the adoption of this Code, may be used for a single-family dwelling. A residential lot that is not a legal lot of record and does not meet the depth or width requirements of this Code at the time of platting may be approved by the Zoning Board of Adjustment with a variance. 
e.  Buildings or structures which do not conform to the area regulations or development standards in this Code shall not increase their gross floor area except when such expansion brings nonconformity into conformance; and except where adaptive re-use is proposed, in which case the proposal shall be presented to both the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council for consideration. 
f.  A non-residential building or structure that does not meet current area regulations or development standards may be reoccupied with a conforming use and without any expansion upon approval of a modified site plan meeting the requirements of Section 8.02 (A.5.g) below and issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. The Development Review Committee (DRC) shall review this plan for compliance and, once approved by the DRC, a Certificate of Occupancy may be issued. 
g.  A conforming non-single family residential use in a building which does not meet the area regulations or development standards in this Code may be reoccupied with another conforming use upon approval of a modified site plan to determine compliance with the following: 
1)  Off-street parking, driveways, and circulation requirements. 
2)  Dumpster location and screening; sidewalk and landscaping requirements. 
3)  Sign requirements. 
4)  Building codes. 
5)  Screening requirements. 
6)  Drainage requirements. 
Each of the above will be reviewed for compliance by the Development Review Committee (DRC) and may be approved by the Planning Manager if total compliance is met. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make final approval or disapproval of a site plan if substantial compliance is met and there is concurrence with the City Staff's recommendations. If the Planning and Zoning Commission does not concur with City Staff's recommendations, the site plan shall automatically be sent to the City Council for approval or denial. 
6.  Restoration of Nonconforming Uses or Structures. 
a.  If a structure occupied by a nonconforming use is destroyed by fire, the elements, or other cause, it may not be rebuilt except to conform to the provisions of this Code. In the case of partial destruction of a nonconforming use structure not exceeding sixty percent (60%) of its total appraised value as determined by the Tarrant County Central Appraisal District, reconstruction will be permitted, in accordance with Section 8.06, but the existing square footage or function of the nonconforming use cannot be expanded, and the above procedures in 8.02 (A.5.g) shall be met. 
b.  A nonconforming use or structure can be remodeled, maintained, or improved as long as the size (square footage) of the structure is not increased. 
c.  When a nonconforming sign, or a substantial part of the sign is damaged, destroyed, taken down, or removed, it may not be re-erected, reconstructed, or rebuilt except in full compliance and conformance with this Code. For purposes of this section, substantial shall mean if the cost of repair exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the cost of a new sign of the same construction and size. A nonconforming, on-premise, detached sign which is required to be relocated due to expansion of public right-of-way may be relocated on the same lot or tract, provided there is no more than one (1) detached sign per lot or tract. The relocation shall occur within six (6) months following completion of the road. 
7.  Completion of Structures. 
a.  Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, or designated use of: 
1)  A building or structure for which a building permit has been issued or a site plan approved prior to the effective date of these zoning regulations, and the permits have not expired in accordance with this Code; or 
2)  A building or structure for which a substantially complete application for a building permit was accepted by the Building Official on or before the effective date of these regulations, provided however that such building permit shall comply with all applicable ordinances of the City of Keller in effect on the date such application was filed and the building permit is issued within thirty (30) days of the effective date of these regulations. 
b.  All structures that have received a permit and have started construction shall complete construction within twelve (12) months or a proposed timeframe accepted an authorized by the Building Official. In the event that construction is delayed, the owner may request a one-time extension to the construction period of up to six (6) months or a proposed timeframe accepted and authorized by the Building Official. If a building is left unfinished and the City determines that construction activity has ceased, the City shall require the owner/developer to submit a proposal for timing to finish the building. Otherwise, the City shall cause the unfinished structure to be demolished at the owner's expense. 
B.  Planning and Zoning Commission. 
1.  General. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall function according to the Code of Ordinances and Texas Local Government Code which establishes other membership and operating procedures. 
2.  Created; Membership; Officers. 
a.  There is hereby created in accordance with Chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code, a City Planning and Zoning Commission which shall consist of seven (7) members, each of whom shall be a resident of the City of Keller. Members shall be appointed by the City Council. Of the seven (7) members, four (4) shall serve a period of one (1) year from the date of initial appointment and three (3) shall serve for a period of two (2) years from the date of initial appointment. Thereafter, all seven (7) members shall serve for a period of two (2) years from the date of appointment. Vacancies shall be filled by appointments for unexpired terms only. 
b.  Members may be removed from office at any time by a majority vote of the City Council for any reason. All members shall serve without compensation. All members shall serve in accordance with Ordinance No. 1701 or most current ordinance pertaining to attendance and tenure requirements. The City Secretary or his/her designee shall keep minutes of all meetings held by the Planning and Zoning Commission and full record of all recommendations to be made by the Planning and Zoning Commission to the City Council. A Chairman may be appointed by the City Council, however if they do not make the appointment on the date annual appointments are made, the Chairman and Vice-Chairman shall be elected by the Planning and Zoning Commission from its membership at its first meeting following the date of annual appointments. The Chairman and Vice Chariman shall hold said offices for a term of one (1) year and until their successors have been elected. 
c.  Any member of the Plannng and Zoning Commission remaining absent for three (3) consecutive regular meetings of the commission may have their appointment declared vacated by a majority vote of the City Council. Any member of the commission remaining absent for six (6) consecutive regular meetings of the commission shall be deemed to have vacated their appointment. 
d.  Newly appointed members of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall go through training offered by the city attorney and the American Planning Association for new commissioners. 
3.  Quorum; Voting. Four (4) members of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall constitute a quorum, and all members, including the presiding chairman, shall have the right of one vote each, a quorum being present. All actions by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be by a majority vote of those members present. If any member has a conflict of interest in review of any item on the Commission's agenda, he or she shall remove themselves from the room and refrain from voting only on the item for which a conflict exists. In the absence of the Chairperson and/or Vice-Chairperson the members constituting a quorum shall select, from the members present, a Chairperson to conduct the meeting. 
4.  Meetings. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall meet at such times in the Town Hall or other specified locations as may be designated by the Chairman or Vice-Chairman in the absence of the Chairman, and at such intervals as may be necessary to orderly and properly transact the business of the Commission but not less than once every thirty (30) days. 
5.  Powers and Duties. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall be an advisory body to the City Council and shall carry out the duties detailed in the Texas Local Government Code and Ordinance No. 70 to make recommendations regarding amendments to the Comprehensive Plan, changes of zoning and permanent zoning to be given to newly annexed areas, and shall approve or make recommendations regarding the approval of the plats of subdivisions as provided by the Texas Local Government Code. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make a periodic review of the City's Comprehensive Thoroughfare Plan and Future Land Use Plan and be prepared to make such recommendations to the City Council as deemed necessary to keep the City's Plans with the needs and uses of the City as outlined in the Comprehensive Plan. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall serve in an advisory capacity on any land use or planning related item(s) in the City. 
6.  Procedure on Zoning Hearings. The procedure and process for zoning changes and/or amendments shall be in accordance with this Code. 
C.  Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA). 
1.  General. In accordance with the Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 211, a Board of Adjustment may be appointed for the purpose of hearing and deciding appeals or special exceptions or authorizing variances or other matters as adopted. 
2.  Creation. There is hereby created a Board of Adjustment to be composed of five (5) members and two (2) alternate members who shall be residents and qualified voters of the City of Keller and shall serve without compensation. 
3.  Members and Terms of Office. 
a.  The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five (5) regular members and two (2) alternate members who shall be appointed by the City Council in accordance with Section 211 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended. The members shall serve for a period of two (2) years and until their successors are duly appointed and qualified. The regular members of the board shall be identified by place numbers 1 through 5. Places 1, 3, and 5 and the first alternate member shall be appointed to serve for two-year terms with terms beginning on November 30 of odd numbered years. Places 2, 4 and the second alternate member shall be appointed to serve for two-year terms beginning on November 30 of even numbered years. All members will be appointed by a majority vote of the City Council. Members may be removed in accordance with State law. Board members may be appointed to succeed themselves. Vacancies shall be filled by an alternate member for the unexpired term of a member whose term becomes vacant. A Chairman may be appointed by the City Council, however if they do not make the appointment on the date annual appointments are made, the Chairman and Vice-Chairman shall be elected by the Board of Adjustment from its membership at its first meeting following the date of annual appointments. The Chairman and Vice Chariman shall hold said offices for a term of one (1) year and until their successors have been elected. 
b.  Any member absent for three (3) regular consecutive meetings may have their office declared vacated by a majority vote of the City Council. Any member of the board remaining absent for six (6) consecutive regular meetings of the board shall be deemed to have vacated their office. Vacancies of an alternate member shall be filled by appointment of the City Council by majority vote. 
c.  Newly appointed members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall go through training offered by the city attorney and the American Planning Association for new board members. 
d.  Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such other times as the Board may determine. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. Four (4) members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business. All cases to be heard by the Board of Adjustment will always be heard by a minimum number of four (4) members. In the absence of the Chairperson and/or Vice- Chairperson the members constituting a quorum shall select, from the members present, a Chairperson to conduct the meeting. The members of the Board shall regularly attend meetings and public hearings of the Board and shall serve without compensation. 
4.  Authority of Board. The Board of Adjustment shall have the authority, subject to the standards established in Sections 211.008 to 211.011 of the Texas Local Government Code and those established herein, to exercise the following powers and perform the following duties: 
a.  Hear and decide an appeal that alleges error in an order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this Code; 
b.  Hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this Code when it requires the Board to do so; and 
c.  Authorize in specific cases a variance from the terms of the zoning portions of this Code, such as lot width, depth and building lines, if the variance is not contrary to the public interest and, due to special conditions, a literal enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this Code is observed and substantial justice is done. 
d.  In exercising its authority under Section 8.02 (C.4.a) above, the Board may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the administrative official's order, requirement, decision, or determination from which an appeal is taken and make the correct order, requirement, decision, or determination, and for that purpose the Board has the same authority as the administrative official. 
e.  Each case before the Board of Adjustment must be heard by at least seventy-five percent (75%) [four (4)] of the members. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board is necessary to: 
1)  Reverse an order, requirement, decision, or determination of an administrative official. 
2)  Decide in favor of an applicant on a matter on which the Board is required to pass under this Code. 
3)  Authorize a variation from the terms of this Code. 
f.  The Chairperson may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
5.  Limitations on Authority of Board. 
a.  The Board may not grant a variance authorizing a use other than those permitted in the district for which the variance is sought. 
b.  The Board shall have no power to grant or modify Specific Use Permits (SUP) authorized under Section 8.02 (F) of these regulations. 
c.  The Board shall have no power to grant a zoning amendment. In the event that a request for a zoning amendment is pending before the Planning and Zoning Commission or the City Council, the Board shall neither hear nor grant any variances with respect to the subject property until final disposition of the zoning amendment. 
d.  The Board shall not grant a variance for any parcel of property or portion thereof upon which a Site Plan, Preliminary Site Evaluation, or Final Plat if required by the City, has not been finally acted upon by both the Planning and Zoning Commission and, if required by the City, by the City Council. All administrative remedies available to the applicant shall have been exhausted prior to hearing by the Zoning Board of Adjustment. 
e.  The Board shall have no power to grant variances except to those established in Section 8.02 (C.4.c) in this Code. 
6.  Variances. 
a.  In order to grant a variance from these zoning regulations, the Board of Adjustment must make written findings that the variance relieves undue hardship, using the following criteria: 
1)  That literal enforcement of the controls will create an unnecessary hardship or practical difficulty in the development of the affected property; 
2)  That the situation causing the hardship or difficulty is neither self-imposed nor generally affecting all or most properties in the same zoning district; 
3)  That the relief sought will not injure the permitted use of adjacent conforming property; and 
4)  That the granting of a variance will be in harmony with the spirit and purpose of these regulations. 
b.  A variance shall not be granted to relieve a self-created or personal hardship, nor shall it be based solely on economic gain or loss, nor shall it permit any person a privilege in developing a parcel of land not permitted by this Code to other parcels of land in the particular zoning district. No variance may be granted which results in undue hardship on another parcel of land. 
c.  The applicant bears the burden of proof in establishing the facts justifying a variance. 
7.  Special Exceptions. 
a.  The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the authority to hear and allow special exceptions only for uses which are conforming but the building structure is not. 
b.  In granting a special exception, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall not authorize uses that are not allowed under the terms of this Code for the respective district. 
c.  A proof of hardship is not required for granting a special exception. 
d.  In granting a special exception, the Board shall not permit variances from the use district regulations which are not prevalent on other lots in the same zoning district. 
e.  The Board may consider special exceptions to the Development Standards contained in this section for single-family residential uses that do not require a plat or site plan approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission (P & Z) and City Council. 
8.  Procedures. 
a.  Application and Fee. An application for granting a variance by the Board of Adjustment, other than an appeal, shall be in writing using forms provided by the City and shall be accompanied by a fee. 
b.  Notice and Hearing. The Board of Adjustment shall hold a public hearing no later than forty-five (45) days after the date the application for action or an appeal is filed on each such application or appeal. Notice of a public hearing shall be provided to all property owners within two hundred feet (200') of the affected property ten (10) days prior to the public hearing. 
c.  Appeals. 
1)  An appeal may be taken from the decision of an administrative official by an applicant for the permit on which the decision is rendered, by any person or persons directly aggrieved by the decision or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the municipality affected by the decision. 
2)  The appellant must file with the Board and the official against whom the appeal is taken a written notice of appeal specifying the grounds for the appeal within fifteen (15) days after the decision has been rendered. The officer to whom the appeal is made shall forthwith transmit to the Board all papers constituting the record of the action that is appealed. 
3)  An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action that is appealed unless the official from whom the appeal is taken certified in writing to the Board that facts supporting the official's opinion that a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In that case, the proceedings may be stayed only by a restraining order granted by the Board or a court of record on application, after notice to the official, if due cause is shown. 
4)  The Board shall set a reasonable time for the appeal hearing and shall give public notice of the hearing and due notice to the parties. The appellant party may appear at the appeal hearing in person or by agent or attorney. 
5)  The Board shall decide the appeal within three (3) weeks after placement on its agenda after which time the request shall be deemed automatically approved. The Board may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the administrative official's order, requirement, decision, or determination from which an appeal is taken, and make the correct order, requirement, decision, or determination. 
a)  Vote Required for Board Decisions. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of an administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under these zoning regulations, or to effect any variance to the zoning regulations granted by the Board. 
b)  Judicial Review. Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by a decision of the Board of Adjustment, or any taxpayer, or any officer, department, or Board of the City may present to a court of record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition must be presented within ten (10) days after the date the decision is filed in the Board's office. 
D.  Changes and Amendments to All Zoning Ordinances and Districts and Administrative Procedures. 
1.  Declaration of Policy and Review Criteria. The City declares the enactment of these regulations governing the use and development of land, buildings, and structures as a measure necessary to the orderly development of the community. Therefore, no change shall be made in these regulations or in the boundaries of the zoning districts except: 
a.  To correct any error in the regulations or map; 
b.  To recognize changed or changing conditions or circumstances in a particular locality; 
c.  To recognize changes in technology, the style of living, or manner of conducting business; 
d.  To change the property to uses in accordance with the approved Master Plan; 
e.  In making a determination regarding a requested zoning change, the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall consider the following factors: 
1)  Whether the uses permitted by the proposed change will be appropriate in the immediate area concerned and their relationship to the general area and the City as a whole, and in compliance with the Future Land Use Plan. 
2)  Whether the proposed change is in accord with any existing or proposed plans for providing streets, water supply, sanitary sewers, and other utilities to the area, and shall note the findings. 
3)  The amount of vacant land currently classified for similar development in the vicinity and elsewhere in the City, and any special circumstances which may make a substantial part of such vacant land unavailable for development. 
4)  The recent rate at which land is being developed in the same zoning classification as the request, particularly in the vicinity of the proposed change. 
5)  How other areas designated for similar development will be, or are unlikely to be, affected if the proposed amendment is approved. 
6)  Any other factors which will substantially affect the health, safety, morals, or general welfare. 
2.  Authority to Amend Ordinance. 
a.  The City Council may from time to time, after receiving a final report thereon by the Planning and Zoning Commission and after public hearings required by law, amend, supplement, or change the regulations herein provided or the boundaries of the zoning districts specified on the Zoning Map. Any Ordinance regulations or Zoning District boundary amendment may be ordered for consideration by the City Council, be initiated by the Planning and Zoning Commission, or be requested by the owner of real property, or the authorized representative of an owner of real property. 
b.  Consideration for a change in any district boundary line or special zoning regulation may be initiated only with written consent of the property owner, or by the Planning and Zoning Commission, or City Council on its own motion when it finds that public benefit will be derived from consideration of such matter. In the event the ownership stated on an application and that shown on the City records are different, the applicant shall submit proof of ownership. 
c.  Each application for zoning or for an amendment or change to the existing provisions of this Code shall be made in writing on an application form available at the City, filed with the City and shall be accompanied by payment of the appropriate fee as established by the City of Keller, Texas and on file with the City Secretary. 
3.  Public Hearing and Notice. 
a.  Upon receipt of a complete written application for a change in a zoning classification (rezoning) or for an amendment to the existing provisions of this Code (text amendment), Community Development staff will set a date for a public hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
b.  Community Development staff shall prepare notice of the public hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with the notice provisions of Chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code. 
1)  For a change in zoning classification, written notice of the public hearing shall be sent to the independent school district with jurisdiction and each owner, as indicated by the most recently approved municipal tax roll, of real property within three hundred feet (300') of the property on which the change in classification is proposed. Written notice will also be sent to each property owner, as indicated by the most recently approved municipal tax roll, of the land for which the change in zoning classification is being proposed. Written opposition towards initiating the super-majority vote shall only be applicable to property owners receiving notice within the two hundred foot (200') distance in accordance with State law and Section 8.02 (D.6.e) of this Code. 
a)  For the purposes of this section, "most recently approved municipal tax roll" shall mean the annual supplemental tax roll from Tarrant Appraisal District (TAD) as amended by the most recent TAD monthly update. 
b)  The notice shall be sent not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of the public hearing. The notice may be served by its deposit in the municipality, properly addressed with postage paid, in the United States mail. 
2)  For an amendment to the existing provisions of this Code, notice of the public hearing shall be published in in the official newspaper of the City not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of the public hearing. 
c.  The City will place at least one sign on the property proposed to be rezoned. Such sign shall, if possible, be located adjacent to a public street. Such sign shall be erected on or before the first date of the first notice to property owners required by law. The City will remove the sign(s) immediately after final action by the City Council, or upon withdrawal of the request of the applicant, whichever comes first. The sign shall state the property posted is under consideration by the City for a zone change and shall contain the City telephone number and office to contact for specific information about hearing dates and the requested zoning action. The erection or continued maintenance of the sign shall not be deemed a condition precedent to the granting of any zone change or the holding of any public hearing. 
4.  Failure to Appear. Failure of the applicant or his representative to appear before the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council for more than one hearing without an approved delay by the Planning Manager shall constitute sufficient grounds for the Planning and Zoning Commission to table or deny the application. 
5.  Planning and Zoning Commission Consideration and Report. The Planning and Zoning Commission, after the public hearing is closed, shall prepare its report and recommendations on the proposed change stating its findings, its evaluation of the request and of the relationship of the request to the Master Plan. The Planning and Zoning Commission may defer its report for not more than ninety (90) days from the time it is posted on the agenda or until it has had an opportunity to consider other proposed changes which may have a direct bearing thereon unless a postponement is requested by the applicant. 
6.  City Council Consideration. 
a.  Applications Recommended for Approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission: Every application or proposal which is recommended favorable by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be automatically forwarded to the City Council for setting and holding of public hearing thereon. No change, however, shall become effective until after the adoption of an ordinance for same. 
b.  Applications Recommended for Denial by the Planning and Zoning Commission: When the Planning and Zoning Commission makes a recommendation that a proposal should be denied, the request, in its original form, shall be automatically placed on the City Council agenda, unless the request is withdrawn by the applicant. 
c.  Resubmission of Applications: A request which has been denied by the City Council may be resubmitted at any time for reconsideration by the City (a new filing fee must accompany the request). 
d.  City Council Hearing and Notice for Zoning Changes: Notice of the City Council public hearing shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of the City, stating the time and place of such hearing, which shall be at least fifteen (15) days after the date of publication. 
e.  Three-Fourths Vote: If a proposed change in zoning classification is protested by the owners of at least twenty percent (20%) of either the area of the lots or land covered by the proposed change or the area of the lots or land immediately adjoining the area covered by the proposed change and extending two hundred feet (200') from that area, the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths (3/4) of all members of the City Council is required to effect the change in zoning classification provided: 
1)  The protest is by/from property owners as described in 3.b.(1)(a) above. 
2)  The protest is written and signed by all persons listed as owners of the property as described in 3.b.(1)(a) above. 
3)  Written protests with signatures are submitted to the City of Keller Community Development department no later than 12:00 p.m. (noon) on the day of the City Council public hearing on the proposed change in zoning classification. 
7.  Final Approval and Ordinance Adoption. Upon approval of the zoning request by the City Council, the applicant shall submit a metes and bounds description of the property to the City for the preparation of the amending Ordinance. The amending Ordinance shall be approved at the time the City Council makes a decision to approve the request as submitted or with certain conditions. The amending Ordinance will not be approved until a correct property description has been prepared for the amending Ordinance. 
E.  Certificates of Occupancy and Compliance. 
1.  Certificates of Occupancy shall be required for any of the following: 
a.  Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected or structurally altered. 
b.  Change in use of an existing building to a use of a different classification. 
d.  Change in ownership or business within a building. 
No such use, or change of use, shall take place until a Certificate of Occupancy therefore shall have been issued by the Building Official or his/her agent. A fee shall be established by separate Ordinance. 
2.  Procedure for New or Altered Buildings: Written application for a Certificate of Occupancy for a new building or for an existing building which is to be altered shall be made at the same time as the application for the Building Permit for such building. Said Certificate shall be issued after the Public Services Director or his/her designee orders the building or structure inspected and finds no violations of the provisions of this Code or other regulations which are enforced by the Department of Public Services. Said Certificate shall be issued by the Public Services Director or his/her designee after the erection or alteration of such building or part thereof has been completed in conformity with the provisions of this Code. 
3.  Procedure for Vacant Land or a Change in Building Use: Written application for a Certificate of Occupancy for the use of vacant land, a change in the use of land or a change in the use of a building, or for a change from a nonconforming use to a conforming use, shall be made to said Planning Manager or his/her agent. If the proposed use is a conforming use, as herein provided, written application shall be made to said Planning Manager. If the proposed use is found to be in conformity with the provisions of this Code upon review of a site plan, the Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued after the application for same has been made and all required inspections are completed and approved by the Public Services Director or his/her designee. 
4.  Contents: Every Certificate of Occupancy shall contain the following: 
a.  A building permit number. 
b.  The address of the building. 
c.  The name and address of the owner. 
d.  A description of that portion of the building for which the Certificate is issued. 
e.  A statement that the described portion of the building has been inspected for compliance with the requirements of the adopted Building Codes. 
f.  Signature by the Building Official or his/her designee. 
5.  Temporary Certificate: If the Building Official finds that no substantial hazard will result from occupancy of any building or portion thereof before the same is completed, a temporary Certificate of Occupancy may be issued for a period not to exceed six (6) months, for the use of a portion or portions of a building or structure prior to the completion of the entire building or structure. Such temporary Certificate of Occupancy shall not be construed as in any way altering the respective rights, duties, or other obligations of the owners/tenants relating to the use or occupancy of the premises, or any other provision of this Code. 
6.  Posting: The Certificate of Occupancy shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises and shall not be removed except by the Building Official or his authorized agent. 
7.  Revocation: The Building Official may, in writing, suspend or revoke a Certificate of Occupancy or a building permit issued under the provisions of this Code whenever the permit or Certificate of Occupancy is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or when it is determined that the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of any Ordinance or regulation, or any of the provision of this Code, or the most current Building, Electrical, Mechanical, Fire, and Plumbing Codes. 
F.  SUP or "S" - Specific Use Permits. 
1.  Specific Uses. 
a.  The purpose of this district is to allow the consideration of certain uses in districts that under most circumstances would not be compatible with other permitted uses but with certain conditions and development restrictions may be compatible. 
b.  The City Council by an affirmative vote may, after public hearing and proper notice to all parties affected, and after recommendations from the Planning and Zoning Commission that the uses are in general conformance with the Master Plan and general objectives of the City and containing such requirements and safeguards as are necessary to protect adjoining property and health, safety, and general welfare of the population, authorize certain uses by a Specific Use Permit. 
c.  Application shall be accompanied by a written and Detailed Site Plan or Concept Plan as defined in this Code drawn to scale and showing the general arrangement of the project, together with essential requirements such as building elevations, site landscaping, off-street parking facilities; size, height, construction materials, and locations of buildings and the uses to be permitted; location and instruction of signs; means of ingress and egress to public streets; traffic study if needed, the type of visual screening such as walls, plantings and fences; and the relationship of the intended use to all existing properties and land uses in all directions. The Planning Manager, Planning and Zoning Commission, or City Council may require additional information or drawings (such as building floor plans or material sample), operating data and expert evaluation or testimony concerning the location, function, and characteristics of any building or use proposed. 
2.  Specific Use Permit Regulations. 
a.  In recommending that a Specific Use Permit for the premises under consideration be granted, the City shall determine that such uses are harmonious and adaptable to building structures and uses of abutting property and other property in the vicinity of the premises under consideration, and shall make recommendations as to requirements for the paving of streets, alleys and sidewalks, means of ingress and egress to public streets, provisions for drainage, adequate off-street parking, screening and open space, heights of structures, and compatibility of buildings. In approving a requested Specific Use Permit, the City Council may consider the following: 
1)  The use is harmonious and compatible with surrounding existing uses or proposed uses; 
2)  The activities requested by the applicant are normally associated with the permitted uses in the base district; 
3)  The nature of the use is reasonable and appropriate in the immediate area; 
4)  Any negative impact on the surrounding area has been mitigated; and 
5)  That any additional conditions specified ensure that the intent of the district purposes are being upheld. 
b.  In granting a Specific Use Permit, the City Council may impose conditions which shall be complied with by the owner or grantee before a certificate of occupancy may be issued by the Planning Manager for use of the building on such property pursuant to such Specific Use Permit and such conditions precedent to the granting of the certificate of occupancy. Any special conditions shall be set forth in writing by the City Council prior to issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy. 
c.  No Specific Use Permit shall be granted unless the applicant, owner and grantee of the Specific Use Permit shall be willing to accept and agree to be bound by and comply with the written requirements of the Specific Use Permit, as attached to the site plan drawing (or drawings) and reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the City Council. An SUP and/or Certificate of Occupancy may be revoked by the Planning Manager or Building Official if all SUP conditions are not complied with. 
d.  A Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy shall be applied for and secured within one (1) year from the time of granting the Specific Use Permit, provided however, that the City Council may authorize an extension. After one (1) year from the date of approval has elapsed, the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council may review the site plan for compliance. If the site plan is determined to be invalid, the property owner(s) must submit a new or revised site plan for approval prior to any construction or application for building permit for the area designated for the Specific Use Permit. If the use for which the SUP applies is not issued a building permit or certificate of occupancy within one year, the SUP will automatically expire. 
e.  No building, premise, or land used under a Specific Use Permit may be enlarged, modified, structurally altered, or otherwise significantly changed unless an amendment to the Specific Use Permit is granted for such enlargement, modification, structural alteration, or change. 
f.  The Board of Adjustment shall not have jurisdiction to hear, review, reverse, or modify any decision, determination, or ruling with respect to the specific land use designated by any Specific Use Permit. 
g.  When the City Council authorizes granting of a Specific Use Permit, the records shall be amended according to its legend to indicate that the affected area has conditional and limited uses. 
3.  Use Regulations - Uses permitted by SUP are specified in the base-zoning district. 
4.  Prior SUP Ordinances Remaining In Effect. Prior to adoption of this Code, the City Council had established various Specific Use Permits, some of which are to be continued in full force and effect. The permits or parts of permits approved prior to this Code specified in Article Nine shall be carried forth in full force and effect and are the conditions, restrictions, regulations, and requirements which apply to the respective Specific Use Permits as authorized within the approving Ordinance at the date of adoption of this Code. Any changes to an existing SUP shall be approved in accordance with the provisions of this Code.  
Section 8.03 - Zoning Districts 
A.  Zoning Districts Established. The City of Keller, Texas is hereby divided into the following zoning districts. The use, height and area regulations as set out herein apply to each district. The districts established herein shall be known as: 
Abbreviated Designation 	Zoning District Name 
Base Districts 	
SF-36 	Single-Family Residential - 36,000 square-foot lots 
SF-30 	Single-Family Residential - 30,000 square-foot lots 
SF-25 	Single-Family Residential - 25,000 square-foot lots 
SF-20 	Single-Family Residential - 20,000 square-foot lots 
SF-15 	Single-Family Residential - 15,000 square-foot lots 
SF-12 	Single-Family Residential - 12,000 square-foot lots 
SF-10 	Single-Family Residential - 10,000 square-foot lots 
SF-8.4 	Single-Family Residential - 8,400 square-foot lots 
2F 	Two-Family Residential (Townhome) 
MF 	Multi-Family Residential 
NS 	Neighborhood Service 
O 	Office 
R 	Retail 
TC 	Town Center OTK 
Old Town Keller 
Katy Road 	Katy Road District 
C 	Commercial 
IP 	Industrial Park 
LI 	Light Industrial 
FP 	Flex Space 
Overlay Districts 	
PD 	Planned Development (Prefix and Overlay District) 
SUP or S 	Specific Use Permit (Overlay District) 
U.S. Highway 377 North 	U.S. Highway 377 North of F.M. 1709 Overlay District 
 
B.  Use Regulations. The use of land and/or buildings shall be in accordance with those listed in each respective zoning district. No land or building shall hereafter be used and no building or structure shall be erected, altered, or converted other than for those specified in the zoning district in which it is located. 
1.  Classification of New/Unlisted Uses. It is recognized that new types of land use will develop and forms of land use not presently anticipated may seek to locate in the City of Keller. In order to provide for such changes and contingencies, a determination as to the appropriate classification of any new or unlisted form of land use in the Use Chart shall be made as follows: 
a.  Initiation. 
1)  A person, the Community Development Staff, the Planning and Zoning Commission, or City Council may propose zoning amendments to regulate new and previously unlisted uses. 
2)  A person requesting the addition of a new use shall submit to the Planning Manager all information necessary for the classification of the use, including but not limited to: 
a)  The nature of the use and whether the use involves dwelling activity, sales, services, or processing; 
b)  The type of product sold or produced under the use; 
c)  Whether the use has enclosed or open storage and the amount and nature of the storage; 
d)  Anticipated employment typically anticipated with the use; 
e)  Transportation requirements; 
f)  The nature and time of occupancy and operation of the premises; 
g)  The off-street parking and loading requirements; 
h)  The amount of noise, odor, fumes, dust, toxic materials, and vibration likely to be generated; and 
i)  The requirements for public utilities such as sanitary sewer and water and any special public services that may be required. 
b.  The Planning Manager shall refer the question concerning any new or unlisted use to the Planning and Zoning Commission requesting an interpretation as to the zoning classification into which such use should be placed. The referral of the use interpretation question shall be accompanied by the statement of facts listed in Section 8.03 (B.1.a) above. An amendment to this Code shall be required. 
c.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the nature and described performance of the proposed use and its compatibility with the uses permitted in the various districts and determine the zoning district or districts within which such use is most similar and should be permitted. 
d.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall transmit its findings and recommendations to the City Council as to the classification proposed for any new and unlisted use. The City Council shall approve or disapprove the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission or make such determination concerning the classification of such use as is determined appropriate based upon its findings. 
e.  Standards for new and unlisted uses may be interpreted by the Planning Manager as those of a similar use. When a determination of the appropriate zoning district cannot be readily ascertained, the same process outlined above shall be followed for determination of the appropriate district. The decision of the Planning Manager may be appealed according the process outlined in Sections 8.03 (B.1.a) through 8.03 (B.1.d) above. 
C.  SF-36: Single-Family Residential District - (36,000 sq. ft. Minimum). 
1.  General Purpose and Description. The SF-36, Single Family Residential District - 36,000 is intended to promote and encourage a suitable environment for family life on large parcels of land used for agricultural purposes and single-family homes. This District is intended to encourage more open space, permeable surfaces, and greater setbacks with characteristics of semi-rural areas. 
2.  Permitted Uses: 
a.  Those uses specified in this Section. 
b.  Single-family detached dwellings. 
c.  Farms, barns, livestock, nurseries, greenhouses, or gardens, limited to the propagation and cultivation of plants, provided no retail business is conducted on the premises except as provided under home occupation (see definition for Home Occupation). The property owner's privately owned horses, mules, donkeys and ponies shall not have a maximum number allowed on their property. The boarding or keeping of horses other than the owner's shall be a maximum of one (1) horse, mule, donkey or pony per acre not to exceed a total number of three (3). (See requirements for metal barns.) 
d.  Municipally-owned facilities and uses. 
e.  Real estate sales offices during the development of residential subdivisions in which the office is located until eighty percent (80%) of the building permits of the platted lots in the subdivision are issued. 
f.  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which said buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work or by order of the Building Official for non-compliance with the provisions of which the use was permitted. 
g.  Detached accessory buildings and uses, customarily incidental to the above uses and located on the same lot therewith, but not involving the conduct of a retail business, as follows: 
1)  A detached private garage or an attached private garage, used in conjunction with the main building at the time of construction of the dwelling unit, within the regulations of the parking section (see Section 8.07 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements) of this Code. 
2)  A maximum of two (2) detached accessory buildings are permitted on any lot/tract. Structures for agricultural purposes only, such as shade structures, one hundred twenty (120) square feet or less are are excluded from this maximum, but are included in consideration of maximum impervious coverage. The boarding or keeping of equine shall be a maximum of one (1) horse, mule, donkey or pony per acre. Accessory buildings one hundred twenty (120) square feet or less do not require a building permit but shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height and shall be a minimum of five feet (5') from the side and rear property lines. Accessory buildings greater than one hundred (120) square feet up to one-thousand two- hundred (1,200) square feet (including detached garage, workshop, pool house, etc.) are allowed with a building permit and must observe the setback requirements for the main structures. All accessory buildings greater than one- thousand two-hundred (1,200) square feet require a Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
3)  One antenna fifty feet (50') or less in height (amateur or CB radio) located in the rear yard. 
4)  Detached living quarters/accessory dwelling units shall only be considered by Specific Use Permit (SUP) and are required to be on a lot one-and-a-half (1.5) acres or larger. They may be used for domestic workers, as a guest house, as an in-law house (even with permanent residence), or as a temporary house while the main structure is built/renovated. 
5)  Private open space or other private recreational amenities as part of a residential subdivision and not for commercial purposes. 
6)  All accessory structures shall be constructed of materials complimentary to the main structure. 
h.  Swimming Pool (private). 
i.  Such uses as may be permitted under the provisions of a Specific Use Permits (SUP). 
3.  Height Regulations. 
Maximum Height - Two and one-half (2½) stories, not to exceed thirty-five feet (35') for the main building. For height requirements for accessory buildings, see Section 8.10 - Accessory Buildings and Use Regulations. Modified building heights may be imposed for properties of exceptional topograghy or necessary finished floor elevations to aid in screening when standard heights create a looming effect over a neighboring property. This determination will be made by the DRC. Decisions of the DRC may be appealed to the City Council for a final decision. 
4.  Area Regulations (see also Section 8.15 - Supplemental Regulations). 
a.  Size of Lots. 
1)  Minimum Lot Area - Thirty-six thousand (36,000) square feet. 
2)  Minimum Lot Width - One hundred forty feet (140'). 
3)  Minimum Lot Depth - Two hundred feet (200'). 
b.  Size of Yards. 
1)  Minimum Front Yard - Thirty-five feet (35'), one hundred feet (100') for agricultural structures without a main building, sixty feet (60') for residential buildings with access on a thoroughfare. 
2)  Minimum Side Yard - Ten percent (10%) of the lot width but not more than fifteen feet (15'); fifteen feet (15') from street right-of-way; twenty-five feet (25') from a thoroughfare right-of-way. 
3)  Minimum Rear Yard - Twenty feet (20') adjacent to an alley; fifteen feet (15') if no alley. 
Special exceptions for building setbacks may be made for properties of exceptional topograghy or necessary finished floor elevations to aid in screening when standard setbacks create a looming effect over a neighboring property. This determination will be made by the DRC. Decisions of the DRC may be appealed to the City Council for a final decision. 
c.  Maximum Lot Coverage - Thirty percent (30%) by main buildings; fifty percent (50%) including accessory buildings, driveways, and parking areas. (Amended by Ord. No. 1850 on July 18, 2017) 
d.  Parking Regulations. 
1)  A garage with a minimum capacity of two (2) cars shall be constructed on the same lot as the primary dwelling unit. The garage shall be maintained for parking and shall not be converted to living space. 
2)  Automobiles, motorcycles, pickup trucks, light load vehicles, recreational vehicles, and towed heavy load vehicles (trailers) may be parked anywhere within a lot provided they are parked on paved surfaces in accordance with Section 8.07 (B.2) of this Code or on gravel surfaces over compacted sub-grade except that light load and heavy load trailers and recreational vehicles shall be parked no closer than a distance of one-hundred feet (100') from the front street right-of-way. If covered by tarps or covers, automobiles, motorcycles, pickup trucks, and other self- propelled light load vehicles shall only be parked within side or rear yards. 
3)  Notwithstanding the locational criteria in 2) above, recreational vehicles may be temporarily parked on paved surfaces within one-hundred feet (100') of the front street right-of-way for loading and unloading and for guest stays. Loading and unloading time shall not exceed six (6) days. Guest stays shall not exceed twenty-eight (28) days in calender year. 
4)  Agricultural equipment and vehicles are permitted and such vehicles do not have to parked on paved surfaces; these vehicles may be parked anywhere within a lot on gravel, grass, or any other type of surface. 
5)  No self-propelled heavy load vehicle (see definition for Heavy Load Vehicle) shall be parked or stored overnight within the lot of any residential district. 
e.  Minimum Dwelling Unit Area - Two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet. 
5.  Special Requirements. 
a.  No permanent use of temporary dwellings, such as recreational vehicles, travel trailers, or mobile homes, may be used for on-site dwelling purposes unless approved by a Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
b.  Gravel driveways are permitted for properties one (1) acre in size and larger. 
c.  Electrical fencing and barbed wire is prohibited as perimeter fencing except for containment of farm animals on two (2) acres or larger. 
d.  Outside storage is prohibited (except for materials for the resident's personal use or consumption, i.e. firewood, garden materials, etc.) 
e.  Single-family homes with side entry garages have special setback requirements as established in Section 8.07 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. 
f.  Other Regulations - As established in Section 8.06 - Building Design and Development Standards. 
SF-36 Zoning District Use Table 
P = Permitted Uses 
SUP = May Be Approved as Special Use Permit 
Additional uses permitted only by Planned Development Districts are listed in Section 8.04(l) 
- = Not Permitted 
Use 	SUP or P 
Accessory building (detached) 1,200 sq. ft. or less 	P 
Accessory building (detached) in excess of 1,200 sq. ft 	SUP 
Accessory dwelling (detached) on lots 1.5 acres or larger 	SUP 
Amateur radio, TV, or CB antenna (50 ft. or less in height) 	P 
Antenna: radio, TV, relay, microwave, or telecommunications (over 50 ft.) 	SUP 
Assisted Living Facility (up to 6 residents) (Amended by Ord. No. 1809 on September 6, 2016) 	P 
Assisted Living Facility (7 or 8 residents) (Amended by Ord. No. 1809 on September 6, 2016) 	SUP 
Athletic stadium or field operated by the city or school district 	P 
Batching plant (temporary) 	Permit 
Cemetery or mausoleum (new or expansion) 	SUP 
Child Care (Center) 	SUP 
Child Care (Home-based) 	SUP 
Detached SF dwelling 	P 
Farm, ranch, livestock, garden, orchard 	P 
Group home 	SUP 
Home occupations 	P 
Kennel, indoor or outdoor pens 	SUP 
Mobile home on individual lot 	SUP 
Modular home 	P 
Offices, City, County, State, and Other Governmental 	P 
Private park 	P 
Private street residential development (gated subdivision) 	PD 
Public park or playground 	P 
Religious institution 	P 
School, Private 	SUP 
School, Public 	P 
Stable (commercial) on two (2) acres or more 	SUP 
Stable (private) 	P 
Temporary field construction office 	P 
Tourist home (bed and breakfast) 	SUP 
Utility structures/sub-stations (Private or Franchised) 	SUP 
Utility structures/sub-stations (Public) 	P 
Wind Turbines 	SUP 
 
D.  SF-30: Single-Family Residential District - (30,000 sq. ft. Minimum). 
1.  General Purpose and Description. The SF-30, Single Family Residential District - 30,000 is intended to provide for development of single-family detached dwelling units on lots of not less than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet. Other uses, such as religious and educational facilities, and open spaces, will be provided for to maintain a balanced, orderly, convenient, and attractive residential area. 
2.  Permitted Uses. 
a.  Those uses specified in this Section. 
b.  Single-family detached dwellings. 
c.  Municipally-owned facilities and uses. 
d.  Real estate sales offices during the development of residential subdivisions in which the office is located until eighty percent (80%) of the building permits of the platted lots in the subdivision are issued. 
e.  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which said buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work or by order of the Building Official for non-compliance with the provisions of which the use was permitted. 
f.  Detached accessory buildings and uses, customarily incidental to the above uses and located on the same lot therewith, but not involving the conduct of a retail business, as follows: 
1)  A detached private garage or an attached private garage, used in conjunction with the main building at the time of construction of the dwelling unit, within the regulations of the parking section (see Section 8.07 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements) of this Code. 
2)  A maximum of two (2) detached accessory buildings are permitted on any lot/tract. Structures for agricultural purposes only, such as shade structures, one hundred twenty (120) square feet or less are are excluded from this maximum, but are included in consideration of maximum impervious coverage. The boarding or keeping of equine shall be a maximum of one (1) horse, mule, donkey or pony per acre. Accessory buildings one hundred twenty (120) square feet or less do not require a building permit but shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height and shall be a minimum of five feet (5') from the side and rear property lines. Accessory buildings greater than one hundred (120) square feet up to one-thousand (1,000) square feet (including detached garage, workshop, pool house, etc.) are allowed with a building permit and must observe the setback requirements for the main structures. All accessory buildings greater than one-thousand (1,000) square feet require a Specific Use Permit (SUP). All accessory structures shall be constructed of materials complimentary to the main structure. 
3)  One antenna fifty feet (50') or less in height (amateur or CB radio) located in the rear yard. 
4)  Accessory dwelling units may be used for domestic workers, as a guest house, as an in-law house (even with permanent residence), or as a temporary house while the main structure is built/renovated. 
5)  Private open space or other private recreational amenities as part of a residential subdivision and not for commercial purposes. 
g.  Swimming Pool (private). 
h.  Such uses as may be permitted under the provisions of Specific Use Permits (SUP). 
3.  Height Regulations. 
Maximum Height - Two and one-half (2½) stories, not to exceed thirty-five feet (35') for the main building. For height requirements for accessory buildings, see Section 8.10 - Accessory Buildings and Use Regulations. Special exceptions for building heights may be made for properties of exceptional topograghy or necessary finished floor elevations to aid in screening when standard heights create a looming effect over a neighboring property. This determination will be made by the DRC. Decisions of the DRC may be appealed to the City Council for a final decision. 
4.  Area Regulations (see also Section 8.15 - Supplemental Regulations). 
a.  Size of Lots. 
1)  Minimum Lot Area - Thirty thousand (30,000) square feet. 
2)  Minimum Lot Width - One hundred forty feet (140'). 
3)  Minimum Lot Depth - Two hundred feet (200'). 
b.  Size of Yards. 
1)  Minimum Front Yard - Thirty-five feet (35'), sixty feet (60') for residential buildings with access on a thoroughfare. 
2)  Minimum Side Yard - Ten percent (10%) of the lot width but not more than fifteen feet (15'); fifteen feet (15') from street right-of-way; twenty-five feet (25') from a thoroughfare right-of-way. 
3)  Minimum Rear Yard - Twenty feet (20') adjacent to an alley; fifteen feet (15') if no alley. 
Special exceptions for building setbacks may be made for properties of exceptional topograghy or necessary finished floor elevations to aid in screening when standard setbacks create a looming effect over a neighboring property. This determination will be made by the DRC. Decisions of the DRC may be appealed to the City Council for a final decision. 
c.  Maximum Lot Coverage - Thirty percent (30%) by main buildings; fifty percent (50%) including accessory buildings, driveways, and parking areas. (Amended by Ord. No. 1850 on July 18, 2017) 
d.  Parking Regulations. 
1)  A garage with a minimum capacity of two (2) cars shall be constructed on the same lot as the primary dwelling unit. The garage shall be maintained for parking and shall not be converted to living space. 
2)  Automobiles, motorcycles, pickup trucks, and other self-propelled light load vehicles may be parked anywhere within a lot provided they are parked on paved surfaces in accordance with Section 8.07 (B.2) of this Code. If covered by tarps or covers, automobiles, motorcycles, pickup trucks, and other self-propelled light load vehicles shall only be parked within side or rear yards on paved surfaces. Towed light load vehicles (trailers) and recreational vehicles shall only be parked within side or rear yards on paved surfaces in accordance with Section 8.07 (B.2) of this Code. 
3)  Notwithstanding the locational criteria in 2) above, recreational vehicles may be temporarily parked on paved surfaces within front yards for loading and unloading and for guest stays. Loading and unloading time shall not exceed six (6) days. Guest stays shall not exceed twenty-eight (28) days in calender year. 
4)  No heavy load vehicle (see definition for Heavy Load Vehicle) shall be parked or stored overnight within the lot of any residential district. 
e.  Minimum Dwelling Unit Area - Two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet. 
5.  Special Requirements. 
a.  No permanent use of temporary dwellings, such as recreational vehicles, travel trailers, or mobile homes, may be used for on-site dwelling purposes unless approved by a Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
b.  Electrical fencing and barbed wire is prohibited as perimeter fencing except for containment of farm animals on two (2) acres or larger. 
c.  Outside storage is prohibited (except for materials for the resident's personal use or consumption, i.e. firewood, garden materials, etc.). 
d.  Single-family homes with side entry garages have special setback requirements as established in Section 8.07 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. 
e.  Other Regulations - As established in Article 8.06 - Building Design and Development Standards. 
SF-30 Zoning District Use Table 
P = Permitted Uses 
SUP = May Be Approved as Special Use Permit 
Additional uses permitted only by Planned Development Districts are listed in Section 8.04(l) 
- = Not Permitted 
Use 	SUP or P 
Accessory building (detached) 1,000 sq. ft. or less 	P 
Accessory building (detached) in excess of 1,000 sq. ft 	SUP 
Accessory dwelling (detached) on lots 1.5 acres or larger 	SUP 
Amateur radio, TV, or CB antenna (50 ft. or less in height) 	P 
Antenna: radio, TV, relay, microwave, or telecommunications (over 50 ft.) 	SUP 
Assisted Living Facility (up to 6 residents) (Amended by Ord. No. 1809 on September 6, 2016) 	P 
Assisted Living Facility (7 or 8 residents) (Amended by Ord. No. 1809 on September 6, 2016) 	SUP 
Athletic stadium or field operated by the city or school district 	P 
Batching plant (temporary) 	Permit 
Cemetery or mausoleum (new or expansion) 	SUP 
Child Care (Center) 	SUP 
Child Care (Home-based) 	SUP 
Detached SF dwelling 	P 
Farm, ranch, livestock, garden, orchard 	P 
Group home 	SUP 
Home occupations 	P 
Kennel, indoor or outdoor pens 	SUP 
Mobile home on individual lot 	SUP 
Modular home 	P 
Offices, City, County, State, and Other Governmental 	P 
Private park 	P 
Private street residential development (gated subdivision) 	PD 
Public park or playground 	P 
Religious institution 	P 
School, Private 	SUP 
School, Public 	P 
Temporary field construction office 	P 
Tourist home (bed and breakfast) 	SUP 
Utility structures/sub-stations (Private or Franchised) 	SUP 
Utility structures/sub-stations (Public) 	P 
Wind Turbines 	SUP 
 
E.  SF-25: Single-Family Residential District - (25,000 sq. ft. Minimum). 
1.  General Purpose and Description. The SF-25, Single Family Residential District - 25,000 is intended to provide for development of single-family detached dwelling units on lots of not less than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet. Other uses, such as religious and educational facilities, and open spaces, will be provided for to maintain a balanced, orderly, convenient, and attractive residential area. 
2.  Permitted Uses. 
a.  Those uses specified in this Section. 
b.  Single-family detached dwellings. 
c.  Municipally-owned facilities and uses. 
d.  Real estate sales offices during the development of residential subdivisions in which the office is located until eighty percent (80%) of the building permits of the platted lots in the subdivision are issued. 
e.  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which said buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work or by order of the Building Official for non-compliance with the provisions of which the use was permitted. 
f.  Detached accessory buildings and uses, customarily incidental to the above uses and located on the same lot therewith, but not involving the conduct of a retail business, as follows: 
1)  A detached private garage or an attached private garage, used in conjunction with the main building at the time of construction of the dwelling unit, within the regulations of the parking section (see Section 8.07 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements) of this Code. 
2)  A maximum of two (2) detached accessory buildings are permitted on any lot/tract. Accessory buildings one hundred twenty (120) square feet or less do not require a building permit but shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height and shall be a minimum of five feet (5') from the side and rear property lines. Accessory buildings greater than one hundred (120) square feet up to one-thousand (1,000) square feet (including detached garage, workshop, pool house, etc.) are allowed with a building permit. All accessory buildings greater than one-thousand (1,000) square feet require a Specific Use Permit (SUP). All accessory structures shall be constructed of materials complimentary to the main structure. 
3)  One antenna fifty feet (50') or less in height (amateur or CB radio) located in the rear yard. 
4)  Accessory dwelling units may be used for domestic workers, as a guest house, as an in-law house (even with permanent residence), or as a temporary house while the main structure is built/renovated. 
5)  Private open space or other private recreational amenities as part of a residential subdivision and not for commercial purposes. 
g.  Swimming Pool (private). 
h.  Such uses as may be permitted under the provisions of Specific Use Permits (SUP). 
3.  Height Regulations. 
Maximum Height - Two and one-half (2½) stories, not to exceed thirty-five feet (35') for the main building. For height requirements for accessory buildings, see Section 8.10 - Accessory Buildings and Use Regulations. Special exceptions for building height may be made for properties of exceptional topograghy or necessary finished floor elevations to aid in screening when standard heights create a looming effect over a neighboring property. This determination will be made by the DRC. Decisions of the DRC may be appealed to the City Council for a final decision. 
4.  Area Regulations (see also Section 8.15 - Supplemental Regulations). 
a.  Size of Lots. 
1)  Minimum Lot Area - Twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet. 
2)  Minimum Lot Width - One hundred twenty feet (120'). 
3)  Minimum Lot Depth - One hundred fifty feet (150'). 
b.  Size of Yards. 
1)  Minimum Front Yard - Thirty-five feet (35'), sixty feet (60') for residential buildings with access on a thoroughfare. 
2)  Minimum Side Yard - Ten percent (10%) of the lot width but no more than fifteen feet (15'); fifteen feet (15') from street right-of-way; twenty-five feet (25') from a thoroughfare right-of-way. 
3)  Minimum Rear Yard - Twenty feet (20') adjacent to an alley; fifteen feet (15') if no alley. 
Special exceptions for building setbacks may be made for properties of exceptional topograghy or necessary finished floor elevations to aid in screening when standard setbacks create a looming effect over a neighboring property. This determination will be made by the DRC. Decisions of the DRC may be appealed to the City Council for a final decision. 
c.  Maximum Lot Coverage - Thirty percent (30%) by main buildings, fifty percent (50%) including accessory buildings, driveways, and parking areas. (Amended by Ord. No. 1850 on July 18, 2017) 
d.  Parking Regulations. 
1)  A garage with a minimum capacity of two (2) cars shall be constructed on the same lot as the primary dwelling unit. The garage shall be maintained for parking and shall not be converted to living space. 
2)  Automobiles, motorcycles, pickup trucks, and other self-propelled light load vehicles may be parked anywhere within a lot provided they are parked on paved surfaces in accordance with Section 8.07 (B.2) of this Code. If covered by tarps or covers, automobiles, motorcycles, pickup trucks, and other self-propelled light load vehicles shall only be parked within side or rear yards on paved surfaces. Towed light load vehicles (trailers) and recreational vehicles shall only be parked within side or rear yards on paved surfaces in accordance with Section 8.07 (B.2) of this Code. 
3)  Notwithstanding the locational criteria in 2) above, recreational vehicles may be temporarily parked on paved surfaces within front yards for loading and unloading and for guest stays. Loading and unloading time shall not exceed six (6) days. Guest stays shall not exceed twenty-eight (28) days in calender year. 
4)  No heavy load vehicle (see definition for Heavy Load Vehicle) shall be parked or stored overnight within the lot of any residential district. 
e.  Minimum Dwelling Unit Area - Two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet. 
5.  Special Requirements. 
a.  No permanent use of temporary dwellings, such as recreational vehicles, travel trailers, or mobile homes, may be used for on-site dwelling purposes unless approved by a Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
b.  Electrical fencing and barbed wire is prohibited as perimeter fencing except for containment of farm animals on two (2) acres or larger. 
c.  Open storage is prohibited (except for materials for the resident's personal use or consumption, i.e. firewood, gardening materials, etc.). 
d.  Single-family homes with side entry garages have special setback requirements as established in Section 8.07 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. 
e.  Other Regulations - As established in Section 8.06 - Building Design and Development Standards. 
SF-25 Zoning District Use Table 
P = Permitted Uses 
SUP = May Be Approved as Special Use Permit 
Additional uses permitted only by Planned Development Districts are listed in Section 8.04(l) 
- = Not Permitted 
Use 	SUP or P 
Accessory building (detached) 1,000 sq. ft. or less 	P 
Accessory building (detached) in excess of 1,000 sq. ft 	SUP 
Accessory dwelling (detached) on lots 1.5 acres or larger 	SUP 
Amateur radio, TV, or CB antenna (50 ft. or less in height) 	P 
Antenna: radio, TV, relay, microwave, or telecommunications (over 50 ft.) 	SUP 
Assisted Living Facility (up to 6 residents) (Amended by Ord. No. 1809 on September 6, 2016) 	P 
Assisted Living Facility (7 or 8 residents) (Amended by Ord. No. 1809 on September 6, 2016) 	SUP 
Athletic stadium or field operated by the city or school district 	P 
Batching plant (temporary) 	Permit 
Cemetery or mausoleum (new or expansion) 	SUP 
Child Care (Center) 	SUP 
Child Care (Home-based) 	SUP 
Detached SF dwelling 	P 
Farm, ranch, livestock, garden, orchard 	P 
Group home 	SUP 
Home occupations 	P 
Kennel, indoor or outdoor pens 	SUP 
Mobile home on individual lot 	SUP 
Modular home 	P 
Offices, City, County, State, and Other Governmental 	P 
Private park 	P 
Private street residential development (gated subdivision) 	PD 
Public park or playground 	P 
Religious institution 	P 
School, Private 	SUP 
School, Public 	P 
Temporary field construction office 	P 
Tourist home (bed and breakfast) 	SUP 
Utility structures/sub-stations (Private or Franchised) 	SUP 
Utility structures/sub-stations (Public) 	P 
Wind Turbines 	SUP 
 
F.  SF-20: Single-Family Residential District - (20,000 sq. ft. Minimum). 
1.  General Purpose and Description. The SF-20, Single-Family Residential District - 20,000 is intended to provide for development of single-family detached dwelling units on lots of not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. Other uses, such as religious and educational facilities, and open spaces, will be provided for to maintain a balanced, orderly, convenient and attractive residential area. 
2.  Permitted Uses. 
a.  Those uses specified in this Section. 
b.  Single-family detached dwellings. 
c.  Municipally-owned facilities and uses. 
d.  Real estate sales offices during the development of residential subdivisions in which the office is located until eighty percent (80%) of the building permits of the platted lots in the subdivision are issued. 
e.  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which said buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work or by order of the Building Official for non-compliance with the provisions of which the use was permitted. 
f.  Detached accessory buildings and uses, customarily incidental to the above uses and located on the same lot therewith, but not involving the conduct of a retail business, as follows: 
1)  A detached private garage or an attached private garage, used in conjunction with the main building at the time of construction of the dwelling unit, within the regulations of the parking section (see Section 8.07 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements) of this Code. 
2)  A maximum of two (2) detached accessory buildings are permitted on any lot/tract. Accessory buildings one hundred twenty (120) square feet or less do not require a building permit but shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height and shall be a minimum of five feet (5') from the side and rear property lines. Accessory buildings greater than one hundred (120) square feet up to one-thousand (1,000) square feet (including detached garage, workshop, pool house, etc.) are allowed with a building permit. All accessory buildings greater than one-thousand (1,000) square feet require a Specific Use Permit (SUP). All accessory structures shall be constructed of materials complimentary to the main structure. 
3)  One antenna fifty feet (50') or less in height (amateur or CB radio) located in the rear yard. 
4)  Accessory dwelling units may be used for domestic workers, as a guest house, as an in-law house (even with permanent residence), or as a temporary house while the main structure is built/renovated. 
5)  Private open space or other private recreational amenities as part of a residential subdivision and not for commercial purposes. 
g.  Swimming Pool (private). 
h.  Such uses as may be permitted under the provisions of Specific Use Permits (SUP). 
3.  Height Regulations. 
Maximum Height - Two and one-half (2½) stories, not to exceed thirty-five feet (35') for the main building. For height requirements for accessory buildings, see Section 8.10 - Accessory Buildings and Use Regulations. Special exceptions for building heights may be made for properties of exceptional topograghy or necessary finished floor elevations to aid in screening when standard heights create a looming effect over a neighboring property. This determination will be made by the DRC. Decisions of the DRC may be appealed to the City Council for a final decision. 
4.  Area Regulations (see also Section 8.15 - Supplemental Regulations). 
a.  Size of Lots. 
1)  Minimum Lot Area - Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
2)  Minimum Lot Width - One hundred twenty feet (120'). 
3)  Minimum Lot Depth - One hundred fifty feet (150') 
b.  Size of Yards. 
1)  Minimum Front Yard - Thirty-five feet (35'), sixty feet (60') for residential buildings with access on a thoroughfare. 
2)  Minimum Side Yard - Ten percent (10%) of the lot width but no more than fifteen feet (15'); fifteen feet (15') from street right-of-way; twenty feet (20') from a thoroughfare right-of-way. 
3)  Minimum Rear Yard - Twenty feet (20') adjacent to an alley; fifteen feet (15') if no alley. 
Special exceptions for building setbacks may be made for properties of exceptional topograghy or necessary finished floor elevations to aid in screening when standard setbacks create a looming effect over a neighboring property. This determination will be made by the DRC. Decisions of the DRC may be appealed to the City Council for a final decision. 
c.  Maximum Lot Coverage - Thirty percent (30%) by main buildings; fifty percent (50%) including accessory buildings, driveways, and parking areas. (Amended by Ord. No. 1850 on July 18, 2017) 
d.  Parking Regulations. 
1)  A garage with a minimum capacity of two (2) cars shall be constructed on the same lot as the primary dwelling unit. The garage shall be maintained for parking and shall not be converted to living space. 
2)  Automobiles, motorcycles, pickup trucks, and other self-propelled light load vehicles may be parked anywhere within a lot provided they are parked on paved surfaces in accordance with Section 8.07 (B.2) of this Code. If covered by tarps or covers, automobiles, motorcycles, pickup trucks, and other self-propelled light load vehicles shall only be parked within side or rear yards on paved surfaces. Towed light load vehicles (trailers) and recreational vehicles shall only be parked within side or rear yards on paved surfaces in accordance with Section 8.07 (B.2) of this Code. 
3)  Notwithstanding the locational criteria in 2) above, recreational vehicles may be temporarily parked on paved surfaces within front yards for loading and unloading and for guest stays. Loading and unloading time shall not exceed six (6) days. Guest stays shall not exceed twenty-eight (28) days in calender year. 
4)  No heavy load vehicle (see definition for Heavy Load Vehicle) shall be parked or stored overnight within the lot of any residential district. 
e.  Minimum Dwelling Unit Area - Two thousand two hundred (2,200) square feet. 
5.  Special Requirements. 
a.  No permanent use of temporary dwellings, such as recreational vehicles, travel trailers or mobile homes, may be used for on-site dwelling purposes unless approved by a Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
b.  Electrical fencing and barbed wire is prohibited as perimeter fencing except for containment of farm animals on two (2) acres or larger. 
c.  Open storage is prohibited (except for materials for the resident's personal use or consumption, i.e. firewood, gardening materials, etc.). 
d.  Single-family homes with side entry garages have special setback requirements as established in Section 8.07 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. 
e.  Other Regulations - As established in Section 8.06 - Building Design and Development Standards. 
SF-20 Zoning District Use Table 
P = Permitted Uses 
SUP = May Be Approved as Special Use Permit 
Additional uses permitted only by Planned Development Districts are listed in Section 8.04(l) 
- = Not Permitted 
Use 	SUP or P 
Accessory building (detached) 1,000 sq. ft. or less 	P 
Accessory building (detached) in excess of 1,000 sq. ft 	SUP 
Accessory dwelling (detached) on lots 1.5 acres or larger 	SUP 
Amateur radio, TV, or CB antenna (50 ft. or less in height) 	P 
Antenna: radio, TV, relay, microwave, or telecommunications (over 50 ft.) 	SUP 
Assisted Living Facility (up to 6 residents) (Amended by Ord. No. 1809 on September 6, 2016) 	P 
Assisted Living Facility (7 or 8 residents) (Amended by Ord. No. 1809 on September 6, 2016) 	SUP 
Athletic stadium or field operated by the city or school district 	P 
Batching plant (temporary) 	Permit 
Cemetery or mausoleum (new or expansion) 	SUP 
Child Care (Center) 	SUP 
Child Care (Home-based) 	SUP 
Detached SF dwelling 	P 
Farm, ranch, livestock, garden, orchard 	P 
Group home 	SUP 
Home occupations 	P 
Kennel, indoor or outdoor pens 	SUP 
Mobile home on individual lot 	SUP 
Modular home 	P 
Offices, City, County, State, and Other Governmental 	P 
Private park 	P 
Private street residential development (gated subdivision) 	PD 
Public park or playground 	P 
Religious institution 	P 
School, Private 	SUP 
School, Public 	P 
Temporary field construction office 	P 
Tourist home (bed and breakfast) 	SUP 
Utility structures/sub-stations (Private or Franchised) 	SUP 
Utility structures/sub-stations (Public) 	P 
Wind Turbines 	SUP 
 
G.  SF-15: Single-Family Residential District - (15,000 sq. ft. Minimum). 
1.  General Purpose and Description. The SF-15, Single-Family Residential District - 15,000 is intended to be similar to the SF-20 except composed of detached, single family residences on lots of not less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. 
2.  Permitted Uses. 
a.  Those uses specified in this Section. 
b.  Single-family detached dwellings. 
c.  Municipally-owned facilities and uses. 
d.  Real estate sales offices during the development of residential subdivisions in which the office is located until eighty percent (80%) of the building permits of the platted lots in the subdivision are issued. 
e.  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which said buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work or by order of the Building Official for non-compliance with the provisions of which the use was permitted. 
f.  Detached accessory buildings and uses, customarily incidental to the above uses and located on the same lot therewith, but not involving the conduct of a retail business, as follows: 
1)  A detached private garage or an attached private garage, used in conjunction with the main building at the time of construction of the dwelling unit, within the regulations of the parking section (see Section 8.07 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements) of this Code. 
2)  A maximum of two (2) detached accessory buildings are permitted on any lot/tract. Accessory buildings one hundred twenty (120) square feet or less do not require a building permit but shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height and shall be a minimum of five feet (5') from the side and rear property lines. Accessory buildings greater than one hundred (120) square feet up to eight hundred (800) square feet (including detached garage, workshop, pool house, etc.) are allowed with a building permit. All accessory buildings greater than eight hundred (800) square feet require a Specific Use Permit (SUP). All accessory structures shall be constructed of materials complimentary to the main structure. 
3)  One antenna fifty feet (50') or less in height (amateur or CB radio) located in the rear yard. 
4)  Accessory dwelling units may be used for domestic workers, as a guest house, as an in-law house (even with permanent residence), or as a temporary house while the main structure is built/renovated. 
5)  Private open space or other private recreational amenities as part of a residential subdivision and not for commercial purposes. 
g.  Swimming Pool (private). 
h.  Such uses as may be permitted under the provisions of Specific Use Permits (SUP). 
3.  Height Regulations. 
Maximum Height - Two and one-half (2½) stories, not to exceed thirty-five feet (35') for the main building. For height requirements for accessory buildings, see Section 8.10 - Accessory Buildings and Use Regulations. Special exceptions for building heights may be made for properties of exceptional topograghy or necessary finished floor elevations to aid in screening when standard heights create a looming effect over a neighboring property. This determination will be made by the DRC. Decisions of the DRC may be appealed to the City Council for a final decision. 
4.  Area Regulations (see also Section 8.15 - Supplemental Regulations). 
a.  Size of Lots. 
1)  Minimum Lot Area - Fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. 
2)  Minimum Lot Width - One hundred five feet (105'). 
3)  Minimum Lot Depth - One hundred twenty-five feet (125'). 
b.  Size of Yards. 
1)  Minimum Front Yard - Thirty feet (30'), sixty feet (60') for residential buildings with access on a thoroughfare. 
2)  Minimum Side Yard - Ten percent (10%) of the lot width but no more than fifteen feet (15') required; fifteen feet (15') on corner lots adjacent to a street, twenty feet (20') adjacent to thoroughfare. 
3)  Minimum Rear Yard - Twenty feet (20') adjacent to an alley; fifteen feet (15') if no alley exists. 
Special exceptions for building setbacks may be made for properties of exceptional topograghy or necessary finished floor elevations to aid in screening when standard setbacks create a looming effect over a neighboring property. This determination will be made by the DRC. Decisions of the DRC may be appealed to the City Council for a final decision. 
c.  Maximum Lot Coverage - Thirty-five percent (35%) by main buildings; fifty percent (50%) including accessory buildings, driveways, and parking areas. (Amended by Ord. No. 1850 on July 18, 2017) 
d.  Parking Regulations. 
1)  A garage with a minimum capacity of two (2) cars shall be constructed on the same lot as the primary dwelling unit. The garage shall be maintained for parking and shall not be converted to living space. 
2)  Automobiles, motorcycles, pickup trucks, and other self-propelled light load vehicles may be parked anywhere within a lot provided they are parked on paved surfaces in accordance with Section 8.07 (B.2) of this Code. If covered by tarps or covers, automobiles, motorcycles, pickup trucks, and other self-propelled light load vehicles shall only be parked within side or rear yards on paved surfaces. Towed light load vehicles (trailers) and recreational vehicles shall only be parked within side or rear yards on paved surfaces in accordance with Section 8.07 (B.2) of this Code. 
3)  Notwithstanding the locational criteria in 2) above, recreational vehicles may be temporarily parked on paved surfaces within front yards for loading and unloading and for guest stays. Loading and unloading time shall not exceed six (6) days. Guest stays shall not exceed twenty-eight (28) days in calender year. 
4)  No heavy load vehicle (see definition for Heavy Load Vehicle) shall be parked or stored overnight within the lot of any residential district. 
e.  Minimum Dwelling Unit Area - Two thousand (2,000) square feet. 
5.  Special Requirements. 
a.  No permanent use of temporary dwellings, such as recreational vehicles, travel trailers, or mobile homes, may be used for on-site dwelling purposes unless approved by a Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
b.  Electrical fencing and barbed wire is prohibited as perimeter fencing except for containment of farm animals on two (2) acres or larger. 
c.  Open storage is prohibited (except for materials for the residents personal use or consumption i.e. firewood, gardening materials, etc.). 
d.  Single-family homes with side entry garages have special setback requirements as established in Section 8.07 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. 
e.  Other Regulations - As established in Section 8.06 - Building Design and Development Standards. 
SF-15 Zoning District Use Table 
P = Permitted Uses 
SUP = May Be Approved as Special Use Permit 
Additional uses permitted only by Planned Development Districts are listed in Section 8.04(l) 
- = Not Permitted 
Use 	SUP or P 
Accessory building (detached) 800 sq. ft. or less 	P 
Accessory building (detached) in excess of 800 sq. ft 	SUP 
Accessory dwelling (detached) on lots 1.5 acres or larger 	SUP 
Amateur radio, TV, or CB antenna (50 ft. or less in height) 	P 
Antenna: radio, TV, relay, microwave, or telecommunications (over 50 ft.) 	SUP 
Assisted Living Facility (up to 6 residents) (Amended by Ord. No. 1809 on September 6, 2016) 	P 
Assisted Living Facility (7 or 8 residents) (Amended by Ord. No. 1809 on September 6, 2016) 	SUP 
Athletic stadium or field operated by the city or school district 	P 
Batching plant (temporary) 	Permit 
Cemetery or mausoleum (new or expansion) 	SUP 
Child Care (Center) 	SUP 
Child Care (Home-based) 	SUP 
Detached SF dwelling 	P 
Farm, ranch, livestock, garden, orchard 	P 
Group home 	SUP 
Home occupations 	P 
Kennel, indoor or outdoor pens 	SUP 
Mobile home on individual lot 	SUP 
Modular home 	P 
Offices, City, County, State, and Other Governmental 	P 
Private park 	P 
Private street residential development (gated subdivision) 	PD 
Public park or playground 	P 
Religious institution 	P 
School, Private 	SUP 
School, Public 	P 
Temporary field construction office 	P 
Tourist home (bed and breakfast) 	SUP 
Utility structures/sub-stations (Private or Franchised) 	SUP 
Utility structures/sub-stations (Public) 	P 
Wind Turbines 	SUP 
 
H.  SF-12: Single-Family Residential District - (12,000 sq. ft. Minimum). 
1.  General Purpose and Description. The SF-12 Single Family Residential District - 12,000 is intended to be similar to the SF-15 except composed of detached, single family residences on lots of not less than twelve thousand (12,000) square feet. 
2.  Permitted Uses. 
a.  Those uses specified in this Section. 
b.  Single-family detached dwellings. 
c.  Municipally-owned facilities and uses. 
d.  Real estate sales offices during the development of residential subdivisions in which the office is located until eighty percent (80%) of the building permits of the platted lots in the subdivision are issued. 
e.  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which said buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work or by order of the Building Official for non-compliance with the provisions of which the use was permitted. 
f.  Detached accessory buildings and uses, customarily incidental to the above uses and located on the same lot therewith, but not involving the conduct of a retail business, as follows: 
1)  A detached private garage or an attached private garage, used in conjunction with the main building at the time of construction of the dwelling unit, within the regulations of the parking section (see Section 8.07 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements) of this Code. 
2)  A maximum of two (2) detached accessory buildings are permitted on any lot/tract. Accessory buildings one hundred twenty (120) square feet or less do not require a building permit but shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height and shall be a minimum of five feet (5') from the side and rear property lines. Accessory buildings greater than one hundred (120) square feet up to seven hundred fifty (750) square feet (including detached garage, workshop, pool house, etc.) are allowed with a building permit. All accessory buildings greater seven hundred fifty (750) square feet require a Specific Use Permit (SUP). All accessory structures shall be constructed of materials complimentary to the main structure. 
3)  One antenna fifty feet (50') or less in height (amateur or CB radio) located in the rear yard. 
4)  Accessory dwelling units may be used for domestic workers, as a guest house, as an in-law house (even with permanent residence), or as a temporary house while the main structure is built/renovated. 
5)  Private open space or other private recreational amenities as part of a residential subdivision and not for commercial purposes. 
g.  Swimming Pool (private). 
h.  Such uses as may be permitted under the provisions of Specific Use Permits (SUP). 
3.  Height Regulations. 
Maximum Height - Two and one-half (2½) stories, not to exceed thirty-five feet (35') for the main building. For height requirements for accessory buildings, see Section 8.10 - Accessory Buildings and Use Regulations. Special exceptions for building heights may be made for properties of exceptional topograghy or necessary finished floor elevations to aid in screening when standard heights create a looming effect over a neighboring property. This determination will be made by the DRC. Decisions of the DRC may be appealed to the City Council for a final decision. 
4.  Area Regulations (see also Section 8.15 - Supplemental Regulations). 
a.  Size of Lots. 
1)  Minimum Lot Area - Twelve thousand (12,000) square feet. 
2)  Minimum Lot Width - One hundred feet (100'). 
3)  Minimum Lot Depth - One hundred fifteen feet (115'). 
b.  Size of Yards. 
1)  Minimum Front Yard - Thirty feet (30'), sixty feet (60') for residential buildings with access on a thoroughfare. 
2)  Minimum Side Yard - Ten percent (10%) of the width of the lot but no more than fifteen feet (15') required; fifteen feet (15') on corner lot adjacent to a street; twenty feet (20') adjacent to a thoroughfare. 
3)  Minimum Rear Yard - Twenty feet (20') if adjacent to an alley; fifteen feet (15') if no alley exists. 
Special exceptions for building setbacks may be made for properties of exceptional topograghy or necessary finished floor elevations to aid in screening when standard setbacks create a looming effect over a neighboring property. This determination will be made by the DRC. Decisions of the DRC may be appealed to the City Council for a final decision. 
c.  Maximum Lot Coverage - Thirty-five percent (35%) by main buildings; fifty percent (50%) including accessory buildings, driveways, and parking areas. (Amended by Ord. No. 1850 on July 18, 2017) 
d.  Parking Regulations. 
1)  A garage with a minimum capacity of two (2) cars shall be constructed on the same lot as the primary dwelling unit. The garage shall be maintained for parking and shall not be converted to living space. 
2)  Automobiles, motorcycles, pickup trucks, and other self-propelled light load vehicles may be parked anywhere within a lot provided they are parked on paved surfaces in accordance with Section 8.07 (B.2) of this Code. If covered by tarps or covers, automobiles, motorcycles, pickup trucks, and other self-propelled light load vehicles shall only be parked within side or rear yards on paved surfaces. Towed light load vehicles (trailers) and recreational vehicles shall only be parked within side or rear yards on paved surfaces in accordance with Section 8.07 (B.2) of this Code. 
3)  Notwithstanding the locational criteria in 2) above, recreational vehicles may be temporarily parked on paved surfaces within front yards for loading and unloading and for guest stays. Loading and unloading time shall not exceed six (6) days. Guest stays shall not exceed twenty-eight (28) days in calender year. 
4)  No heavy load vehicle (see definition for Heavy Load Vehicle) shall be parked or stored overnight within the lot of any residential district. 
e.  Minimum Dwelling Unit Area - One thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet. 
5.  Special Requirements. 
a.  No permanent use of temporary dwellings, such as recreational vehicles, travel trailers or motor homes, may be for on-site dwelling purposes unless approved by a Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
b.  Electrical fencing and barbed wire is prohibited as perimeter fencing except for containment of farm animals on two (2) acres or larger. 
c.  Open storage is prohibited (except for materials for the resident's personal use or consumption, i.e. firewood, gardening materials, etc.). 
d.  Single-family homes with side entry garages have special setback requirements as established in Section 8.07 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. 
e.  Other Regulations - As established in Section 8.06 - Building Design and Development Standards. 
SF-12 Zoning District Use Table 
P = Permitted Uses 
SUP = May Be Approved as Special Use Permit 
Additional uses permitted only by Planned Development Districts are listed in Section 8.04(l) 
- = Not Permitted 
Use 	SUP or P 
Accessory building (detached) 750 sq. ft. or less 	P 
Accessory building (detached) in excess of 750 sq. ft 	SUP 
Accessory dwelling (detached) on lots 1.5 acres or larger 	SUP 
Amateur radio, TV, or CB antenna (50 ft. or less in height) 	P 
Antenna: radio, TV, relay, microwave, or telecommunications (over 50 ft.) 	SUP 
Assisted Living Facility (up to 6 residents) (Amended by Ord. No. 1809 on September 6, 2016) 	P 
Assisted Living Facility (7 or 8 residents) (Amended by Ord. No. 1809 on September 6, 2016) 	SUP 
Athletic stadium or field operated by the city or school district 	P 
Batching plant (temporary) 	Permit 
Cemetery or mausoleum (new or expansion) 	SUP 
Child Care (Center) 	SUP 
Child Care (Home-based) 	SUP 
Detached SF dwelling 	P 
Farm, ranch, livestock, garden, orchard 	P 
Group home 	SUP 
Home occupations 	P 
Kennel, indoor or outdoor pens 	SUP 
Mobile home on individual lot 	SUP 
Modular home 	P 
Offices, City, County, State, and Other Governmental 	P 
Private park 	P 
Private street residential development (gated subdivision) 	PD 
Public park or playground 	P 
Religious institution 	P 
School, Private 	SUP 
School, Public 	P 
Temporary field construction office 	P 
Tourist home (bed and breakfast) 	SUP 
Utility structures/sub-stations (Private or Franchised) 	SUP 
Utility structures/sub-stations (Public) 	P 
Wind Turbines 	SUP 
 
I.  SF-10: Single-Family Residential District - (10,000 sq. ft. Minimum). 
1.  General Purpose and Description. The SF-10 Single Family Residential District - 10,000 is intended to be similar to the SF-12 except composed of detached, single family residences on lots of not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
2.  Permitted Uses. 
a.  Those uses specified in this Section. b. Single-family detached dwellings. 
c.  Municipally-owned facilities and uses. 
d.  Real estate sales offices during the development of residential subdivisions in which the office is located until eighty percent (80%) of the building permits of the platted lots in the subdivision are issued. 
e.  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which said buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work or by order of the Building Official for non-compliance with the provisions of which the use was permitted. 
f.  Detached accessory buildings and uses, customarily incidental to the above uses and located on the same lot therewith, but not involving the conduct of a retail business, as follows: 
1)  A detached private garage or an attached private garage, used in conjunction with the main building at the time of construction of the dwelling unit, within the regulations of the parking section (see Section 8.07 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements) of this Code. 
2)  A maximum of two (2) detached accessory buildings are permitted on any lot/tract. Accessory buildings one hundred twenty (120) square feet or less do not require a building permit but shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height and shall be a minimum of five feet (5') from the side and rear property lines. Accessory buildings greater than one hundred (120) square feet up to five hundred (500) square feet (including detached garage, workshop, pool house, etc.) are allowed with a building permit. All accessory buildings greater than five hundred (500) square feet require a Specific Use Permit (SUP). All accessory structures shall be constructed of materials complimentary to the main structure. 
3)  One antenna fifty feet (50') or less in height (amateur or CB radio) located in the rear yard. 
4)  Accessory dwelling units may be used for domestic workers, as a guest house, as an in-law house (even with permanent residence), or as a temporary house while the main structure is built/renovated. 
5)  Private open space or other private recreational amenities as part of a residential subdivision and not for commercial purposes. 
g.  Swimming Pool (private). 
h.  Such uses as may be permitted under the provisions of Specific Use Permits (SUP). 
3.  Height Regulations. 
Maximum Height - Two and one-half (2½) stories, not to exceed thirty-five feet (35') for the main building. For height requirements for accessory buildings, see Section 8.10 - Accessory Buildings and Use Regulations. Special exceptions for building heights may be made for properties of exceptional topograghy or necessary finished floor elevations to aid in screening when standard heights create a looming effect over a neighboring property. This determination will be made by the DRC. Decisions of the DRC may be appealed to the City Council for a final decision. 
4.  Area Regulations (see also Section 8.15 - Supplemental Regulations). 
a.  Size of Lots. 
1)  Minimum Lot Area - Ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
2)  Minimum Lot Width - Ninety feet (90'). 
3)  Minimum Lot Depth - One hundred ten feet (110'). 
b.  Size of Yards. 
1)  Minimum Front Yard - Twenty-five feet (25'), sixty feet (60') for residential buildings with access on a thoroughfare. 
2)  Minimum Side Yard - Ten percent (10%) of the lot width but no more than fifteen feet (15') required; fifteen feet (15') on corner lot adjacent to a street; twenty feet (20') adjacent to thoroughfare. 
3)  Minimum Rear Yard - Twenty feet (20') adjacent to an alley; fifteen feet (15') if no alley exists. 
Special exceptions for building setbacks may be made for properties of exceptional topograghy or necessary finished floor elevations to aid in screening when standard setbacks create a looming effect over a neighboring property. This determination will be made by the DRC. Decisions of the DRC may be appealed to the City Council for a final decision. 
c.  Maximum Lot Coverage - Thirty-five percent (35%) by main buildings; fifty percent (50%) including accessory buildings, driveways, and parking areas. (Amended by Ord. No. 1850 on July 18, 2017) 
d.  Parking Regulations. 
1)  A garage with a minimum capacity of two (2) cars shall be constructed on the same lot as the primary dwelling unit. The garage shall be maintained for parking and shall not be converted to living space. 
2)  Automobiles, motorcycles, pickup trucks, and other self-propelled light load vehicles may be parked anywhere within a lot provided they are parked on paved surfaces in accordance with Section 8.07 (B.2) of this Code. If covered by tarps or covers, automobiles, motorcycles, pickup trucks, and other self-propelled light load vehicles shall only be parked within side or rear yards on paved surfaces. Towed light load vehicles (trailers) and recreational vehicles shall only be parked within side or rear yards on paved surfaces in accordance with Section 8.07 (B.2) of this Code. 
3)  Notwithstanding the locational criteria in 2) above, recreational vehicles may be temporarily parked on paved surfaces within front yards for loading and unloading and for guest stays. Loading and unloading time shall not exceed six (6) days. Guest stays shall not exceed twenty-eight (28) days in calender year. 
4)  No heavy load vehicle (see definition for Heavy Load Vehicle) shall be parked or stored overnight within the lot of any residential district. 
e.  Minimum Dwelling Unit Area - One thousand six hundred (1,600) square feet. 
5.  Special Requirements. 
a.  No permanent use of temporary dwellings, such as recreational vehicles, travel trailers or motor homes, may be for on-site dwelling purposes unless approved by a Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
b.  Electrical fencing and barbed wire is prohibited as perimeter fencing except for containment of farm animals on two (2) acres or larger. 
c.  Open storage is prohibited (except for materials for the resident's personal use or consumption, i.e. firewood, gardening materials, etc.). 
d.  Single-family homes with side entry garages have special setback requirements as established in Section 8.07 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. 
e.  Other Regulations - As established in Section 8.06 - Building Design and Development Standards. 
SF-10 Zoning District Use Table 
P = Permitted Uses 
SUP = May Be Approved as Special Use Permit 
Additional uses permitted only by Planned Development Districts are listed in Section 8.04(l) 
- = Not Permitted 
Use 	SUP or P 
Accessory building (detached) 500 sq. ft. or less 	P 
Accessory building (detached) in excess of 500 sq. ft 	SUP 
Accessory dwelling (detached) on lots 1.5 acres or larger 	SUP 
Amateur radio, TV, or CB antenna (50 ft. or less in height) 	P 
Antenna: radio, TV, relay, microwave, or telecommunications (over 50 ft.) 	SUP 
Assisted Living Facility (up to 6 residents) (Amended by Ord. No. 1809 on September 6, 2016) 	P 
Assisted Living Facility (7 or 8 residents) (Amended by Ord. No. 1809 on September 6, 2016) 	SUP 
Athletic stadium or field operated by the city or school district 	P 
Batching plant (temporary) 	Permit 
Cemetery or mausoleum (new or expansion) 	SUP 
Child Care (Center) 	SUP 
Child Care (Home-based) 	SUP 
Detached SF dwelling 	P 
Farm, ranch, livestock, garden, orchard 	P 
Group home 	SUP 
Home occupations 	P 
Kennel, indoor or outdoor pens 	SUP 
Mobile home on individual lot 	SUP 
Modular home 	P 
Offices, City, County, State, and Other Governmental 	P 
Private park 	P 
Private street residential development (gated subdivision) 	PD 
Public park or playground 	P 
Religious institution 	P 
School, Private 	SUP 
School, Public 	P 
Temporary field construction office 	P 
Tourist home (bed and breakfast) 	SUP 
Utility structures/sub-stations (Private or Franchised) 	SUP 
Utility structures/sub-stations (Public) 	P 
Wind Turbines 	SUP 
 
J.  SF-8.4: Single-Family Residential District - (8,400 sq. ft. Minimum). 
1.  General Purpose and Description. The SF-8.4, Single Family Residential District - 8,400 is designed to provide for suitable residential environment on smaller and more compact lots or parcels of land not less than eight thousand four hundred (8,400) square feet. 
2.  Permitted Uses. 
a.  Those uses specified in this Section. 
b.  Single-family detached dwellings. 
c.  Municipally-owned facilities and uses. 
d.  Real estate sales offices during the development of residential subdivisions in which the office is located until eighty percent (80%) of the building permits of the platted lots in the subdivision are issued. 
e.  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which said buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work or by order of the Building Official for non-compliance with the provisions of which the use was permitted. 
f.  Detached accessory buildings and uses, customarily incidental to the above uses and located on the same lot therewith, but not involving the conduct of a retail business, as follows: 
1)  A detached private garage or an attached private garage, used in conjunction with the main building at the time of construction of the dwelling unit, within the regulations of the parking section (see Section 8.07 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements) of this Code. 
2)  A maximum of two (2) detached accessory buildings are permitted on any lot/tract. Accessory buildings one hundred twenty (120) square feet or less do not require a building permit but shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height and shall be a minimum of five feet (5') from the side and rear property lines. Accessory buildings greater than one hundred (120) square feet up to five hundred (500) square feet (including detached garage, workshop, pool house, etc.) are allowed with a building permit. All accessory buildings greater than five hundred (500) square feet require a Specific Use Permit (SUP). All accessory structures shall be constructed of materials complimentary to the main structure. 
3)  One antenna fifty feet (50') or less in height (amateur or CB radio) located in the rear yard. 
4)  Accessory dwelling units may be used for domestic workers, as a guest house, as an in-law house (even with permanent residence), or as a temporary house while the main structure is built/renovated. 
5)  Private open space or other private recreational amenities as part of a residential subdivision and not for commercial purposes. 
g.  Swimming Pool (private). 
h.  Such uses as may be permitted under the provisions of Specific Use Permits (SUP). 
3.  Height Regulations. 
Maximum Height - Two and one-half (2½) stories, not to exceed thirty-five feet (35') for the main building. For height requirements for accessory buildings, see Section 8.10 - Accessory Buildings and Use Regulations. Special exceptions for building heights may be made for properties of exceptional topography or necessary finished floor elevations to aid in screening when standard heights create a looming effect over a neighboring property. This determination will be made by the DRC. Decisions of the DRC may be appealed to the City Council for a final decision. 
4.  Area Regulations (see also Section 8.15 - Supplemental Regulations). 
a.  Size of Lots. 
1)  Minimum Lot Area - Eight thousand four hundred (8,400) square feet. 
2)  Minimum Lot Width - Sixty-five feet (65'). 
3)  Minimum Lot Depth - One hundred ten feet (110'). 
b.  Size of Yards. 
1)  Minimum Front Yard - Twenty-five feet (25'), sixty feet (60') for residential buildings with access on a thoroughfare. 
2)  Minimum Side Yard - Ten percent (10%) of the lot width but no more than fifteen feet (15') required; fifteen feet (15') on corner lots adjacent to a street; twenty feet (20') adjacent to a thoroughfare. 
3)  Minimum Rear Yard - Twenty feet (20') if adjacent to an alley; fifteen feet (15') if no alley exists. 
Special exceptions for building setbacks may be made for properties of exceptional topography or necessary finished floor elevations to aid in screening when standard setbacks create a looming effect over a neighboring property. This determination will be made by the DRC. Decisions of the DRC may be appealed to the City Council for a final decision. 
c.  Maximum Lot Coverage - Thirty-five percent (35%) by main buildings; fifty percent (50%) including accessory buildings, driveways, and parking areas. (Amended by Ord. No. 1850 on July 18, 2017) 
d.  Parking Regulations. 
1)  A garage with a minimum capacity of two (2) cars shall be constructed on the same lot as the primary dwelling unit. The garage shall be maintained for parking and shall not be converted to living space. 
2)  Automobiles, motorcycles, pickup trucks, and other self-propelled light load vehicles may be parked anywhere within a lot provided they are parked on paved surfaces in accordance with Section 8.07 (B.2) of this Code. If covered by tarps or covers, automobiles, motorcycles, pickup trucks, and other self-propelled light load vehicles shall only be parked within side or rear yards on paved surfaces. Towed light load vehicles (trailers) and recreational vehicles shall only be parked within side or rear yards on paved surfaces in accordance with Section 8.07 (B.2) of this Code. 
3)  Notwithstanding the locational criteria in 2) above, recreational vehicles may be temporarily parked on paved surfaces within front yards for loading and unloading and for guest stays. Loading and unloading time shall not exceed six (6) days. Guest stays shall not exceed twenty-eight (28) days in calender year. 
4)  No heavy load vehicle (see definition for Heavy Load Vehicle) shall be parked or stored overnight within the lot of any residential district. 
e.  Minimum Dwelling Unit Area - One thousand four hundred (1,400) square feet. 
5.  Special Requirements. 
a.  No permanent use of temporary dwellings, such as recreational vehicles, travel trailers, or mobile homes, may be used for on-site dwelling purposes unless approved by a Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
b.  Electrical fencing and barbed wire is prohibited as perimeter fencing except for containment of farm animals on two (2) acres or larger. 
c.  Open storage is prohibited (except for materials for the residents personal use or consumption i.e. firewood, gardening materials, etc.). 
d.  Single-family homes with side entry garages have special setback requirements as established in Section 8.07 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. 
e.  Other Regulations - As established in Section 8.06 - Building Design and Development Standards. 
SF-8.4 Zoning District Use Table 
P = Permitted Uses 
SUP = May Be Approved as Special Use Permit 
Additional uses permitted only by Planned Development Districts are listed in Section 8.04(l) 
- = Not Permitted 
Use 	SUP or P 
Accessory building (detached) 500 sq. ft. or less 	P 
Accessory building (detached) in excess of 500 sq. ft 	SUP 
Accessory dwelling (detached) on lots 1.5 acres or larger 	SUP 
Amateur radio, TV, or CB antenna (50 ft. or less in height) 	P 
Antenna: radio, TV, relay, microwave, or telecommunications (over 50 ft.) 	SUP 
Assisted Living Facility (up to 6 residents) (Amended by Ord. No. 1809 on September 6, 2016) 	P 
Assisted Living Facility (7 or 8 residents) (Amended by Ord. No. 1809 on September 6, 2016) 	SUP 
Athletic stadium or field operated by the city or school district 	P 
Batching plant (temporary) 	Permit 
Cemetery or mausoleum (new or expansion) 	SUP 
Child Care (Center) 	SUP 
Child Care (Home-based) 	SUP 
Detached SF dwelling 	P 
Farm, ranch, livestock, garden, orchard 	P 
Group home 	SUP 
Home occupations 	P 
Kennel, indoor or outdoor pens 	SUP 
Mobile home on individual lot 	SUP 
Modular home 	P 
Offices, City, County, State, and Other Governmental 	P 
Private park 	P 
Private street residential development (gated subdivision) 	PD 
Public park or playground 	P 
Religious institution 	P 
School, Private 	SUP 
School, Public 	P 
Temporary field construction office 	P 
Tourist home (bed and breakfast) 	SUP 
Utility structures/sub-stations (Private or Franchised) 	SUP 
Utility structures/sub-stations (Public) 	P 
Wind Turbines 	SUP 
 
K.  2F: Two-Family Residential District (Townhome). 
1.  General Purpose and Description. The 2F, Two-Family Residential is intended to promote stable, quality multiple-occupancy residential development at slightly increased densities. Individual ownership of the two- family or townhome units is encouraged. This District may include entire neighborhoods, or, when in accordance with the intent of the Master Plan, may provide a "buffer" or transition district between lower density residential areas and higher or non-residential areas, or major thoroughfares. 
2.  Permitted Uses. 
a.  Those uses specified in this Section. 
b.  Two-Family residence (townhome). 
c.  All uses allowed in the SF-8.4 Zoning District except that accessory dwelling units are prohibited. 
d.  Such uses as may be permitted under the provisions of Specific Use Permits (SUP). 
3.  Height Regulations. 
Maximum Height - Two and one-half (2½) stories, not to exceed thirty-five feet (35') for the main building. For height requirements for accessory buildings, see Section 8.10 - Accessory Buildings and Use Regulations. Special exceptions for building heights may be made for properties of exceptional topograghy or necessary finished floor elevations to aid in screening when standard heights create a looming effect over a neighboring property. This determination will be made by the DRC. Decisions of the DRC may be appealed to the City Council for a final decision. 
4.  Area Regulations (see also Section 8.15 - Supplemental Regulations). 
a.  Size of Lots. 
1)  Minimum Lot Area - Eight thousand four hundred (8,400) square feet for each pair of dwelling units or four thousand two hundred (4,200) square feet per unit. 
2)  Minimum Lot Width - Seventy feet (70'); thirty-five feet (35') for each dwelling unit. 
3)  Minimum Lot Depth - One hundred feet (100'). 
b.  Size of Yards. 
1)  Minimum Front Yard - Twenty-five feet (25'); sixty feet (60') for residential buildings with access on a thoroughfare. 
2)  Minimum Side Yard - Ten percent (10%) of the lot width but no more than fifteen feet (15') required; fifteen feet (15') on corner lot adjacent to street; twenty feet (20') adjacent to a thoroughfare. 
3)  Minimum Rear Yard - Twenty feet (20') if adjacent to an alley; fifteen feet (15') if no alley exists. 
Special exceptions for building setbacks may be made for properties of exceptional topograghy or necessary finished floor elevations to aid in screening when standard setbacks create a looming effect over a neighboring property. This determination will be made by the DRC. Decisions of the DRC may be appealed to the City Council for a final decision. 
c.  Maximum Lot Coverage - Thirty-five percent (35%) by main buildings; fifty percent (50%) including pools, accessory buildings, driveways, parking areas, and impervious surfaces. 
d.  Parking Regulations. 
1)  A garage with a minimum capacity of one (1) car shall be constructed for each dwelling unit. The garage shall be maintained for parking and shall not be converted to living space. 
2)  Automobiles, motorcycles, pickup trucks, and other self-propelled light load vehicles may be parked anywhere within a lot provided they are parked on paved surfaces in accordance with Section 8.07 (B.2) of this Code. If covered by tarps or covers, automobiles, motorcycles, pickup trucks, and other self-propelled light load vehicles shall only be parked within side or rear yards on paved surfaces. Towed light load vehicles (trailers) and recreational vehicles shall only be parked within side or rear yards on paved surfaces in accordance with Section 8.07 (B.2) of this Code. 
3)  Notwithstanding the locational criteria in 2) above, recreational vehicles may be temporarily parked on paved surfaces within front yards for loading and unloading and for guest stays. Loading and unloading time shall not exceed six (6) days. Guest stays shall not exceed twenty-eight (28) days in calender year. 
4)  No heavy load vehicle (see definition for Heavy Load Vehicle) shall be parked or stored overnight within the lot of any residential district. 
e.  Minimum Dwelling Area Size - One Thousand One Hundred (1,100) square feet. 
f.  Lots in the 2F District shall be platted in pairs such that a townhome may be placed on each of a pair of lots for the purpose of encouraging individual ownership of each side or unit. The subdivision plat shall designate the pairs of lots and which lot lines are to be outside lot lines of each pair. There shall be only one dwelling unit per lot, and no dwelling unit shall cross a designated outside lot line. No single-family detached dwelling may be constructed on one of the designated pair of lots unless the zoning classification is changed to a single-family district. 
g.  All utilities shall be provided separately to each townhome in a 2F District such that each unit is individually metered. 
5.  Special Requirements. 
a.  No permanent use of temporary dwellings, such as recreational vehicles, travel trailers, or mobile homes, may be used for on-site dwelling purposes unless approved by a Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
b.  Electrical fencing and barbed wire is prohibited as perimeter fencing except for containment of farm animals on two (2) acres or larger. 
c.  Open storage is prohibited (except for materials for the resident's personal use or consumption, i.e. firewood, gardening materials, etc.). 
d.  Single-family homes with side entry garages have special setback requirements as established in Section 8.07 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. 
e.  Other Regulations - As established in Section 8.06 - Building Design and Development Standards. 
2F Zoning District Use Table 
P = Permitted Uses 
SUP = May Be Approved as Special Use Permit 
Additional uses permitted only by Planned Development Districts are listed in Section 8.04(l) 
- = Not Permitted 
Use 	SUP or P 
Accessory building (detached) 500 sq. ft. or less 	P 
Accessory building (detached) in excess of 500 sq. ft 	SUP 
Amateur radio, TV, or CB antenna (50 ft. or less in height) 	P 
Antenna: radio, TV, relay, microwave, or telecommunications (over 50 ft.) 	SUP 
Athletic stadium or field operated by the city or school district 	P 
Batching plant (temporary) 	Permit 
Child Care (Center) 	SUP 
Child Care (Home-based) 	SUP 
Detached Private Garage 	P 
Detached SF dwelling meeting Mimimum SF-8.4 district requirements 	P 
Group home 	SUP 
Home occupations 	P 
Mobile home on individual lot 	SUP 
Modular home 	P 
Offices, City, County, State, and Other Governmental 	P 
Private park 	P 
Private street residential development (gated subdivision) 	PD 
Public park or playground 	P 
Religious institution 	P 
School, Private 	SUP 
School (public) 	P 
Temporary field construction office 	P 
Tourist home (bed and breakfast) 	SUP 
Utility structures/sub-stations (Private or Franchised) 	SUP 
Utility structures/sub-stations (Public) 	P 
Wind Turbines 	SUP 
 
L.  MF: Multi-Family Residential District. 
1.  General Purpose and Description. The MF, Multi-Family Residential District, is an attached residential district intended for condominiums and apartments with a base density of twelve (12) residential units per acre and a maximum density of sixteen (16) residential units per acre if certain enhancements as stated in this Code are met. This district is meant to be developed in a park-like setting with extensive areas of usable open space and landscaping. This District should be located adjacent to a major thoroughfare and should not have access to standard residential streets. This district should serve as a buffer between retail/commercial development or heavy automobile traffic, and medium or low density residential development. 
2.  Permitted Uses. 
a.  Those uses specified in this Section. 
b.  Multi-Family Dwelling greater than two (2) units attached. 
c.  Municipally-owned facilities and uses. 
d.  Leasing offices for the apartment complex. 
e.  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which said buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work, by order of the Building Official. 
f.  Accessory buildings and uses, customarily incidental to the above uses and located on the same lot therewith, but not involving the conduct of a retail business except as provided herein: 
1)  Covered parking areas and garages. 
2)  Antenna(s) (fifty feet [50'] or less) (amateur or CB radio) located in the rear yard and screened from the view of public streets and single family residential uses as permitted by regulations. 
g.  Swimming Pool (private). 
h.  Group Family Home. 
i.  Common open space, community center, recreational building, and other facilities or amenities, provided they are for use by the residents and guests of the multi-family complex. 
j.  Such uses as may be permitted under the provisions of Specific Use Permits (SUP). 
3.  Height Regulations. 
Maximum Height - Two and one-half (2½) stories not to exceed thirty-five feet (35') except where the first floor is composed entirely of parking garages, then three and one- half (3½) stories not to exceed forty-five (45) feet. All accessory buildings (excluding recreational buildings and clubhouse) shall be limited to one story, fifteen feet (15') in height. 
4.  Area Regulations. 
a.  Size of Lots. 
1)  Minimum Lot Area - The minimum lot size shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
2)  Minimum Lot Width - Seventy feet (70'). 
3)  Minimum Lot Depth - One hundred twenty feet (120'). 
b.  Size of Yards. 
1)  Minimum Front Yard - Forty feet (40'). All areas adjacent to a street shall be deemed front yards. 
2)  Minimum Side Yard - Twenty feet (20'); sixty feet (60') when adjacent to a Single-Family Residential zoning district. 
3)  Minimum Rear Yard - Thirty feet (30'); sixty feet (60') when adjacent to a Single-Family Residential zoning district. 
c.  Minimum Area Per Dwelling Unit - Seven hundred fifty (750) square feet per unit plus one hundred fifty (150) square feet for each additional bedroom over one. 
d.  Maximum Lot Coverage - Fifty percent (50%) by main buildings; sixty-five percent (65%) including accessory buildings, driveways, parking areas, and impervious surfaces. 
5.  Parking Regulations. 
a.  Automobiles, motorcycles, and light load vehicles may be parked provided the vehicles are parked on paved surfaces in accordance with the minimum number of parking spaces as indicated in Article 8.07. 
b.  All open parking areas shall be screened from direct view adjacent to public streets. Screening may be in the form of live plant materials, berms, or brick masonry walls. Covered carports shall not be constructed adjacent to streets and shall not be in the view from the public rights-of-ways. 
c.  Attached or detached garages shall be provided for twenty-five percent (25%) of the total units. Covered parking shall be provided for fifty percent (50%) of the units. Carports shall be constructed in a manner to be compatible in design and material with the primary buildings. Metal roof/poles shall be of architectural metal. 
d.  No heavy load vehicle (see definition for Heavy Load Vehicle) shall be parked or stored overnight within the lot of any residential district. 
e.  Boats, campers, trailers, and other recreational vehicles shall be prohibited unless oversize parking areas are provided. This parking area shall not be used to meet the minimum parking requirements and shall not be in view from a public street. 
6.  Special District Requirements. 
a.  A site plan submittal shall be in accordance with this Code and shall include façade elevations and landscaping plans at the time of submittal. All zoning requests for multi-family shall include a complete site plan submittal including facade elevations and landscaping plans. A life-like computer generated and/or rendering showing the color and material for the buildings is required with all submittals. 
b.  Each multi-family complex shall provide recreational facilities designed for use by the tenants of the complex. 
c.  Buildings shall not exceed two hundred feet (200') in length. 
d.  All multi-family dwelling units shall have roof slopes with a minimum of 4:12 pitch. 
e.  Buildings with facades that are longer than fifty feet (50') shall have their facades broken up into smaller areas through the use of varying facade setbacks, arcades, and architectural features such as recessed vestibules, columns, canopies, or other acceptable means. 
f.  All buildings containing residential units shall provide a sign, visible from the driveway, identifying the unit numbers within the building. 
g.  All floor mounted mechanical, heating, and air conditioning units shall be screened with a minimum three-foot (3') masonry wall and/or live screening. 
h.  Every multi-family project shall provide for adequate refuse facility within the development. All dumpsters shall be screened with a minimum six-foot (6') masonry- screening wall on three (3) sides and shall not be in view from any streets. Refuse dumpsters shall be no closer than fifty feet (50') to any adjacent single-family residential zoning district. 
i.  All multi-family developments shall provide for fifteen percent (15%) of the development in usable open space exclusive of street yard landscaping. This includes, but not limited to, landscaped hike/bike trail, open area recreational facilities, parks and playgrounds, water features and decorative objects such as fountains. Usable open space shall not include rooftops, accessory buildings, parking areas, driveways, turnaround areas, or the right-of-way or easement for streets or alleys. 
j.  At the time of site plan approval, the City Council may approve up to fifty percent (50%) of park dedication or park fee credit for usable open space under the following conditions: 
1)  Children's play areas developed with play equipment. 
2)  Preservation of significant trees or other natural vegetation. k. Preservation of vistas and other natural qualities. 
l.  Buffer or transition between the multi-family use and other uses that exceed the Code requirements. 
m.  Defined pedestrian connections between the multi-family development and parkland. 
n.  In addition to the landscaping provisions of this Code, the following additional criteria apply to multi-family developments: 
1)  Landscaping buffer at street frontage(s) and adjacent to developed single-family residential property shall be thirty feet (30'). 
2)  One (1) four-inch (4") caliper shade tree spaced to achieve full canopy coverage at mature height shall be planted within the landscape buffer at all street frontages and adjacent to any portion of the lot adjacent to developed single-family residential property. If spacing exceeds thirty feet (30'), provide for two (2) understory trees in between canopy trees. Trees such as Crape Myrtle or Bradford Pear will not be considered in meeting this requirement. 
3)  All principal and accessory buildings located in the multi-family zoning district shall have at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the total exterior walls, excluding doors and windows, constructed of brick, stone, or a combination of both materials. Stucco or similar material and/or exceptions to the above requirements may be considered by the City Council, on case-by-case basis, at the time of site plan approval. Accessory structures shall be compatible with the main structure. 
o.  The use of temporary dwellings, such as travel trailers, recreational vehicles, or motor homes, is prohibited. Open storage is prohibited. 
7.  Density Calculations. The maximum density in the multi-family zoning district shall be twelve (12) units per acre. One (1) additional unit per acre in excess of the base density is permitted (up to a maximum of sixteen [16] units per acre) for each of the following standards: 
a.  Fifty percent (50%) of the total units to have attached or detached garages. 
b.  All stairways to be located inside individual units. 
c.  Increase the depth of the landscaping buffer yards and the number of trees to be planted within the landscaping buffer yards by thirty percent (30%) over standard requirement. 
d.  Twenty percent (20%) of the total development to be allocated for usable open space. e. Permanent usable open space within the development or within one hundred feet (100') of the development for the general public including public parks or trail system. (If this credit is used, the park dedication credit will not be applicable.) 
8.  Other Regulations. Unless otherwise noted all Development Standards contained within this Code will apply to multi-family projects. Any changes to the multi-family district requirements shall only be considered through a Planned Development zoning application. 
MF Zoning District Use Table 
P = Permitted Uses 
SUP = May Be Approved as Special Use Permit 
Additional uses permitted only by Planned Development Districts are listed in Section 8.04(l) 
- = Not Permitted 
Use 	SUP or P 
Accessory building (detached) in excess of 200 sq. ft 	SUP 
Amateur radio, TV, or CB antenna (50 ft. or less in height) 	P 
Antenna: radio, TV, relay, microwave, or telecommunications (over 50 ft.) 	SUP 
Athletic stadium or field operated by the city or school district 	P 
Batching plant (temporary) 	Permit 
Child Care (Center) 	SUP 
Child Care (Home-based) 	SUP 
College, University, or Private Boarding School 	SUP 
Community Center (private) 	SUP 
Detached private garage 	P 
Group home 	SUP 
Multi-Family Dwelling 	P 
Nursing Home 	SUP 
Offices, City, County, State, and Other Governmental 	P 
Private park 	P 
Public park or playground 	P 
Religious institution 	P 
Retirement home 	SUP 
School, Private 	SUP 
School, Public 	P 
Temporary field construction office 	P 
Tourist home (bed and breakfast) 	SUP 
Two-family dwelling 	P 
Utility structures (Private or Franchised) 	SUP 
Utility structures/sub-stations (Public) 	P 
Wind Turbines 	SUP 
 
M.  NS - Neighborhood Service District. 
1.  General Purpose and Description. The NS, Neighborhood Service District is established as a limited retail category intended for the use of nearby neighborhood areas for the purpose of supplying day-to-day needs and personal services. The maximum floor area for a use within a multi-use building or a free-standing building for one use shall not exceed six thousand (6,000) square feet unless approved by a Specific Use Permit (SUP) or a Planned Development (PD). The architectural character within this district shall be compatible with the adjacent residential neighborhoods. 
2.  Permitted Uses. 
a.  Those uses specified in this Section. 
b.  Such uses as may be permitted under the provisions of Specific Use Permits (SUP). 
3.  Height Regulations. 
a.  Maximum Height - Two (2) stories, thirty-five feet (35'); if additional height over thirty-five feet (35') is desired, then an additional setback is required. One (1) story and twenty-five feet (25') maximum height if within one hundred feet (100') of a developed SF-zoning district/lot. Architectural features may exceed twenty-five feet (25'). 
b.  Roof - Buildings shall have pitched or mansard roofs. Other roof types may be considered by the City Council at the time of site plan approval. 
4.  Area Regulations. 
a.  Size of Lots. 
1)  Minimum Lot Size - Thirty-three thousand (33,000) square feet. 
2)  Minimum Lot Width - One hundred fifty feet (150'). 
b.  Size of Yards. 
1)  Minimum Front Yard - Thirty feet (30'); all yards adjacent to a street shall be considered a front yard. 
2)  Minimum Side Yard - Exterior, fifteen feet (15'); interior, none; thoroughfare, thirty feet (30'). 
3)  Minimum Rear Yard - Twenty feet (20'). 
4)  Adjacent to a Single-Family District - The side or rear setback, whichever is adjacent to the single-family zoning district shall observe a thirty-foot (30') setback. 
5)  Additional setback for structures over thirty-five feet (35') - One (1) additional foot setback for each additional two feet (2') in height above thirty-five feet (35'). 
5.  Other Regulations. 
a.  As established in Article Eight. 
b.  Parking Requirements: As established in Section 8.07 - Off Street Parking and Loading Requirements. 
c.  No permanent use of temporary dwellings, such as travel trailers or mobile homes, may be used for on-site dwelling or non-residential purposes. 
d.  Site Plan submittal is required. 
e.  No outside storage or display is permitted unless approved by a Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
NS Zoning District Use Table 
P = Permitted Uses 
SUP = May Be Approved as Special Use Permit 
Additional uses permitted only by Planned Development Districts are listed in Section 8.04(l) 
- = Not Permitted 
Use 	SUP or P 
Administrative, professional or corporate office 	P 
Antenna: radio, TV, relay, microwave, or telecommunications (over 50 ft.) 	SUP 
Appliance Rental 	SUP 
Athletic stadium or field operated by the city or school district 	P 
Automobile electric charging station 	P 
Automobile parts retail sales wholly enclosed in a building 	SUP 
Automobile renting 	SUP 
Automobile service station 	SUP 
Bakery (retail) 	P 
Bank, saving, loan, and credit unions, including automated teller 	P 
Bar 	SUP 
Barber shop or beauty salon stand alone 	P 
Barber shop or beauty salon within multi-use retail 	P 
Batching plant (temporary) 	Permit 
Bed and Breakfast/Tourist Home 	SUP 
Building material and hardware 	P 
Child Care (Center) 	P 
Community center 	P 
Convenience store with gas pumps 	SUP 
Copy shop or printing shop 	P 
Dance studio or aerobics center 	P 
Driving School 	SUP 
Dry cleaning (small shop) in a multi-use building 	P 
Dry cleaning free-standing building 	SUP 
Fitness Center/Health Club 	P 
Fraternal clubs, lodges, sororities, and fraternities, etc. 	SUP 
Grocery store or food market 	SUP 
Gunsmith (repair only) 	SUP 
Kennel, indoor or outdoor pens 	SUP 
Laundromat (self service) 	SUP 
Medical/Dental clinic or office 	P 
Minor medical emergency clinic 	SUP 
Mixed-Use Residential 	SUP 
Museum or art gallery 	P 
Nursing Home 	SUP 
Offices, City, County, State, and Other Governmental 	P 
Optical store, optician or optometrist 	P 
Pet grooming, no outdoor kennels 	P 
Pharmacist or drug store 	P 
Private club 	SUP 
Private park 	P 
Private school 	P 
Radio broadcasting without tower 	SUP 
Religious institution 	P 
Restaurant, café, cafeteria 	P 
Restaurant with Drive-thru/Drive-in 	SUP 
Retail uses and services wholly enclosed within a building 	P 
School, Private 	P 
School, Public 	P 
School, Business or Trade 	SUP 
Seasonal Sales 	SUP 
Spa to include Cosmetologists (Hair, Nails, Face) & Massage Therapists Licensed in TX 	SUP 
Studio, art or photographic (within multi-use retail) 	P 
Studio, art or photography (stand alone) 	P 
Temporary field construction office 	P 
Utility structures (Private or Franchised) 	SUP 
Utility structures (public) 	P 
Vehicle or car wash 	SUP 
Veteranarian Clinic (no outdoor pens) includes grooming facility 	P 
VeterinarianClinic (with outdoor pens) may or may not include grooming facility 	SUP 
Wind Turbines 	SUP 
 
N.  O - Office District. 
1.  General Purpose and Description. The O, Office District is established to create a flexible District for low intensity office and professional uses generally in buildings two (2) stories or less. Permitted uses should be compatible with adjacent residential areas by limiting heights to one (1) story and utilizing buffers and landscape requirements established by the District. Adaptive reuse of existing structures is encouraged. Sites zoned "O" may be built over two (2) stories in height if located away from any properties zoned for single family residential. Buildings in this District should be compatible and in similar scale with residential uses and adjacent property. 
2.  Permitted Uses. 
a.  Those uses specified in this Section. 
b.  Accessory uses to the main use. 
c.  Professional, administrative, and general office uses. d. Uses permitted by Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
3.  Height Regulations. 
a.  Maximum Height - Two (2) stories, thirty-five feet (35'); if additional height over thirty-five feet (35') is desired, then an additional setback is required. One (1) story and twenty-five feet (25') maximum height if within one hundred feet (100') of a developed SF-zoning district/lot. Architectural features may exceed twenty-five feet (25'). 
b.  Roof Pitch - Buildings shall have pitched or mansard roof design. Other roof type may be considered on a case-by-case basis, by the City Council. 
4.  Area Regulations. 
a.  Size of Lots. 
1)  Minimum Lot Size - Thirty-three thousand (33,000) square feet. 
2)  Minimum Lot Width - One hundred fifty feet (150'). 
b.  Size of Yards. 
1)  Minimum Front Yard - Thirty feet (30'); all yards adjacent to a street shall be considered a front yard. 
2)  Minimum Side Yard - Exterior, fifteen feet (15'); interior, none; thoroughfare, thirty feet (30'). 
3)  Minimum Rear Yard - Twenty feet (20'). 
4)  Adjacent to a Single-Family District - The side or rear setback, whichever is adjacent to the single-family zoning district shall observe a thirty-foot (30') setback. 
5)  Additional setback for structures over thirty-five feet (35') - One (1) additional foot setback for each additional two feet (2') in height above thirty-five feet (35'). 
5.  Other Regulations. 
a.  As established in Article Eight. 
b.  Parking Requirements: As established in Section 8.07 - Off Street Parking and Loading Requirements. 
c.  No permanent use of temporary dwellings, such as travel trailers or mobile homes, may be used for on-site dwelling or non-residential purposes. 
d.  Site Plan submittal is required. 
e.  No outside storage or display is permitted unless approved by a Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
O Zoning District Use Table 
P = Permitted Uses 
SUP = May Be Approved as Special Use Permit 
Additional uses permitted only by Planned Development Districts are listed in Section 8.04(l) 
- = Not Permitted 
Use 	SUP or P 
Administrative, professional or corporate office 	P 
Antenna: radio, TV, relay, microwave, or telecommunications (over 50 ft.) 	SUP 
Bank, saving, loan, and credit unions, including automated teller 	SUP 
Batching plant (temporary) 	Permit 
Child Care (Center) 	SUP 
College, university or private boarding school 	SUP 
Community center 	P 
Copy shop or printing shop 	SUP 
Medical/Dental clinic or office 	P 
Minor medical emergency clinic 	SUP 
Museum or art gallery 	P 
Offices, City, County, State, and Other Governmental 	P 
Optical store, optician or optometrist 	P 
Pet grooming, no outdoor kennels 	P 
Pharmacist or drug store 	P 
Private park 	P 
Public Park or Playground 	P 
Public Parking Garage associated with a building 	SUP 
Radio broadcasting without tower 	SUP 
Religious institution 	P 
Research and Scientific Laboratories 	SUP 
School, Private 	P 
School, Public 	P 
School, Business or Trade 	SUP 
Temporary field construction office 	P 
Utility structures (Private or Franchised) 	SUP 
Utility structures (public) 	P 
Wind Turbines 	SUP 
 
O.  R - Retail. 
1.  General Purpose and Description. The R, Retail District is established to provide locations for various types of general retail trade, business, and service uses. The District allows shopping areas or uses with a gross leasable floor area which exceeds six thousand (6,000) square feet (those not permitted in the NS District). These shopping areas should utilize established landscape and buffering requirements. 
2.  Permitted Uses. 
a.  Those uses specified in this Section. 
b.  Such uses as may be permitted under the provisions of Specific Use Permits. 
3.  Height Regulations. 
Maximum Height - Two (2) stories, thirty-five feet (35'); if additional height over thirty-five feet (35') is desired, then additional setback is required. One (1) story, twenty-five feet (25') if within one hundred feet (100') of a developed SF-zoning district/lot. Architectural features may exceed twenty-five feet (25'). 
4.  Area Regulations. 
a.  Size of Lots. 
1)  Minimum Lot Size - Thirty-three thousand (33,000) square feet. 
2)  Minimum Lot Width - One hundred fifty feet (150'). 
b.  Size of Yards. 
1)  Minimum Front Yard - Thirty feet (30'); all yards adjacent to a street shall be considered a front yard. 
2)  Minimum Side Yard - Exterior, fifteen feet (15'); interior, none; thoroughfare, thirty feet (30'). 
3)  Minimum Rear Yard - Twenty feet (20'). 
4)  Adjacent to a Single-Family District - The side or rear yard setback, whichever is adjacent to the single-family zoning district shall observe a sixty-foot (60') building setback. 
5)  Additional setback for structures over thirty-five feet (35') - One (1) additional foot setback for each additional two feet (2') in height above thirty-five feet (35'). 
5.  Other Regulations. 
a.  As established in Article Eight. 
b.  Parking Requirements: As established in Section 8.07 - Off Street Parking and Loading Requirements. 
c.  No permanent use of temporary dwellings, such as travel trailers or mobile homes, may be used for on-site dwelling or non-residential purposes. 
d.  Site Plan submittal is required. 
e.  No outside storage or display is permitted unless approved by a Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
R Zoning District Use Table 
P = Permitted Uses 
SUP = May Be Approved as Special Use Permit 
Additional uses permitted only by Planned Development Districts are listed in Section 8.04(l) 
- = Not Permitted 
Use 	SUP or P 
Administrative, professional or corporate office 	P 
Antenna: radio, TV, relay, microwave, or telecommunications (over 50 ft.) 	SUP 
Appliance Rental 	SUP 
Athletic stadium or field operated by the city or school district 	P 
Automobile electric charging station 	P 
Automobile parts retail sales wholly enclosed in a building 	SUP 
Automobile sales 	SUP 
Automobile renting 	SUP 
Automobile service station 	SUP 
Bakery (retail) 	P 
Bank, saving, loan, and credit unions, including automated teller 	P 
Bar/Tavern 	SUP 
Barber shop or beauty salon stand alone 	P 
Barber shop or beauty salon within multi-use retail 	P 
Batching plant (temporary) 	Permit 
Bed and Breakfast/Tourist Home 	SUP 
Brewery with retail sales on and off premise 	P 
Brewery with entertainment inside or outside 	SUP 
Building material and hardware 	P 
Child Care (Center) 	P 
College, university or private boarding school 	P 
Community center 	P 
Copy shop or printing shop 	P 
Dance studio or aerobics center 	P 
Distillery 	SUP 
Distillery with 1,500 square-foot tasting room 	P 
Driving School 	SUP 
Dry cleaning (small shop) in a multi-use building 	P 
Dry cleaning free-standing building 	SUP 
Entertainment Facility (Indoor) 	SUP 
Fitness Center/Health Club 	P 
Fraternal clubs, lodges, sororities, and fraternities, etc. 	P 
Greenhouses and nurseries (commercial retail) 	SUP 
Grocery store or food market 	SUP 
Gunsmith (repair only) 	SUP 
Hospital 	SUP 
Hotel/Motel 	SUP 
Indoor Gun Range 	SUP 
Light Manufacturing wholly enclosed within a building 	SUP 
Liquor Store (10,000 sf or greater 	SUP 
Motorcycle sales 	SUP 
Medical/Dental clinic or office 	P 
Minor medical emergency clinic 	SUP 
Museum or art gallery 	P 
Nursing Home 	SUP 
Offices, City, County, State, and Other Governmental 	P 
Optical store, optician or optometrist 	P 
Outpatient Substance Use Treatment Program for Adolescents 	SUP 
Pet grooming, no outdoor kennels 	SUP 
Pharmacist or drug store 	P 
Private club 	SUP 
Private park 	P 
Public Parking Garage associated with a building 	SUP 
Radio broadcasting without tower 	SUP 
Religious institution 	P 
Restaurant, café, cafeteria 	P 
Restaurant with Drive-thru/Drive-in 	SUP 
Retail uses and services wholly enclosed within a building 	P 
Sales of used goods and merchandise 	SUP 
School, Private 	P 
School, Public 	P 
School, Business or Trade 	P 
Seasonal Sales 	SUP 
Spa to include Cosmetologists (Hair, Nails, Face) & Massage Therapists Licensed in TX 	SUP 
Studio, art or photographic (within multi-use retail) 	P 
Studio, art or photography (stand alone) 	P 
Temporary field construction office 	P 
Tool and machinery rental shop 	SUP 
Utility structures (Private or Franchised) 	SUP 
Utility structures (public) 	P 
Vehicle or car wash 	SUP 
Veterinarian Clinic (no outdoor pens) includes grooming facility 	SUP 
Veterinarian Clinic (with outdoor pens) may or may not include grooming facility 	SUP 
Wind Turbines 	SUP 
Winery with retail sales (either on or off premise) 	P 
 
(Ord. No. 1959 , § 2(Exh. B), 12-3-2019) 
P.  TC - Town Center District. 
1.  General Purpose and Description. 
a.  The Town Center district is intended to serve as a mixed use community retail center. Mutually supportive office, civic, cultural, entertainment, and residential uses are planned to enhance the viability of this mixed use community retail center. Multiple, complementary uses may be mixed vertically within the same building and/or may be mixed horizontally in multiple buildings. The form of development is compact with tightly grouped buildings arranged around a connected street and sidewalk network that serves vehicle, pedestrian, and bicycle transportation. Building architecture reflects a distinct look and identity. Open space, street trees, street lighting, benches, and other amenities create a human scale environment. The standards of this district are unique to the Town Center district. 
b.  The Master Plan for Town Center is a conceptual layout of buildings, streets, buffers, landscaping, and open space within the Town Center district (see Figure 1 within this section.) Building locations, sizes, orientations, and other features as shown on the Master Plan are intended to be illustrative rather than a mandatory development plan. The exact location and precise boundaries for various developments are established by the standards of this district and identified through the site plan review process required as part of this district. 
c.  All requirements of this Code are applicable to Town Center district unless otherwise specifically noted in this section. 
2.  Permitted Uses in Town Center. 
a.  The following use charts specify those uses permitted in the Town Center district. 
b.  Uses in Town Center district shall be generally pedestrian oriented and encourage pedestrian traffic. Uses with drive-through lanes are discouraged in Town Center, are permitted only by Specific Use Permit. If such uses are allowed by City Council approval, the use must be mitigated with special design features during site plan review. 
TC Zoning District Use Table 
P = Permitted Uses 
SUP = May Be Approved As Specific Use Permit 
- = Not Permitted 
Use 	SUP or P 
Administrative, professional or corporate office 	P 
Automobile electric charging station 	SUP 
Bakery (retail) 	P 
Bank, saving, loan, and credit unions, including automated teller 	SUP 
Barber shop or beauty salon within multi-use retail 	P 
Batching plant (temporary) 	Permit 
Brewery with retail sales on and off premise 	SUP 
Brewery with entertainment inside or outside 	SUP 
Child Care (Center) as an accessory use only 	SUP 
Copy shop or printing shop 	P 
Dance studio or aerobics center 	P 
Distillery with 1,500 square-foot tasting room 	SUP 
Dry cleaning (small shop) in a multi-use building 	P 
Dry cleaning free-standing building 	SUP 
Entertainment Facility (Indoor) 	SUP 
Fitness Center/Health Club 	P 
Fuel Pumps/Sales* 	SUP* 
Grocery store or food market 	SUP 
Gunsmith (repair only) 	SUP 
Hotel 	SUP 
Liquor Store (10,000 sf or greater) 	SUP 
Minor medical emergency clinic 	SUP 
Mixed-Use Residential 	SUP 
Museum or art gallery 	P 
Offices, City, County, State, and Other Governmental 	SUP 
Optical store, optician or optometrist 	P 
Pharmacist or drug store 	SUP 
Private club 	SUP 
Private park 	P 
Public parking garage (associated with building) 	P 
Religious institution 	P 
Residential Single Family Dwelling: Townhome/Patio Home 	PD 
Restaurant, café, cafeteria 	P 
Restaurant with Drive-thru/Drive-in 	SUP 
Retail uses and services wholly enclosed within a building 	P 
Seasonal Sales 	SUP 
Spa to include Cosmetologists (Hair, Nails, Face) & Massage Therapists Licensed in TX 	SUP 
Studio, art or photographic (within multi-use retail) 	P 
Studio, art or photography (stand-alone) 	P 
Temporary field construction office 	P 
Utility structures (Private or Franchised) 	SUP 
Utility structures (public) 	P 
Veterinarian Clinic (no outdoor pens) includes grooming facility 	P 
Winery with retail sales (either on or off premise) 	SUP 
* See supplemental regulations for Fuel Pumps/Sales in this district (below) 
 
(Ord. No. 1959 , § 2(Exh.B), 12-3-2019) 
3.  Design Review Required for Town Center. All development within the Town Center district shall be subject to design review as part of the site plan review process. A site plan as outlined in this Code shall be submitted for each use in Town Center. The Development Review Committee may also require any other reasonable and pertinent information necessary for design review. Design review is required in this district to ensure that development within the district is in conformance with design guidelines for the Town Center and that: 
a.  The proposed development is architecturally compatible with other development in the surrounding areas. 
b.  The proposed development is within the character of the Town Center concept as a community focal point with quality development having a pedestrian orientation, suitable amenities, and an overall design theme. 
4.  Design Standards for Town Center. 
a.  Street Network, Building Siting and Massing. The layout of public streets and private drives, and building location, design, and orientation, should generally conform to the approved Master Plan. The following standards shall be used to evaluate the conformance of site development to the intent of the Master Plan: 
1)  Town Center Lane shall be extended north of Keller Parkway and shall terminate in a circle, loop, or some other monumental configuration and design similar to the southern terminus of Town Center Lane at Bear Creek Parkway. A public street or private drive aisle shall connect the northern terminus of Town Center Lane to Rufe Snow Drive. 
2)  Public streets, private drives, and sidewalks shall be designed to form an interconnected street system that serves pedestrians and cyclists as well as vehicular transportation. 
3)  Site layout shall reinforce street edges and create pedestrian scaled open spaces. 
4)  Buildings shall be sited perpendicular and parallel to streets. 
5)  Building fronts and entries shall be articulated and be oriented toward streets, and shall be arranged to create courtyards and other human scale spaces. 
6)  Where possible, buildings shall be arranged to provide views and access to open spaces. 
7)  Off-street surface parking should be located behind or to the sides of buildings where possible. Large parking lots in front of buildings, along the street frontage, are prohibited. Buildings fronting streets are allowed to have only two rows of parking and one driving lane. 
b.  Building Height, Building Area, and Setback Requirements. 
1)  Unless otherwise stated, the building height in the Town Center district shall be two (2) stories, not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet. Restaurant uses, kiosks and fuel pump canopies may be single-story in height by right. Hotel uses in the Town Center South sub-district only may be five (5) stories in height by right. Single- story building heights and three (3) to five (5) story building heights may be approved by Specific Use Permit. Maximum height shall be five (5) stories or sixty feet (60'). If a single story building is proposed the building façade shall either be a minimum height of twenty feet (20') or shall reflect a two-story design to provide for compatibility with other buildings in the area. Single-Family Attached Dwelling (Townhouse) and Patio Home uses shall meet the maximum heights as per the Design Standards within this section. 
2)  Building footprints and locations should generally follow the arrangement of the Master Plan. No building footprint in Town Center shall be less than six thousand (6,000) square feet of air-conditioned space. Building footprints less than six thousand (6,000) square feet may be approved by Specific Use Permit. 
3)  Restaurants in Town Center may be one story and incorporate their own special design features in keeping with the design guidelines and spirit of Town Center. 
4)  The setbacks for non-single family residential uses in the Town Center district shall be determined based on the building and site design at the time of site plan review provided that all building and fire code requirements are met at the time of construction and proposed setbacks compliment the surrounding area . 
5)  In Town Center, the minimum setback from an adjacent single-family residential district shall be sixty feet (60'). For structures over thirty-five feet (35'), the minimum sixty-feet (60') setback shall be increased one foot (1') for each additional two feet (2') in building height above thirty-five feet. 
6)  Mixed-use Residential uses shall comply with the building height, building area, and setback requirements as non-residential uses. 
7)  Supplemental Regulations for Fuel Pumps/Sales. 
a)  Fuel pumps/sales shall only be allowed as an accessory use with a grocery or food store, fifty thousand (50,000) square-feet or larger in size, and may be approved by Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
b)  Convenience stores shall not be allowed as part of the fuel pumps. Kiosks may be used in lieu of convenience stores and shall not exceed 350 square feet in building area. Kiosks larger than three hundred fifty (350) square feet may be considered as part of the site plan variance process. Kiosks shall not be required to meet the minimum building footprint of Town Center. 
c)  The design elements of the kiosk and fuel pumps columns and canopy shall be aesthetically compatible with its associated grocery or food store and the Town Center surroundings. Fuel pump canopies shall not exceed twenty-five feet (25') in height. Fuel pump canopies and kiosks shall comply with the Town Center zoning district's building material requirements (see Section 8.03 (P.4.d). 
d)  The use of lighted stripes, exposed neon tubular lights or similar material on kiosks or fuel pump canopies shall not be permitted. 
e)  Fuel pumps/sales shall not exceed four (4) fueling dispensers or eight (8) fueling pumps. 
f)  All fuel pump station amenities such as lighting fixtures, trash receptacles, and other features shall be coordinated in design with the building and fuel pump canopy and compatible with the Town Center surroundings. 
g)  The outside placement of vending machines, ice machines, merchandise, and other outside storage or displays are prohibited. 
h)  Fuel pump station canopies are allowed no more than two (2) attached signs or two (2) logos not to exceed twenty-four inches (24") in height. Kiosks shall be limited to one (1) attached sign, not to exceed twenty (20) square feet in total area and thirty-six inches (36") in height. 
i)  Fuel pump stations in Town Center may utilize electronic signage for advertisement of gas prices only. The placement of electronic signage shall be limited to monument signs. Electronic signage shall be static. 
8)  Single-family residential uses may be allowed through PD. 
c.  Architectural Character. 
1)  The architectural styles of buildings in the Town Center District shall be compatible with the buildings constructed within the district. Compatibility can be achieved through coordinated and complementary attributes such as building materials, colors, building forms, architectural detailing and amenities. This provision does not require that all developments be the same and diversity is encouraged in Town Center. 
2)  All buildings shall have horizontal and vertical facade articulations. 
3)  Buildings with facades longer than fifty feet (50') shall have their facades broken up into smaller areas through the use of varying façade setbacks, arcades, awnings, canopies, architectural features such as plazas, columns, or other means. 
4)  Non-single family residential buildings shall have an expression of a masonry pier or column effect at least twenty-five feet (25') on center. On the ground floor, the facade in between piers or columns shall have as much storefront glass as possible so as to enliven the facade and open it up to pedestrian involvement. Windows shall not be located higher than three feet (3') from the ground. For large uses with expansive facade areas without windows, an expression of windows with elements such as display windows or opaque windows with canopies and awnings shall be considered. 
5)  Rooflines shall be interrupted with gables or other architectural elements to break up the building profile. 
6)  Windows along streets shall be equally spaced with a specific rhythm and not create long areas of flat, solid spaces along streets. Varying window size and height based on the interior functions is discouraged. Windows shall be designed to reinforce a vertical appearance, not a horizontal appearance. 
7)  If a building sides or backs to a street, public open space, or adjacent developments, the side or rear facade shall be treated in the same architectural style and material as the front facade. This includes but is not limited to the same roof treatment, building material, and window treatment. All buildings shall carry the roof treatment and facade articulation around the entire building, including the rear side. 
8)  Sloping roof forms as a complete sloping form (pitched roof) or mansard roof shall be utilized on all buildings in Town Center. Flat roofs are allowed only based on building design as approved during the site plan review by the Development Review Committee. Roof pitch shall not be less than 4:12, but if the pitch is less than 6:12 but more than 4:12, the roof must have a projecting eave of no less than two feet (2') horizontally from the vertical wall plane. Mansard roofs shall have a pitch of not less than 1:1. 
9)  At the intersection of the facade and roof planes, there shall be a projecting cornice element of brick or cast stone. Fibrous Cement may be allowed only with approval of the City Council. 
10)  All non-residential buildings are required to have window head and sill details, which utilize either projecting elements or materials of a contrasting color and texture, which will highlight the window treatment. 
d.  Building Material Requirements. 
1)  The wall surface for all buildings other than glass shall be of one hundred percent (100%) masonry material compatible with the Town Center district. Seventy percent (75%) of overall wall surfaces other than glass shall be of brick, stone, or cast stone. The remaining twenty-five percent (25%) may be stucco, fibrous cement, split-face block, or other masonry material. The use of any other wall surface material may be approved by the City Council at the time of site plan review. Stucco may be used on wall surfaces of a minimum ten feet (10') above grade level. 
2)  Building colors shall be compatible with one another. Building colors shall generally be variations of red or earth tones with white or off-white accents and generally compatible with the character of Town Center. 
3)  Roof material shall be standing-seam metal, stone, clay, or concrete roofing tile. Adjacent buildings shall have similar roof material to provide for compatibility among individual developments. 
4)  The use of reflective glass is prohibited in Town Center. The use of florescent paint, florescent colors, or exterior neon tubular lights shall be prohibited. The use of lighted color bands and back-lighted plastic awnings are prohibited. 
5)  Other building material requirements of this Code shall apply to Town Center if not specifically noted otherwise. 
e.  Landscape Easements/Setbacks. The following minimum landscape easement/setback (measured from R.O.W.) shall be required and shown on the final plat: 
FM 1709/Keller Parkway 
 South Side 	40 feet 
 North Side 	30 feet 
Rufe Snow Drive 
 South of Keller Parkway/FM 1709 	30 feet 
 North of Keller Parkway/FM 1709 	30 feet 
Bear Creek Parkway 
 Building 	15 feet 
 Parking/driving Lane 	30 feet 
Country Brook Lane 	15 feet 
Keller Smithfield Road 
 South of Keller Parkway (Commercial) 	50 feet 
 South of Keller Parkway (Residential) 	20 feet 
 North of Keller Parkway 	30 feet 
 Town Center Lane 	11 to 17 feet based on design 
 
f.  Landscaping Requirements Adjacent to Rights-of-Way and Within Landscaping/Sidewalk Easements. The streetscape within Town Center District is one of the key components that establishes a basic framework for development and establish connections among different uses. Proposed improvements are located in either the right-of-way (R.O.W.) or landscape easements on either side of the road. Easements are measured from the edge of right of way. Location of trees and shrubs further than five feet from utility lines shall remain and/or comply with UDC landscaping requirements. 
1)  FM 1709/Keller Parkway shall have a single row of matched Texas Red Oaks, minimum four-inch (4") caliper, thirty feet (30') on center, planted within the landscaping easement on each side, in accordance with specifications provided by the City (see Figure 5 within this section). A single row of tree form Yaupon Hollies shall be planted adjacent to the street in addition to the single row of Oaks. A five- foot (5') concrete sidewalk shall be constructed centered between Oaks and Hollies. Pedestrian scaled light fixtures, consistent in color and design with the City approved specifications, shall be provided at a one hundred twenty-foot (120') spacing on center. 
2)  Rufe Snow Drive and Keller-Smithfield Road shall have a single row of Red Oaks, minimum four-inch (4") caliper, thirty feet (30') on center planted within the landscaping easement on each side in accordance with specifications provided by the City (see Figure 6 within this section). Brick columns and evergreen shrubs (required along all off-street parking areas adjacent to streets) shall not be required along Rufe Snow Drive south of tributary BB12 of Big Bear Creek. A five- foot (5') concrete sidewalk shall be constructed in a location approved by the City. Pedestrian scaled light fixtures, consistent in color and design with the City approved specifications, shall be provided at a one hundred twenty-foot (120') spacing on center. 
3)  Country Brook Lane shall have a single row of matched Elms, minimum four-inch (4") caliper, thirty feet (30') on center planted within the right of way along both sides (see Figure 7 within this section). A five-foot (5') concrete sidewalk shall be constructed in a location approved by the City. Pedestrian scaled light fixtures, consistent in color and design with the City approved specifications, shall be provided at a one hundred twenty-foot (120') spacing on center. 
4)  Bear Creek Parkway shall have a single row of matched Elms, minimum four-inch (4") caliper, thirty feet (30') on center planted within the right-of-way along both sides and the center medians (see Figure 8 within this section). A five-foot (5') concrete sidewalk shall be constructed in a location approved by the City. Pedestrian scaled light fixtures, consistent in color and design with the City approved specifications, shall be provided at a one hundred twenty-foot (120') spacing on center. 
5)  Town Center Lane shall have a single row of Cedar Elms, minimum four-inch (4") caliper, thiry feet (30') on center planted within the landscape easement on each side in accordance with specifications provided by the City (see Figure 9 within this section). Any future extension of Town Center Lane shall be consistent in design, landscaping, and special features with the existing Town Center Lane. 
g.  Parking Lot Lay Out, Landscaping, and Lighting. 
1)  Parking for all uses shall be provided in accordance with this Code, however, smaller parking ratios may be considered at the time of site plan approval. The sharing of parking for two (2) or more uses is encouraged and may be utilized. The minimum number of parking spaces shall be determined by a study following the procedures of the Urban Land Institute or Institute of Transportation Engineers parking guidelines. 
2)  All parking lots and drives shall be constructed of reinforced concrete. Concrete pavers, consistent with the Town Center specifications, shall be utilized at select locations such as building entry or parking lot islands. 
3)  Concrete curbs shall be provided at the edge of all surface parking areas and around all islands. 
4)  Twenty-five (25) square feet of landscaped area shall be provided for each surface parking space and one (1) tree shall be provided for every twelve (12) surface parking spaces. A maximum of twelve (12) surface parking spaces is permitted between trees. Large, shade providing canopy trees with a minimum three-inch (3") caliper, shall be used to meet this requirement. Required trees shall be in in accordance with the list of Large Trees, provided in Section 8.20. 
5)  Parking lot trees shall be planted in islands a minimum of ten feet (10') wide or in curbed five feet-by-five feet (5'X5') diamond cut-outs in pavement. Islands or diamond cut-outs shall be placed to offer shaded parking from the western sun whenever practicable. Additional landscaping in these islands or diamond cut-outs shall be heat tolerant and low maintenance varieties accordance with the list of Large Trees, provided in Section 8.20. 
6)  If the proposed number of surface parking spaces for a development exceed the Code requirement by ten percent (10%), fifty (50) square feet of landscaping per each additional parking space shall be provided. 
7)  All off-street parking areas adjacent to streets shall be screened by a solid row of evergreen shrubs, to create a three-foot (3') evergreen hedge, and brick column with stone caps, thirty feet (30') on center, in accordance with specifications provided by the City (See Figures 18 and 19 within this Section) 
8)  A minimum five-foot (5') foundation planting shall be provided along the front and sides of all buildings and parking structures. Potted plantings may be considered around patio dining areas in lieu of foundation plantings adjacent to the patio area. Foundation planting and landscape islands with trees may also be required at the rear of the building if visible from streets, other buildings, or open spaces within Town Center. 
9)  In the Town Center district, landscaping shall comply with the Landscaping section of this Code except that the required canopy trees for side and rear lot buffers shall be in accordance with the list of Large Trees, provided at the end of this article. For the Town Center district, the following landscape plant materials are required in side and rear buffers that abut single-family residential zoning districts: 
a)  Five (5) gallon dwarf Yaupon Holly evergreen shrubs shall be planted at five feet (5') on-center spacing adjacent to the required screening wall. 
10)  Required screening walls shall comply with Section 8.13 of this Code except as noted below. In Town Center, required screening walls must comply with all of the following: 
a)  Screening walls shall be a minimum of eight feet (8') in height. 
b)  Screening walls shall be made of pre-cast concrete with panels and columns. Panels shall be monolithic - no more than one panel between posts - with a running bond, brick pattern stamped or cast into the panel on both sides of the panel. The material and color of the panel shall be complimentary and compatible to existing screening walls. 
11)  All landscaping and parking lot islands shall be irrigated in accordance with an approved automatic drip irrigation system. Landscaping shall be maintained in good condition. 
12)  Landscape lighting may be used to highlight landscape elements, building entries, and other important architectural features and accent elements such as fountains and sculptures. 
13)  Parking lot lighting fixtures shall be provided in accordance with the approved specifications for Town Center (see Figure 16 within this section). A lighting plan shall be required, illustrating proposed light fixtures and repective candle footprints to determine number of required fixtures for maximum safety and plesant appearance. Ornamental light fixtures are required within the front yard/front parking lot. Large parking lots may utilize another type of fixture as approved by the City. The total height for parking lot lights shall not exceed twenty feet (20') unless approved at the time of site plan review. A maximum height of thirty inches (30") is allowed for light pedestals within parking lots. 
14)  Building lighting shall be limited to decorative lighting. Standard wall pack lights shall not be used are in the Town Center district. 
h.  Driveway Locations and Turning Lanes. 
1)  Parking lots and driveways shall connect to provide internal circulation for the development. 
2)  A ten-foot (10') band of pavers, consistent in color and design with the approved specifications, shall be provided in crosswalks and entry drives. Pavers shall be antique red Uni-Décor pavers in a herringbone pattern with Holland Stone Soldier Course, as manufactured by or equal to Pavestone Co., Grapevine, Texas. 
3)  Turning lanes shall comply with the general requirements contained in this Code. 
i.  Sidewalk Patios. 
1)  Sidewalk Patio. The design of the interior and immediate surroundings of a sidewalk patio should adhere to the following guidelines. 
a)  The clear height from grade level to any obstruction such as an overhead canopy should be a minimum of seven feet (7'). 
b)  The surface area of an outdoor patio may not exceed the interior floor area of the primary licensed establishment. 
c)  The path to the door of the primary licensed establishment shall be maintained at three feet (3'). 
d)  The patio shall extend to the building line when located between the primary licensed establishment and the street. 
2)  Patio Fencing. Fences or railings are used to delineate and contain the patio. 
a)  A fence or other vertical barrier must be used to delineate the perimeter of the patio area. 
b)  The width of any opening in a fence should be no greater than six and a half feet (6.5') and no less than three feet (3'). 
c)  The required height of a fence facing the street is three and a half feet (3.5'). Side screens may be up to seven feet (7') high above the grade. Such screens should not be entirely opaque but may be formed by structures with lattice or grillwork and climbing vines. 
d)  Fences and screens should be easily removable at all times. 
e)  The design, materials and colors used in the development of the patio restaurant should be of high quality finish and compatible with the streetscape. 
f)  All finishes should be clean and free of any exposed screws or other fasteners. g) Perimeter fences shall not obstruct the line of sight for pedestrians and drivers. 
3)  Awning. Awnings can be used to provide shade and weather protection for the patio as well as visual screening from adjacent uses. 
a)  Materials should be securely fastened to a frame, which is either retractable or demountable. 
b)  Sheltering material should be fabricated and finished to fit the supporting structure with no loose or unsecured edges. 
c)  Materials and colors should coordinate with the surrounding buildings and streetscape elements. They should generally contribute to the design theme of the street. 
d)  The awning should not extend into the public sidewalk adjacent to the patio. 
e)  The awning should attach to the building below the signage identifying the restaurant with a minimum height of seven feet (7'). 
f)  Lighting and other attachments to the awning should be securely fixed and integrated to the supporting structure. 
g)  A building permit is required for awnings. 
h)  Awnings shall be maintained in excellent condition at all times. 
4)  Enclosures. Enclosures may be used for more extensive weather protection and to extend the patio season. 
a)  Enclosures must include a minimum of one continuous opening (from ground to canopy) to the outside (ie. no roll-down walls of any kind, however slide up/down doors are acceptable) that comprises at least 25% of the total perimeter of all of the patio walls. 
b)  The enclosure area should be well ventilated to provide for dispersion of smoke and exchange of air. 
c)  Ventilation should be directly to the exterior and may be achieved by passive means through vents in the awning and/or active fans. 
d)  Cash machines should not be located within the patio area, except where enclosed within a freestanding building or kiosk. 
e)  A building permit is required for the construction of an enclosure. 
5)  Lighting. Lighting is important to the function and appearance of a patio as well as the safety and security of the public environment. 
a)  Exterior lighting should not spill into abutting private property or interfere with the public thoroughfare. 
b)  Lighting should be demountable with no exposed cables or energized fixtures. 
c)  Lighting design should coordinate with patio furnishings and streetscape design. 
d)  Lighting should not be attached to trees or shrubs on City property; however string lighting to highlight deciduous trees within the patio area is permitted. 
e)  Lighting should be used to identify the entrance to a patio. 
f)  Pathways through a patio should be illuminated to ensure the safety of patrons and staff. 
6)  Plant Materials. Plant materials contribute to our general comfort and enjoyment of the patio experience. 
a)  Planting of annuals, vines and container-grown vegetation is encouraged but should be easily removable from the site. 
b)  Planters should be integral with fence and deck structures to maintain a compatible design relationship. 
c)  Deciduous shade trees enhance the quality of the patio space with shade and screening. 
d)  Planting should be used along with spatial separation and structures to screen a patio from adjacent vehicle parking and circulation. 
e)  Planters must not obstruct the public right of way. 
7)  Surface Treatment. The paving of a patio surface provides durable and attractive platform for the patio, which is distinct from the public right-of-way. 
a)  Paving should be durable, skid-proof and easily maintained in a clean and unobstructed condition. 
b)  The minimum slope of pavement should be one percent (1%) and the maximum slope four percent (4%) within the seating area. 
c)  A change in elevation may be used to define the edge of a patio, but should not create an additional barrier to movement. 
j.  Utility Placement. All new utilities shall be placed underground. A utility plan including the location of all existing and new utility boxes shall be provided with the site plan. Utility boxes shall be located away from the rights-of-way lines and where possible at the rear of properties. All other provisions of the Private Utilities section of this Code shall be met. 
k.  Signage. All signs or any changes, modifications, or alterations to a sign require a permit. All signs shall be externally illuminated unless noted otherwise. 
1)  Monument Signs. 
a)  Each platted parcel may have one monument sign. A corner lot with more than six hundred feet (600') of frontage on two streets may have one additional sign. Residential uses may have two signs per frontage located at either side of the primary entry drive. 
b)  The design of the monument sign, including sign shape, area, height, and length, shall be in accordance with Figure 17 within this section. 
c)  Sign materials shall be as follows: 
i.  Sign Frame and Base - The exterior finish for the sign base and frame shall be brick, natural or cultured stone, cementitious stucco, or integrally- colored split face block. 
ii.  Coping and Accents - Coping and accents shall be cast stone, brick, or natural or cultured stone, or cementitious stucco. Coping and accents materials shall not be the same materials as used for the sign frame and base. 
iii.  Sign Panel/Face - The sign panel/face can be cast stone, acrylic, painted or coated aluminum, or other material commonly used for sign panel/faces. Metallic and or other highly-reflective materials and wood materials are prohibited. 
iv.  Letters/Logos - Individual letters and logos shall be pin mounted to the sign panel/face. Letters and logos may be constructed of bronze, aluminum, acrylic, or other material commonly used for sign letters and logos. If cast stone is used for the sign panel/face, letters and logos may be carved (cast) into the cast stone panel/face. 
d)  Monument signs shall be externally illuminated only. 
2)  Attached Building Signage. 
a)  All signs shall be placed in a uniform area on each building defined by architectural detailing. Permit drawings shall show all details associated with the sign including height, location, types of material, and method of lighting. 
b)  Attached signs shall be individually mounted letters. Internally illuminated channel letters and silhouette channel lighting are allowed. 
c)  Window signs are allowed in accordance with Section 8.09 of this Code. (Amended by Ord. No. 1799 on July 5, 2016) 
d)  Temporary signs are allowed in accordance with Section 8.09 of this Code. (Amended by Ord. No. 1799 on July 5, 2016) 
3)  Landmark Sign. 
a)  A landmark sign is a special purpose, off-premise sign that advertises multiple businesses and tenants within the Town Center Zoning District. Businesses and tenants listed on the landmark sign cannot be on the same lot as the landmark sign. 
b)  With approval of a specific use permit, one (1) landmark sign is permitted for every five-hundred feet (500') of street frontage along both sides of Keller Parkway. 
c)  Landmark signs shall be architecturally compatible to the overall architecture of the Town Center Zoning District. Decorative roof and wall design features, such as parapets, ridges, and eaves, etc. shall be incorporated into the design to provide visual interest. 
d)  Landmark signs may be two- or four-sided, and shall comply with the following standards: 
i.  Maximum Height: Thirty-five feet (35'). 
ii.  Maximum Base Dimensions: Fourteen feet (14') by fourteen feet (14'). 
iii.  Maximum Sign Area Per Business/Tenant: Five feet tall (5') by ten feet (10') wide. 
iv.  The initial landmark sign shall establish the form, design, and materials for subsequent landmark signs. Subsequent landmark signs shall match the initial landmark sign. 
4)  Sandwich Board Sign. 
a)  One (1) free-standing sandwich board sign (A-frame sign) shall be allowed per business. 
b)  The maximum width is twenty-four inches (24"), The maximum height is forty-eight inches (48"). 
5)  No signage or other type of advertisement is permitted on park benches and trash receptacles. 
6)  All other signage requirements or any provisions not listed shall comply with the sign requirements (see Section 8.09 - Sign Regulations) of this Code. 
l.  Outside Storage - Except as provided herein, all outside storage and display is prohibited in Town Center. 
1)  Orderly outside displays shall be approved, with a permit, only in association with special events in Town Center. 
2)  Retailers may have limited seasonal displays for thirty (30) days, twice each year and shall obtain a permit for such uses. 
3)  The outside placement of vending machines, ice machines, newspaper machines, grocery carts, merchandise, and other outside uses is prohibited. Temporary cart storage is allowed in the parking lot and shall be provided with six-inch (6") concrete curbs. Metal corrals are not allowed. 
m.  Service Areas and Loading Docks. 
1)  All loading docks and trash collection areas shall not face a street and shall be screened in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
2)  Service areas, loading docks, and back doors shall not front on streets or public open spaces. 
n.  Fences and Walls. 
1)  Wood fences are prohibited in Town Center. 
2)  All fencing and walls shall be of brick, stone, or ornamental metal with evergreen landscaping or a combination thereof. The screening wall requirements in Town Center shall be in accordance with the provisions of this Code (see Section 8.12 - Fencing Requirements in Multi-Family and Non-Residential Uses). 
o.  Pedestrian Circulation. Each lot within the Town Center area shall provide its share of on-site pedestrian facilities. Where the concept plan shows connections to other properties, adequate provisions shall be made for creating a coordinated system of pedestrian ways throughout the district. 
1)  Grade separations shall be provided where pedestrian ways cross thoroughfares or creeks. 
2)  Facilities for bike parking shall be provided. 
3)  Benches shall be provided at approximately one hundred-foot (100') intervals (See Figure 13). 
p.  Street Furnishings and Lighting. Private development within the Town Center District shall coordinate the selection and installation of street furniture, trash receptacles, ash urns, and lighting with the standards selected by the City for the public areas in order to maintain design continuity (see Figures 12-16 within this section). 
5.  Variances to Design Standards. When special conditions exist that prevent strict compliance with the regulations in Section 4, Design Standards, the City Council, upon recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission, may authorize a variance or deviation from these regulations. The process for requesting a variance shall be in accordance with Article Two, Section 2.08 - Procedures for Variances from the Regulations of the Code. 
6.  Illustrations. 
 
Figure 1 - Town Center Master Plan
 
Figure 2 - Single Story Building Elevation
 
Figure 3 - Two Story Building Elevation
 
Figure 4 - Grocery/Retail Building Elevation
 
Figure 5 - FM 1709
 
Figure 6 - Rufe Snow Drive/Keller-Smithfield Road With Retail Frontage
 
Figure 7 - Country Brook Lane
 
Figure 8 - Bear Creek Parkway (Divided Cross Section)
 
Figure 9 - Town Center Lane
 
Figure 10 - Keller-Smithfield Road With Single Family Frontage
 
Figure 11 - Bear Creek Parkway at Town Center (Undivided Cross Section)
 
Figure 12 - Bench Details
 
Figure 13 - Ash Urn Details
 
Figure 14 - Trash Receptacle Details
 
Figure 15 - Pedestrian Light Pole Details
 
Figure 16 - Parking Light Details
 
Figure 17 - Monument Sign Details
 
Figure 18 - Brick Columns Details
 
Figure 19 - Brick Columns Details
Q.  OTK - Old Town Keller District. 
1.  General Purpose and Description. The OTK District encompasses most of the original town site of Keller. The area generally contains a mixture of some of the oldest buildings in Keller along with newer uses and buildings that have replaced older structures over the years. Vacant lots are scattered throughout the district. The OTK District is designed to transform the area into a historic focal point of the City with the character of a small Texas town of the early to middle 1900's. The standards set forth in this district will ensure design consistency in both the redevelopment of existing structures and in new developments. 
a.  Boundary Established. The boundary of the OTK Overlay District consists of Johnson Road on the north, the Union Pacific Railroad on the west, and Bear Creek Parkway on the south. The eastern boundary follows various property lines near Elm Street and Ruby Street. Please refer to the attached Old Town Keller boundary map for exact boundaries (See Figure 1 within this Section). 
b.  Subdistricts Created. 
1)  Main Street Subdistrict. The Main Street Subdistrict consists of all properties with frontage along Main Street and Keller Parkway. This subdistrict is characterized by continuous storefronts along the streets with deep, long, and narrow shops. Buildings are typically one or two stories in height with flat roofs and display a historic mercantile character. 
2)  Neighborhood Subdistrict. The Neighborhood Subdistrict consists of all other properties within the OTK boundary. A mixture of architectural styles including Minimal Traditionalist with Tudor influence, Bungalow, Craftsman, American Foursquare, and Ranch Style. There are a few examples of the historic mercantile character. 
2.  Site Plan Required. All developments within the OTK District shall be subject to design review as part of the site plan review process. A detailed site plan as outlined in this Code shall be submitted for each use in OTK. Unless specifically noted within this section, all requirements of this Code apply to the OTK District. Design review is required in this district to ensure that development within the district is in conformance with design guidelines for OTK and that proposed development is architecturally compatible and within the historic character of OTK. Site plan approval shall be required for the following: 
a.  All new developments/buildings. 
b.  A change of use in an existing structure. 
c.  Additions to existing non-residential buildings or additions to residential buildings costing twenty-five percent (25%) or more of appraised value as determined by the Tarrant Appraisal District. 
d.  Remodeling of existing non-residential buildings costing twenty-five percent (25%) or more of appraised value as determined by the Tarrant Appraisal District. 
3.  Development Standards - Main Street Subdistrict of Old Town Keller. 
a.  Site Orientation and Layout. The front facades of buildings or dining patio fencing in new developments or proposed remodeling shall be located close to the sidewalks to encourage pedestrian involvement and to provide an area for landscaping, benches, tables and other types of street furniture. Parking shall be provided at the rear of developments (see Figure 2 within this Section). Developers shall share in the cost of remote parking lots if parking cannot be provided on site. 
b.  Size of Lot. (Amended by Ord. No. 1805 on August 16, 2016)  
1)  Minimum lot area: Two-thousand five-hundred (2,500) square feet. 
2)  Minimum lot width: Twenty-five feet (25'). (Amended by Ord. No. 1805 on August 16, 2016) 
3)  Minimum lot depth: Sixty feet (60'). (Amended by Ord. No. 1805 on August 16, 2016) 
4)  Lot and tracks in existence prior to July 7, 2015 shall be deemed conforming and may be developed or redeveloped in compliance with all other sections of this Code, provided their dimension are unchanges except for dedications of Rights-of- Way. (Amended by Ord. No. 1805 on August 16, 2016) 
c.  Size of Yards. 
1)  Minimum front yard: The character of Old Town calls for 'Build-to' lines, reducing the setback from the street as much as possible while still accomodating the landscape buffer, sidewalk and necessary easements. This is typically fifteen feet (15'), however may vary from case-to-case to achieve the build-to scenario. 
2)  Minimum side yard: Fifteen feet (15') adjacent to a street. 
3)  Interior side yard: No side yard is required provided that: 
a)  Both property owners agree to adjoin buildings. 
b)  Adequate fire lanes and circulation is provided on site. c) Appropriate building codes can be met. 
4)  Minimum rear yard: Five feet (5'). 
d.  Building Height. Maximum building height shall be two (2) stories or thirty-five feet (35'). Buildings may be up to four (4) stories if approved by the City Council at the time of site plan review. Building height shall be measured from the ground to the peak of the roof. New construction shall have a minimum height of twenty feet (20') to maintain a well- defined street space. 
4.  Outside Storage and Outside Display. 
a.  The provisions for outside storage and display shall apply to all permitted uses in accordance with this Code within the Old Town Keller District (OTK). 
b.  Outside storage and display are prohibited on vacant or undeveloped lots. 
c.  All outside storage and display areas shall not be located in or on any required parking spaces, sidewalks, public rights-of-way, or required landscape or buffer areas. 
d.  A minimum accessible pathway in areas used for outside storage or display shall be provided to allow for flow of pedestrian traffic outside of designated vehicular traffic drives. 
e.  All outside storage and display areas shall be maintained free of garbage and other debris. 
f.  Outside storage and display areas for single-occupant or multi-occupant structures or buildings shall be limited to ten percent (10%) of the total gross floor area of the structure or building with a maximum storage and display area of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet. 
g.  Merchandise must be freestanding and not be located in or on pallets, crates, stands, shelving, racks, or similar types of storage structures. 
h.  Only goods and merchandise associated with the existing on-site business use may be sold or displayed on-premise. 
i.  Outside storage and display areas of bulk goods and merchandise including, but not limited to mulch (bag or bulk), concrete, salt, tires, or other similar products that cannot be easily carried into the store for purchase shall meet the following requirements: 
1)  Outside storage and display areas are located in the side or rear yards. 
2)  Outside storage and display areas, goods, and merchandise shall not exceed the height of six feet (6'). 
3)  Outside storage and display areas shall be screened from view of the public rights- of-way and adjacent residential properties by an opaque fence of suitable height to prevent visibility from public rights-of-way. 
4)  Where screening or fencing is provided or required, decorative iron with landscaping, aluminum with landscaping, wood, or materials being used on the primary structure or building shall be used for fencing. Other materials may be considered with the administrative approval of the Planning Manager. 
5)  Screening shall not be required if the outside storage and display area is located out of view from any public rights-of-way. 
5.  Design Standards - Main Street Subdistrict of Old Town Keller. 
a.  Architectural Requirements. 
1)  Materials. The selected architectural materials must reflect a sense of quality, history, and permanence by utilizing brick, stone, stucco, fibrous cement and concrete. The use of split-faced concrete block shall be limited to the base of a building up to three feet (3') in height from the foundation. Metal and canvas are acceptable materials for awnings and canopies. Vinyl or plastic awnings or canopies shall not be allowed. The color of building materials and the facade shall reflect the eclectic character of the early to mid 1900's, and include earth tones of red, tan, brown and off-white. Accesssory structures shall compliment the main structure in façade and design. 
2)  Façade composition pattern of openings and surface features, a recognizable entry, an interesting roofline, and appropriate building materials. Aspects of the architecture and eclectic character of the Main Street subdistrict, reminiscent of early to middle 1900s, such as materials, colors, window types, cornices, and overall proportions should be reflected in the overall facade composition. Blank walls are prohibited on the front facade and on any facades that may face side streets. As much storefront glass as possible must be incorporated into the facade along with projecting elements and recesses in the facade to define individual tenants within the building. Materials and architectural elements of the front facade shall be carried on all sides of the building (see Figure 3 within this Section). 
3)  Building entrances. Building entrances must be prominent and easy to identify. The main building entrance must be distinguishable along the storefront. At least one of the following treatments is required: 
a)  Entrance located in the center of the facade, as part of a symmetrical overall composition; 
b)  Entrance accented by architectural elements, such as columns, overhanging roofs, awnings, or balconies; 
c)  Entrance marked or accented by a change in the roofline or change in the roof type. 
If rear or side entries are provided, they must be prominent and easy to identify and should be treated as a secondary main entrance in a manner similar to the main entry. Buildings adjacent to the promenade must provide a primary access to the promenade. 
4)  Accent elements. Accent elements such as cut-out openings and latticework, balconies, ornamental building numbers, medallions, and decorative ceramic tile accents must be incorporated into the design of the building to reflect the eclectic character of the Main Street subdistrict, reminiscent of the early to middle 1900s. 
5)  Mechanical equipment. Exterior building walls shall be tall enough to shield all rooftop mechanical equipment from the streetview. Other screening devices such as latticework, louvered panels, any treatments that are compatible with the building's architecture may be considered on a case-by-case basis with approval by the City Council. All ground-mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened within an opaque materialmatching the building style, durability and and color. 
6)  Residential-style architecture. Any buildings, in the form of new construction or being relocated from another location and having a residential-style architecture fitting the character of the district, may be considered in the Main Street subdistrict on a case-by-case basis and approved by the City Council as an element of a site plan application. 
b.  Landscaping, Lighting, Street Furniture, Fencing, and Sidewalk Requirements. 
1)  Street Trees. Large canopy trees shall be planted along Main Street in a straight line spaced at a distance allowing for healthy mature tree canopy between the sidewalk and the street in areas where possible . Understory street trees may be proposed in place of large canopy trees if overhead power lines are present. Such proposals shall be considered by the Planning Manager or his/her designee for final determination. Tree grates shall be provided for tree planting in paved areas. Open tree grates shall be at least five feet by five feet (5' x 5') with openings no more than one- fourth inch (¼") in width (in narrow sidewalk areas, three-foot by seven-foot (3' x 7') is an acceptable alternate). The size and shape of the tree grates must relate to the paving pattern. The grates must be designed to allow for tree trunk growth and be constructed of ductile iron with a durable factory applied finish. Landscape up-lighting and electrical outlets shall be provided in the tree grate area. All trees and landscaping must be provided with adequate and inconspicuous irrigation systems. 
2)  Courtyards and Small spaces. Scale appropriate landscaping shall be designed and planted in courtyards and in areas where space is limited near existing buildings. All new developments shall have foundation watering to reduce soils shifting and appropriately scaled plantings in front of the building and along any sides adjacent to public streets. The foundation planting area shall be a minimum of five feet (5') in width and contain a mixture of landscaping to provide seasonal interest and color. 
3)  Existing Building Surrounded by Paving. In lieu of foundation planting, landscaping may be provided in raised planters, pots or raised landscape beds in the front and sides of existing buildings that are surrounded by paving or to provide for an outdoor patio. The container landscaping chosen must provide near equivalent coverage as a five foot (5') foundation landscape bed. An automatic irrigation system must be provided to ensure adequate hydration of the selected landscaping. 
4)  Streetlights and Street Furniture. Decorative style streetlights, benches and trash receptacles of a style and color similar to those currently in place and provided in Figure 6. Street lights shall be installed on all street corners and at a spacing between street corners not to exceed sixty feet (60') in a uniform manner as each property is developed or redeveloped. 
5)  Lighting. Light for off-street parking facilities shall be of the same height, style and color of the required streetlights mentioned above. Lighting fixtures attached to buildings shall be of a decorative or historic character that is compatible with the architecture of the buildings and the required streetlights. 
6)  Fencing and Screening. Masonry products in keeping with the OTK common area style must be used to screen dumpsters. In areas where fencing is appropriate, as determined by the DRC, materials and styles fitting the character of the neighborhood shall be used. If wood fencing is proposed, details including construction, footing design, specific materials proposed, and maintenance to maximize life must be included in the site plan and permit request. 
c.  Sidewalk Patios. 
1)  Sidewalk Patios. Sidewalk patios are encouraged along the promenade. The design of the interior and immediate surroundings of a sidewalk patio should adhere to the following guidelines. 
a)  The clear height from grade level to any obstruction such as an overhead canopy should be a minimum of seven feet (7'). 
b)  The surface area of an outdoor patio may not exceed the interior floor area of the primary licensed establishment. 
c)  The path to the door of the primary licensed establishment shall be maintained at three feet (3'). 
d)  The patio shall extend to the building line when located between the primary licensed establishment and the street. 
2)  Patio Fencing. Fences or railings are used to delineate and contain the patio. 
a)  A fence or other vertical barrier must be used to delineate the perimeter of the patio area. 
b)  The width of any opening in a fence should be no greater than six and a half feet (6.5') and no less than three feet (3'). 
c)  The required height of a fence facing the street is three and a half feet (3.5'). Side screens may be up to seven feet (7') high above the grade. Such screens should not be entirely opaque but may be formed by structures with lattice or grillwork and climbing vines. 
d)  Fences and screens should be easily removable at all times. 
e)  The design, materials and colors used in the development of the patio restaurant should be of high quality finish and compatible with the streetscape. 
f)  All finishes should be clean and free of any exposed screws or other fasteners. g) Perimeter fences shall not obstruct the line of sight for pedestrians and drivers. 
3)  Awning. Awnings can be used to provide shade and weather protection for the patio as well as visual screening from adjacent uses. 
a)  Materials should be securely fastened to a frame, which is either retractable or demountable. 
b)  Sheltering material should be fabricated and finished to fit the supporting structure with no loose or unsecured edges. 
c)  Materials and colors should coordinate with the surrounding buildings and streetscape elements. They should generally contribute to the design theme of the street. 
d)  The awning should not extend into the public sidewalk adjacent to the patio. 
e)  The awning should attach to the building below the signage identifying the restaurant with a minimum height of seven feet (7'). 
f)  Lighting and other attachments to the awning should be securely fixed and integrated to the supporting structure. 
g)  A building permit is required for awnings. 
h)  Awnings shall be maintained in excellent condition at all times. 
4)  Enclosures. Enclosures may be used for more extensive weather protection and to extend the patio season. 
a)  Enclosures must include a minimum of one continuous opening (from ground to canopy) to the outside (ie. no roll-down walls of any kind, however slide up/down doors are acceptable)) that comprises at least 25% of the total perimeter of all of the patio walls. 
b)  The enclosure area should be well ventilated to provide for dispersion of smoke and exchange of air. 
c)  Ventilation should be directly to the exterior and may be achieved by passive means through vents in the awning and/or active fans. 
d)  Cash machines should not be located within the patio area, except where enclosed within a freestanding building or kiosk. 
e)  A building permit is required for the construction of an enclosure. 
5)  Lighting. Lighting is important to the function and appearance of a patio as well as the safety and security of the public environment. 
a)  Exterior lighting should not spill into abutting private property or interfere with the public thoroughfare. 
b)  Lighting should be demountable with no exposed cables or energized fixtures. c) Lighting design should coordinate with patio furnishings and streetscape design. 
d)  Lighting should not be attached to trees or shrubs on City property; however string lighting to highlight deciduous trees within the patio area is permitted. 
e)  Lighting should be used to identify the entrance to a patio. 
f)  Pathways through a patio should be illuminated to ensure the safety of patrons and staff. 
6)  Plant Materials. Plant materials contribute to our general comfort and enjoyment of the patio experience. 
a)  Planting of annuals, vines and container-grown vegetation is encouraged but should be easily removable from the site. 
b)  Planters should be integral with fence and deck structures to maintain a compatible design relationship. 
c)  Deciduous shade trees enhance the quality of the patio space with shade and screening. 
d)  Planting should be used along with spatial separation and structures to screen a patio from adjacent vehicle parking and circulation. 
e)  Planters must not obstruct the public right of way. 
7)  Surface Treatment. The paving of a patio surface provides durable and attractive platform for the patio, which is distinct from the public right-of-way. 
a)  Paving should be durable, skid-proof and easily maintained in a clean and unobstructed condition. 
b)  The minimum slope of pavement should be 1% and the maximum slope 4% within the seating area. 
c)  A change in elevation may be used to define the edge of a patio, but should not create an additional barrier to movement. 
d.  Sidewalks. All sidewalks along Main Street in the Main Street Subdistrict shall be constructed of brick pavers in the same design, pattern and color as the sidewalk in place along South Main Street between Taylor Street and the Big Bear Creek Bridge. Properties with existing concrete sidewalks shall upgrade the sidewalk with brick pavers in the manner described above when any building additions are proposed or when remodeling existing buildings at a cost of twenty-five percent (25%) or more of the appraised value as determined by the Tarrant Appraisal District. 
e.  Signage Requirements. All signage for new buildings/uses or change in use shall comply with these requirements at the time of sign permit. 
1)  A sign permit shall be required for all signage. 
2)  Signage may be internally or externally illuminated. 
3)  Monument signs are not permitted in OTK. 
4)  Only one attached sign shall be allowed per building or lease space elevation exclusive of address number signs and shingle signs. (Amended by Ord. No. 1799 on July 5, 2016) 
5)  Sign sizing shall be as set forth in Section 8.09. (Amended by Ord. No. 1799 on July 5, 2016) 
a)  Wall mounted signs on Main Street must be historic in context with the eclectic character of the Main Street Subdistrict. 
b)  Projecting signs are considered attached wall mounted signs and shall be allowed provided that they do not extend more than four feet (4') from the wall surface. (See Figure 4 within this Section). Vertically oriented (projection sign) signage shall be placed a minimum of ten feet (10') above grade. 
c)  Shingle signs on Main Street may be up to four (4) square feet and in keeping with the eclectic character of the Main Street Subdistrict. 
6)  Sign materials and styles shall reflect the character of Old Town Keller. Post and bracket styles; wood, metal, or masonry materials with painted, engraved, or mounted letters are encouraged. 
7)  Signs must be located on the facade in areas designated for this function; for example, a recessed or framed area or a parapet panel between shop-front and roofline. 
8)  Color, materials, sizes, shapes, and lighting of signs must be compatible with the architecture of the building, the business it identifies and the character of the surrounding area. 
9)  Sign shapes must be simple and straightforward to communicate well. Signs as symbols are permitted and encouraged because they are easily read and add to the vitality of a storefront. 
10)  Portable signs such as menu boards for restaurants or to direct customers to parking areas shall be allowed provided they do not block sidewalks or streets and are stored indoors after hours of operation. 
11)  Wall murals shall be considered on a case-by-case basis and approved by the City Council as an element of a site plan application. 
12)  Temporary signs are allowed in accordance with the general sign provisions of this Code. (Amended by Ord. No. 1799 on July 5, 2016) 
f.  Parking Requirements. Parking areas situated in front of buildings in new developments in the Main Street Subdistrict are prohibited. In new developments, required parking shall be provided at the rear of buildings. Parking provided on the side of a building will be considered on a case-by-case basis and approved by the City Council as an element of a site plan application. The parking requirements of this Code shall be enforced in new developments to the extent possible. Developers must share in the cost of remote parking lots if all required parking cannot be provided on site. 
6.  Development Standards - Neighborhood Subdistrict of Old Town Keller. 
a.  Site Orientation and Layout. The Neighborhood Subdistrict is more residential in character and contains a mixture of some of the early homes built in Keller and some infill residential structures from the 1900's through the 1970's. The structures in this subdistrict are set back farther from the street than the structures in the Main Street Subdistrict to allow for additional landscaping. Most of the streets have wide right-of-ways (approximately eighty feet [80']) that will accommodate ninety-degree (90°) head in parking within the street right-of-way (see Figure 5 within this Section). 
b.  Size of Lot. Lots vary in size and dimension through the Neighborhood Subdistrict of OTK. Many of the structures built were designed to fit on narrow lots. Lot and yard sizes should be suitable to fit the character of the area and maintain health and safety as defined in the current building and fire codes. 
7.  Design Standards - Neighborhood Subdistrict of Old Town Keller. 
a.  Architectural Requirements. All new structures of the Neighborhood Subdistrict shall resemble the residential character and style of a Texas small town of the early to middle 1900's (see Figure 4). 
Architectural styles considered appropriate include American foursquare, Craftsman, Bungalow, Minimal Traditional, and Ranch Style, 
Any buildings, in the form of new construction or being relocated from another location and having a non-residential-style architecture fitting the character of the district, may be considered in the Neighborhood subdistrict on a case-by-case basis and approved by the City Council as an element of a site plan application. 
b.  Landscaping, Lighting, and Sidewalk Requirements. 
1)  Street Trees. A minimum of two large canopy trees shall be planted at suitable spacing, based on the type of tree, to accommodate mature canopy spread on center within the required front yard centered between the building and the property line. All trees and landscaping must be provided with adequate and inconspicuous irrigation systems. 
2)  Ornamental Trees and Shrubs. Ornamental trees and shrubs shall be planted in courtyards and in areas where space is limited near existing buildings. All new developments shall have foundation plantings, either in ground, raised planters or pots, in front of the building and along any sides adjacent to public streets. The foundation planting area shall be a minimum of five feet (5') in width in ground, or of equal spacing if pots or raised bades are used, and contain a mixture of drought and heat tolerant ornamental trees, shrubs, and seasonal color. 
3)  Streetlights, Parking Lot Lighting and Building Lighting. The streetlight, parking lot lighting, building lighting and street furniture requirements for the Neighborhood Subdistrict are the same as the requirements for the Main Street Subdistrict. 
4)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks in the Neighborhood Subdistrict shall be six feet (6') in width and constructed of concrete with a two-foot (2') wide band of pavers spaced every ten feet (10'). Paver's band shall resemble the brick paver sidewalks along Main Street. 
c.  Signage Requirements. 
1)  The attached signage requirements for the Neighborhood Subdistrict are the same as the Main Street Subdistrict. 
2)  Detached or Ground Mounted Signage. 
a)  All detached signage shall be externally illuminated. 
b)  A sign permit shall be required for all new signs or alterations to signs. 
c)  Only one detached sign shall be allowed per business per public street frontage. 
d)  For single-occupant buildings, detached signage shall not exceed fifteen (15) square feet in total surface area and six feet (6') in height. For multi-occupant buildings, all detached signage shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in total surface area and six feet (6') in height. 
e)  Signs must reflect the character of Old Town and may include post and bracket or double-pylon signs using wooden posts or painted metal poles or monument style signs shall be allowed. Other styles that reflect the character of Old Town will be considered. 
f)  Sign materials shall be consistent with the character of Old Town and the primary licensed establishment. 
g)  Color, materials, sizes, shapes, and lighting of signs must be compatible with the architecture of the primary licensed establishment, the business it identifies and the character of the surrounding area. 
h)  Sign shapes must be simple and straightforward to communicate well. Signs as symbols are permitted and encouraged because they are easily read and add to the vitality of a storefront. 
d.  Parking Requirements. As existing structures in the Neighborhood Subdistrict are redeveloped, the developer or property owner shall be responsible for constructing the ninety-degree (90°) head in parking within the right-of-way composed of either concrete or asphalt. The developer or property owner is also responsible for the construction of a concrete curb adjacent to the sidewalk and a concrete valley gutter between the street edge and the head-in parking space (see Figure 7 within this section for street cross-section). If head in parking does not provide an adequate number of parking for a particular use, parking may be added at the rear of the building if accessible, or the property owner may contribute funds for the construction of remote parking facilities. These requirements also apply to new developments. 
OTK Zoning District Use Table 
P = Permitted Uses 
SUP = May Be Approved As Specific Use Permit 
- = Not Permitted 
Use 	Neighborhood Subdistrict 	Main Street Subdistrict 
Administrative, professional or corporate office (Amended by Ord. No. 1805 on August 16, 2016) 	P*/SUP 	P*/SUP 
Automobile electric charging station 	P 	SUP 
Bakery (retail) 	P 	P 
Bank, saving, loan, and credit unions, including automated teller 	SUP 	SUP 
Bar 	SUP 	SUP 
Barber shop or beauty salon stand alone 	SUP 	SUP 
Barber shop or beauty salon within multi-use retail 	P 	P 
Batching plant (temporary) 	Permit 	Permit 
Bed and Breakfast/Tourist Home 	SUP 	- 
Brewery with retail sales on and off premise 	P 	P 
Brewery with entertainment inside or outside 	SUP 	SUP 
Child Care (Center) as an accessory use only 	SUP 	SUP 
Commercial wedding/event venue 	SUP 	SUP 
Copy shop or printing shop 	P 	P 
Dance studio or aerobics center 	P 	P 
Distillery with 1,500 square-foot tasteing room 	SUP 	SUP 
Dry cleaning free-standing building 	SUP 	SUP 
Entertainment Facility (Indoor) 	SUP 	SUP 
Grocery store or food market 	SUP 	SUP 
Gunsmith (repair only) 	SUP 	SUP 
Hotel 	SUP 	SUP 
Light Manufacturing, wholly enclosed in a building 	SUP 	SUP 
Medical Offices (Amended by Ord. No. 1805 on August 16, 2016) 	SUP 	SUP 
Mixed-Use Residential 	SUP 	SUP 
Museum or art gallery 	P 	P 
Offices, City, County, State, and Other Governmental 	P 	P 
Optical store, optician or optometrist 	P 	P 
Pharmacist or drug store 	SUP 	SUP 
Private club 	P 	P 
Private park 	SUP 	SUP 
Public parking garage (associated with building) 	P 	P 
Public Park or Playground 	SUP 	P 
Religious institution 	P 	P 
Residential Single-Family Detached Dwelling 	P 	- 
Residential Single Family Dwelling: Townhome/Patio Home 	- 	SUP 
Restaurant, café, cafeteria 	P 	P 
Retail uses and services wholly enclosed within a building 	P 	P 
Sales of used goods and merchandise 	SUP 	SUP 
School, Private 	SUP 	SUP 
Seasonal Sales 	SUP 	SUP 
Spa to include Cosmetologists (Hair, Nails, Face) & Massage Therapists Licensed in TX 	SUP 	SUP 
Studio, art or photographic (within multi-use retail) 	P 	P 
Studio, art or photography (stand-alone) 	P 	P 
Temporary field construction office 	P 	P 
Utility structures (Private or Franchised) 	SUP 	SUP 
Utility structures (public) 	P 	P 
Veterinarian Clinic (no outdoor pens) includes grooming facility 	P 	P 
Winery with retail sales (either on or off premise) 	P 	P 
*Administrative, professional or corporate offices are allowed by right when on the second floor or higher of a building or when the use occupies 1,200 square feet or less in an existing building. In all other circumstances an SUP will be required. (Amended by Ord. No. 1805 on August 16, 2016) 
 
(Ord. No. 1959 , § 2(Exh.B), 12-3-2019) 
8.  Illustrations. 
 
Figure 1 - Old Town Keller Boundary
 
Figure 2 - Building Relationship to Main Street
 
Figure 3 - Main Street Facade Treatments
 
Figure 4 - Projecting Signs & View From Main Street
 
Figure 5 - Typical Neighborhood Street
 
Figure 6 - Trash Receptacles and Street Furniture
 
Figure 7 - Typical Cross Section of Street in Old Town Keller
R.  KR - Katy Road District. 
1.  General Purpose and Description. The Katy Road District area generally contains a mixture of industrial-type businesses and older buildings along the railroad corridor in Keller. There are a few residential lots scattered throughout the district. The Katy Road District is designed to encourage redevelopment and increase economic growth for this area. The regulations and standards set forth in this district will ensure design consistency in both the redevelopment of existing structures and in new developments. 
2.  Boundary. The boundary of the Katy Road District consists of Caylor Road on the north, the Union Pacific Railroad on the east, Katy Road on the west, and Golden Triangle Boulevard on the south, and includes all property within this boundary. Please refer to the attached Katy Road District boundary map for exact boundaries (See Figure 1 within this Section). 
3.  Site Plan/Design Review Required. A detailed site plan as outlined in this Code shall be submitted for any new non-residential building, expansion or addition to an existing non-residential building, or conversion of an existing structure from residential to non-residential use. Design review is required in this district to ensure that development within the district is in conformance with site and architectural standards of this overlay district. 
4.  Permitted Uses. 
a.  The The following use charts specify those uses permitted in the Katy Road district. 
b.  Any new or unlisted uses not shown on the use chart for the Katy Road District shall follow the provisions for classification of new or unlisted uses as stated in Section 8.03 (B.1) of this Code. 
KR Zoning District Use Table 
P = Permitted Uses 
SUP = May Be Approved As Specific Use Permit 
- = Not Permitted 
Use 	SUP or P 
Accessory dwelling (attached) 	P 
Administrative, professional or corporate office 	P 
Amateur radio, TV, or CB antenna (50 ft or less in height) 	P 
Antenna: radio, TV, relay, microwave, or telecommunications (over 50 ft) 	SUP 
Appliance Rental 	P 
Assembly of light electronic instruments and devices (enclosed building) 	P 
Athletic stadium or field operated by the city or school district 	SUP 
Automobile/boat upholstery 	P 
Auto, boat/motorcycle sale, repair or related uses and services 	P 
Automobile parts and sales and wholly enclosed in a building 	P 
Automobile reconditioning, body/fender repair 	P 
Automobile Repair, Major (Amended by Ord. No. 1828 on January 17, 2017) 	SUP 
Automobile Repair, Minor (Amended by Ord. No. 1828 on January 17, 2017) 	P 
Automobile Repair, Sales and Service (Amended by Ord. No. 1828 on January 17, 2017) 	P 
Bank, saving, loan, and credit unions, including drive-thru and automatic teller 	SUP 
Bar 	SUP 
Barber shop or beauty salon 	P 
Batching plant (temporary) 	SUP 
Building material and hardware wholly enclosed with no outside storage or display 	P 
Building material and hardware (with outside storage) 	P 
Cabinet and furniture upholstery shop 	P 
Child care or day care center 	SUP 
City, County, State and governmental offices 	P 
College, university or private boarding school 	P 
Commercial engraving/printing 	SUP 
Commercial wedding/event venue 	SUP 
Community center 	SUP 
Contractor shop 	SUP 
Convenience store with gas pumps 	SUP 
Copy shop or printing shop 	P 
Distillery 	SUP 
Donation center 	SUP 
Driving school 	P 
Dry cleaning - free standing 	P 
Dry cleaning - small shop within a multi-use retail building 	P 
Dry cleaning plant or commercial laundry 	P 
Entertainment Facilites (Indoor or Outdoor) 	SUP 
Family home/adult care/day care/group home 	SUP 
Fitness Center/Health Club 	P 
Fraternal clubs, lodges, sororities and fraternities, etc. 	SUP 
Freight or truck terminal yard 	SUP 
Funeral parlor or mortuary 	P 
Furniture restoration, wholly enclosed in a building 	P 
General Retail Sales and Services 	P 
Greenhouses and nurseries (commercial retail) 	P 
Gunsmith (repair only) 	P 
Heating and air conditioning sales and services (enclosed building without outside storage) 	P 
Heavy machinery sales and service 	P 
Heavy vehicle storage 	P 
Heliports and helistops 	SUP 
High risk or hazard industrial manufacturing wholly enclosed within a building 	SUP 
Hospital 	SUP 
Indoor Gun Range 	SUP 
Industrial manufacturing wholly enclosed within a building 	P 
Industrial manufacturing not wholly enclosed within a building 	SUP 
Landscaping service 	P 
Laundromat (self service) 	P 
Light manufacturing in enclosed building 	P 
Light manufacturing with outside storage 	SUP 
Medical/Dental Clinic or Office 	SUP 
Medical laboratory 	P 
Metal recycling collection center 	SUP 
Mini-warehouse or self-service storage warehouse 	P 
Minor medical emergency clinic 	P 
Monuments and headstones sales with outside storage 	P 
Motorcycle sales with outside storage 	P 
Municipal uses operated by the City of Keller 	P 
Museum or art gallery 	SUP 
Newspaper printing 	P 
Office showroom 	P 
Outpatient substance use treatment program for adolescents 	SUP 
Overnight delivery and service center 	P 
Pawnshop 	P 
Pet grooming, no outside pens 	P 
Pet grooming with outside pens 	SUP 
Pharmacist or drug store 	SUP 
Portable building sales with outside storage 	P 
Printing company 	P 
Private club 	SUP 
Public parking garage 	SUP 
Radio broadcasting without tower 	P 
Religious institution 	P 
Research and scientific laboratories 	P 
Restaurant, café or cafeteria 	P 
Sales of used goods and merchandise 	SUP 
School, Private 	P 
School, Public 	P 
School, Business or Trade 	P 
Security systems installation company 	P 
Studio, art or photographic 	P 
Theater, indoor 	SUP 
Tool and machinery rental shop 	SUP 
Truck rental or leasing 	P 
Utility structures (private or franchised) 	SUP 
Utility structures (public) 	P 
Vehicle or car wash 	SUP 
Veterinarian Clinic (with outdoor pens) may or may not include grooming facility 	SUP 
Veterinarian Clinic (no outdoor pens) may or may not include grooming facility 	P 
Wallpaper, flooring, and carpet supply 	P 
Warehouse and service uses without outside storage 	P 
Wholesale distribution center and warehousing 	SUP 
Wholesale sales and services without outside storage 	P 
Wind turbines 	SUP 
Wrecker Services 	SUP 
 
(Ord. No. 1959 , § 2(Exh.B), 12-3-2019) 
5.  General Standards. The standards within this section apply to all properties within the Katy Road District unless specified otherwise. 
a.  Access Management. Driveway approaches shall follow these guidelines: 
1)  Required widths: 
a)  One-Way Driveway: Fifteen feet (15') plus ten-foot (10') radii. 
b)  Two-Way Driveway: Twenty-four feet (24') plus fifteen-foot (15') radii. 
c)  A maximum width of forty-five feet (45') plus twenty-foot (20') radii will be allowed where significant traffic is projected for two-way access as determined by the Director of Public Works. 
2)  Each property shall be permitted a minimum of one (1) driveway. No minimum spacing between driveways along Katy Road shall be required. 
3)  Driveways shall be located a minimum of two hundred fifty feet (250') from arterial street intersections and two hundred feet (200') from collector street intersections. 
4)  All two-way driveways shall intersect at ninety degrees (90°). 
5)  All non-residential driveway approaches shall be constructed in accordance with the City Standard Driveway Construction Details and be maintained by the property owners or property associations. 
6)  Modifications or alternatives to the standards in Section 8.03(R.5.a) may be approved by the Director of Public Works if he/she determines that the requested changes will not create a serious detriment to the safety or operation of traffic on the street or roadway. The Director of Public Works may require that the applicant submit a traffic analysis if it is determined that such an analysis is necessary in order to render a decision on the request. 
b.  Parking. 
1)  The minimum number of parking spaces for all uses shall be provided at a rate of seventy-five percent (75%) of the required number of parking spaces per Section 8.07 of this Code. 
2)  Parking areas shall be permitted in front of existing buildings or new developments. 
3)  All off-street parking and maneuvering areas shall be paved to a minimum of six inches (6") of reinforced concrete over six inches (6") cement-limed or crushed limestone stabilized base compacted to ninety-five percent (95%) density or an equivalent asphalt section. Gravel, pavers or alternative pavement types intended to reduce storm water runoff may be approved by the Director of Public Works. 
4)  Approaches for fire lanes, loading, and storage areas shall be paved to a minimum of seven inches (7") of reinforced concrete over six inches (6") cement-limed or crushed limestone stabilized base compacted to nine-five percent (95%) density. 
c.  Landscape Requirements. 
1)  Buffers. 
a)  Minimum five-foot (5') landscape buffer adjacent to public streets. 
b)  Minimum five-foot (5') landscape buffer adjacent to rear property lines. c) Landscape buffers along side property lines will not be required. 
2)  Understory Trees. 
a)  Understory trees shall be planted in landscape buffers adjacent to public streets and along rear property lines at a rate of one (1) ornamental tree per fifteen feet (15') of landscape buffer (see Article Nine - Recommended List for Required Landscape Areas). 
b)  The required understory trees for landscape buffers adjacent to public streets may be placed in a linear arrangement with consistent spacing or in a random, free-form, and/or clustered arrangement. 
c)  Understory trees shall be a minimum of eight feet (8') in height at the time of planting. 
3)  Seasonal Color, Shrubs, Planters, Pots, and Beds. Seasonal color, living ground cover, and small shrubs may be used in lieu of ornamental trees for landscape buffers adjacent to public streets. Such plantings shall be provided in raised planters, pots, or landscape beds in the front and sides of existing buildings. The area for seasonal color and shrubs shall be equivalent to the area of the required front landscape buffer. One (1) five-gallon shrub shall be provided for every fifteen (15) square feet of landscape area. Landscape areas not planted with shrubs shall be planted with seasonal color and/or living ground cover. 
4)  All trees and landscaping must be provided with irrigation systems. 
d.  Development Standards. 
1)  Site Orientation and Layout. The front facades of existing buildings and new developments may be located close to the street to provide an area for parking and landscaping. Parking may be provided in front or at the rear of developments. 
2)  Size of Lot. 
a)  Minimum lot area: Five thousand (5,000) square feet. b) Minimum lot width: Fifty feet (50'). 
c)  Minimum lot depth: None. 
3)  Size of Yards. 
a)  Minimum front yard: Fifteen feet (15'). Buildings shall be allowed to encroach fifty percent (50%) of a lot's minimum fifteen-foot (15') front building setback. 
b)  Minimum side yard: Fifteen feet (15') adjacent to a street. 
c)  Interior side yard: None. 
d)  Minimum rear yard: Five feet (5'). 
e)  Adjacent to a Single-Family District or Use: None. 
4)  Building Height. 
a)  Maximum building height shall be twenty-five feet (25'). Architectural features may exceed twenty-five feet (25'). 
b)  Pitched roofs may exceed height limits with City Council approval provided they are gable or non-shed roof types. 
c)  One (1) additional foot setback from all property lines for each additional two feet (2') in height above twenty-five feet (25'). 
e.  Design Standards. 
1)  Architectural Requirements. The intent of the design standards that follow is to allow construction of buildings that reflect the context of existing industrial developments and close proximity to the railroad corridor. 
2)  Building Materials. 
a)  The selected architectural materials must reflect a sense of quality and permanence by utilizing brick, stone, concrete, stucco, and metal. 
b)  The use of natural clay brick, native or manufactured stone, stucco, exposed concrete, textured concrete blocks (quick brick), split-face concrete blocks, fiber-cement materials or any other wall surface material allowed by building code shall be noted on the site plan elevations. Stucco may be used for cornices, medallions, and other architectural details and elements. 
c)  The use of exposed metal exterior walls and finishes shall be allowed so long as it is architectural metal. For metal exterior finishes, the use of corrugated panels, profiled panels, deep ribbed panels, or concealed fastener systems are permitted and shall have a finish of a permanent material such as a baked or enamel finish or painted to the wall manufacturer's standards. Metal exterior walls shall be compatible in color with the principal buildings and existing surrounding structures. 
d)  Roof material shall be asphalt composition, architectural metal, stone, clay or concrete roofing tile. 
e)  Carports constructed entirely out of metal are permitted. Carports shall be shown on the site plan and shall be compatible in design and material with the main structure. Carports shall be located on the side or rear of the property and shall observe all building setback lines. 
3)  Building Exterior Colors. 
a)  Preferred colors of buildings and accessory structures are earth tones (red, brown, tan, off-white, green). Accessory structures shall be compatible with the main structure. The use of florescent paint, florescent colors and the extensive use of bright colors on buildings as commercial identity or signage shall not be permitted. 
b)  Service doors, down spouts, utility boxes and panels, and other similar features on the buildings shall be painted to match the primary material on the building. 
c)  The use of lighted stripes, exposed neon tubular lights or similar material on buildings or accessory structures shall not be permitted. 
d)  Awning and canopies shall be architectural metal, canvas, glass, fiberglass, or fabric. Vinyl, plastic or similar materials for awnings and canopies are not allowed. 
4)  Mechanical equipment. Roof top mechanical/electrical equipment shall be screened with an extension of the building facade or a compatible roof design and shall be tall enough to shield all rooftop mechanical equipment from the view from the street. The screening of equipment with metal screening, latticework, louvered panels, or other materials that are compatible with the building's architecture may be approved on a case- by-case basis by City Council. The screening of all ground-mounted mechanical equipment shall not be required. 
5)  Service Areas and Loading Docks. Service area, loading docks, service doors, and trash collection areas fronting on streets or public open spaces shall be permitted. Screening of these areas shall not be required. 
f.  Signage Requirements. 
1)  Attached or Building Mounted Signage. 
1)  Attached signs are allowed in accordance with the sign provisions in Section 8.09 of this Code unless otherwise specified. 
b)  Sign materials shall consist of wood, metal, masonry, durable plastic, or similar materials with painted, engraved, or individual mounted letters. 
c)  Only one attached sign shall be allowed per business per public street frontage. An additional attached sign may be permitted per business if facing the rear of the property. 
d)  Wall murals shall be considered on a case-by-case basis and approved by City Council as an element of a site plan application. 
2)  Detached or Ground Mounted Signage. 
a)  Detached or ground mounted signs are allowed in accordance with the sign provisions in Section 8.09 of this Code unless otherwise specified. 
1)  Sign materials shall consist of wood, metal, masonry, durable plastic, or similar materials with painted, engraved, or individual mounted letters. 
2)  Only one detached sign shall be allowed per business per public street frontage. 
3)  Post and bracket or double-pylon signs using wooden posts or painted metal poles or monument style signs shall be allowed. Masonry framing of monument signs shall not be required. 
e)  Detached signs for Single-Occupant or Multi-Occupant Buildings two thousand (2,000) square feet or less shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in total surface area and six feet (6') in height. 
f)  Detached signs for Single-Occupant or Multi-Occupant Buildings greater than two thousand (2,000) square feet to five thousand (5,000) square feet shall not exceed thirty-six (36) square feet in total surface area and six feet (6') in height. 
g)  Detached signs for Single-Occupant or Multi-Occupant Buildings greater than five thousand (5,000) square feet shall comply with the sign provisions in Section 8.09 of this Code. 
h)  The sign may be located within five feet (5') from the public right-of-way and shall not create hazards to traffic or pedestrians. 
i)  Pole signs are not permitted. 
3)  Miscellaneous Signage. 
a)  Window signs are allowed in accordance with the sign provisions in Section 8.09 of this Code. 
b)  Temporary banner signs are allowed in accordance with the sign provisions in Section 8.09 of this Code. 
g.  Fencing. 
1)  All fencing shall be shown on the site plan for the development and be approved as part of the site plan approval. 
2)  Fencing shall be constructed of wrought iron, tubular steel, chain link, barbed wire, masonry, wood, fiberglass stockade, split rail, live screening, or a combination thereof. 
3)  Fencing shall not exceed eight feet (8') in height unless specifically approved on a site plan by the City Council. 
4)  Fencing shall be allowed within the front building setback. 
h.  Screening. 
1)  Screening walls between non-residential developments and single-family or two-family residential uses or zoning districts shall not be required. 
2)  Screening walls around refuse storage, trash compactor, ground mounted utilities, heating/cooling units, and loading areas shall not be required. 
3)  If screening walls are proposed, screening walls shall be constructed in accordance with Section 8.13 of this Code. Screening wall plans shall be submitted at time of Building Permit application in accordance with the application requirements listed in Section 4.13 - Landscaping and Screening Wall Plans. 
i.  Lighting. 
1)  Lighting shall be in accordance with Section 8.16 of this Code. 
2)  No minimum setback shall be required for light poles placed on the site from all adjacent residential properties. 
3)  Back-lit canopies or awnings shall not be allowed. 
j.  Sidewalks. No perimeter sidewalks along the street rights-of-way of Katy Road shall be required for properties within this Katy Road District. A five-foot (5') wide concrete sidewalk shall be required along the street rights-of-way of Golden Triangle Boulevard. 
k.  Outside Storage and Outside Display. 
1)  The provisions for outside storage and display shall apply to all permitted uses in accordance with this Code except for single-family and two-family residential uses within the Katy Road District. 
2)  Outside storage and display are prohibited on vacant or undeveloped lots. 
3)  All outside storage and display areas shall not be located in or on any sidewalks, public rights-of-way, or required landscape or buffer areas. 
4)  A minimum accessible pathway in areas used for outside storage or display shall be provided to allow for flow of pedestrian traffic outside of designated vehicular traffic drives. 
5)  All outside storage and display areas shall be maintained free of garbage and other debris. 
6)  Outside storage and display areas for single-occupant or multi-occupant structures or buildings shall be limited to seventy-five percent (75%) of the total lot area. 
7)  Outside storage and display areas shall not exceed the height of six feet (6') within the front yard. 
8)  Merchandise must be freestanding and not be located in or on pallets, crates, stands, shelving, racks, or similar types of storage structures. 
9)  Only goods and merchandise associated with the existing on-site business use may be sold or displayed on-premise. 
10)  Screening shall not be required for outside storage of vehicles. 
11)  Outside storage and display areas of bulk goods and merchandise including, but not limited to mulch (bag or bulk), concrete, salt, tires, or other similar products that cannot be easily carried into the store for purchase shall meet the following requirements: 
a)  Outside storage and display areas are located in the side or rear yards. 
b)  Goods and merchandise shall not exceed the height of six feet (6'). 
c)  Outside storage and display areas shall be screened from view of the public rights-of-way and adjacent residential properties by a minimum six foot (6') fence. 
d)  Where screening or fencing is provided or required, it shall be in accordance with Section 8.03 (R.5.g) and (R.5.h) of this Code. 
l.  Drainage. With the approval of the Director of Public Works, no on-site detention of storm water runoff is required provided: 
1)  There is sufficient downstream capacity of the storm water drainage system to accommodate the increased runoff due to site development; 
2)  The conveyance of the storm water from the site being developed is directly to a storm water system within public rights-of-way or minor tributary and not across private property; and/or 
3)  Site development makes use of gravel or other permeable pavement and/or other storm water quanity best management practices to reduce the amount of storm water runoff. 
6.  Variances to Standards. When special conditions exist that prevent strict compliance with the regulations in Section 5, General Standards, the City Council, upon recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission, may authorize a variance or deviation from these regulations. The process for requesting a variance shall be in accordance with Article Two, Section 2.08 - Procedures for Variances from the Regulations of the Code. 
 
Figure 1 - Overall Katy Road District Boundary
S.  C - Commercial District. 
1.  General Purpose and Description. The C, Commercial District is intended predominately for certain retail, and light intensity wholesale and commercial uses of a service nature which typically have operating characteristics or traffic service requirements generally incompatible with typical office, other retail, shopping, and residential environments. 
2.  Permitted Uses. 
a.  Those uses specified in this Section. 
b.  Such uses as may be permitted under provisions of Specific Use Permits (SUP). 
3.  Height Regulations. 
Maximum Height - Two (2) stories, thirty-five feet (35'); maximum four (4) stories, forty-eight feet (48') if an additional setback is met. One story, twenty-five feet (25') if within one hundred feet (100') of a developed SF-zoning district/lot. Architectural features may exceed twenty-five feet (25'). 
4.  Area Regulations. 
a.  Size of Lots. 
1)  Minimum Lot Size - Thirty-three thousand (33,000) square feet. 
2)  Minimum Lot Width - One hundred fifty feet (150'). 
3)  Minimum Lot Depth - None. 
b.  Size of Yards. 
1)  Minimum Front Yard - Thirty feet (30'); all yards adjacent to a street shall be considered a front yard. 
2)  Minimum Side Yard - None. 
3)  Minimum Rear Yard - Twenty feet (20'). 
4)  Adjacent to a Single-Family District - The side or rear setback, whichever is adjacent to the single-family zoning district shall observe a sixty-foot (60') setback. 
5)  Additional setback for structures over thirty-five feet (35') - One (1) additional foot setback for each additional two feet (2') in height above thirty-five feet (35'). 
5.  Other Regulations. 
a.  As established in Article Eight. 
b.  Parking Requirements: As established in Section 8.07 - Off Street Parking and Loading Requirements. 
c.  No permanent use of temporary dwellings, such as travel trailers or mobile homes, may be used for on-site dwelling or non-residential purposes. 
d.  Site Plan submittal is required. 
e.  No outside storage is permitted unless approved by a Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
6.  Compliances with State Laws and Federal Laws. No uses shall be allowed which are prohibited by State law or which operate in excess of State or National environmental or pollution standards as determined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Texas Air Control Board, Texas State Department of Health, or The Texas Water Quality Control Board, as the case may be. 
C Zoning District Use Table 
P = Permitted Uses 
SUP = May Be Approved as Special Use Permit 
Additional uses permitted only by Planned Development Districts are listed in Section 8.04(l) 
- = Not Permitted 
Use 	SUP or P 
* All uses listed in Retail Zoning District with the same conditions. 	P 
Accessory Dwelling as part of a primary structure 	P 
Automobile Repair, Sales and Service (Amended by Ord. No. 1828 on January 17, 2017) 	SUP 
Brewery 	P 
Brewery with entertainment inside or outside 	SUP 
Commercial engraving/printing 	SUP 
Contractor shop 	SUP 
Convenience store with gas pumps 	SUP 
Donation center 	SUP 
Dry cleaning plant or commercial laundry 	P 
Entertainment Facilities (Indoor or Outdoor) 	SUP 
Freight or truck terminal yard 	SUP 
Furniture restoration 	P 
Greenhouses and nurseries (commercial retail or wholesale) 	SUP 
Gunsmith (repair only) 	P 
Heating and air conditioning sales and services without outdoor storage 	P 
Heavy machinery sales and service 	SUP 
Heavy vehicle storage 	SUP 
Heliports and helistops 	SUP 
Hospital 	P 
Hotel/Motel 	P 
Light Manufacturing wholly enclosed within a building 	P 
Metal Recycling Center 	SUP 
Mini-Warehouse or Self Storage Warehouse 	SUP 
Monuments and headstones sales with outside storage 	SUP 
Museum or art gallery 	P 
Newspaper printing 	P 
Nursing Home 	SUP 
Offices, City, County, State, and Other Governmental 	P 
Optical store, optician or optometrist 	P 
Overnight delivery and service center 	SUP 
Pet grooming, no outdoor kennels 	P 
Pharmacist or drug store 	P 
Portable building sales with outside storage 	SUP 
Printing company (commercial) 	P 
Private club 	P 
Public Parking Garage associated with a building 	P 
Radio broadcasting without tower 	SUP 
Religious institution 	P 
Research and scientific laboratories 	P 
Retail uses and services wholly enclosed within a building 	P 
Veterinarian Clinic (with or without outdoor pens) includes grooming facility 	SUP 
Winery 	P 
* All uses listed in Retail Zoning District with the same conditions. 	P 
 
T.  IP - Industrial Park District. 
1.  General Purpose and Description. The IP, Industrial Park District is intended to provide a low intensity campus or open setting for research and development laboratories, science and high technology firms and related office and support uses. 
2.  Permitted Uses. 
a.  Those uses specified in this Section. 
b.  Such uses as may be permitted under provision of Specific Use Permits (SUP). 
3.  Height Regulations. 
Maximum Height - Six (6) stories, seventy-two feet (72') - additional height is allowed by a Specific Use Permit (SUP) on a case-by-case basis. 
4.  Area Regulations. 
a.  Size of Lot. 
1)  Minimum Lot Area for industrial district - Three (3) acres. 
2)  Minimum Lot Width - One hundred fifty feet (150'). 
3)  Minimum Lot Depth - Two hundred feet (200'). 
b.  Size of Yards. 
1)  Minimum Front Yard - Fifty feet (50'). 
2)  Minimum Side Yard - None - Thirty feet (30') adjacent to a street. 
3)  Minimum Rear Yard - Thirty feet (30'). 
4)  Adjacent to a Single-Family District - The side or rear setback, whichever is adjacent to the single-family zoning district shall observe a sixty-foot (60') setback. 
5.  Other Regulations. 
a.  As established in Article Eight. 
b.  Parking Requirements: As established in Section 8.07 - Off Street Parking and Loading Requirements. 
c.  No permanent use of temporary dwellings, such as travel trailers or mobile homes, may be used for on-site dwelling or non-residential purposes. 
d.  Site Plan submittal is required. 
e.  No outside storage is permitted unless approved by a Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
6.  Compliance With State Laws and Federal Laws. No uses shall be allowed which are prohibited by State law or which operate in excess of State or National environmental or pollution standards as determined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Texas Air Control Board, Texas State Department of Health, or The Texas Water Quality Control Board, as the case may be. 
IP Zoning District Use Table 
P = Permitted Uses 
SUP = May Be Approved as Special Use Permit 
Additional uses permitted only by Planned Development Districts are listed in Section 8.04(l) 
- = Not Permitted 
Use 	SUP or P 
* All uses listed in Retail and Commercial Zoning District with the same conditions. 	P 
Administrative, professional or corporate office 	P 
Antenna: radio, TV, relay, microwave, or telecommunications (over 50 ft.) 	SUP 
Assembly of light electronic instruments and devices (enclosed building) 	P 
Assembly of products including packaging 	P 
Assembly of radios/audio/visual equipment/communication equipment 	P 
Automobile Repair, Minor (Amended by Ord. No. 1828 on January 17, 2017) 	SUP 
Automobile Repair, Sales and Service (Amended by Ord. No. 1828 on January 17, 2017) 	P 
Batching plant (temporary) 	Permit 
Heliports and helistops 	SUP 
Hospital 	P 
Hotel/Motel 	P 
Light Manufacturing wholly enclosed within a building 	P 
Medical clinic, office, or laboratory 	P 
Offices, City, County, State, and Other Governmental 	P 
Public Parking Garage associated with a building 	P 
Religious institution 	P 
Research and scientific laboratories 	P 
Technology/Research and Development 	P 
* All uses listed in Retail and Commercial Zoning District with the same conditions. 	P 
 
U.  LI - Light Industrial District. 
1.  General Purpose and Description. The LI, Light Industrial District is intended primarily for the conduct of light manufacturing, assembling and fabrication, and for warehousing, wholesaling and service operations that do not depend upon frequent customer or client visits. Such uses do require accessibility to major highways, rail lines or other means of transportation. 
2.  Permitted Uses. The attached uses are permitted in the "LI" District, provided that such manufacturing or industrial operation shall not disseminate dust, fumes, gas, noxious odor, smoke, glare, or other atmospheric influence beyond the boundaries of the property on which such use is located and which produces no noise exceeding the average intensity of noise of street traffic at that point and provided that such use does not create fire hazards on surrounding property. 
a.  Those uses specified in this Section. 
b.  A "high risk or hazardous industrial use" is permitted by Specific Use Permit (SUP) only. In this section, "high risk or hazardous industrial use" means any industrial use whose operation, in the opinion of the Fire Chief, involves a much higher than average risk to public health and safety. These uses include but are not limited to facilities where significant amounts of radiation, radioactive materials, highly toxic chemicals or substances, or highly combustible or explosive materials are present, used, produced, stored, or disposed of. 
c.  Such uses as may be permitted under provisions of Specific Use Permits (SUP). 
3.  Height Regulations. 
Maximum Height - Two (2) stories, thirty-five feet (35'); maximum four (4) stories, forty-eight feet (48') if an additional setback is met. 
4.  Area Regulations. 
a.  Size of Lots. 
1)  Minimum Lot Size - Thirty-three thousand (33,000) square feet. 
2)  Minimum Lot Width - One hundred fifty feet (150'). 
3)  Minimum Lot Depth - None. 
b.  Size of Yards. 
1)  Minimum Front Yard - Thirty feet (30'); all yards adjacent to a street shall be considered a front yard. 
2)  Minimum Side Yard - None; thirty feet (30') adjacent to street. 
3)  Minimum Rear Yard - Thirty feet (30'). 
4)  Adjacent to a Single-Family District - The side or rear setback, whichever is adjacent to the single-family zoning district shall observe a one hundred-foot (100') setback. 
5)  Additional setback for structures over thirty-five feet (35') - One (1) additional foot setback for each additional two feet (2') in height above thirty-five feet (35'). 
5.  Other Regulations. 
a.  As established in Article Eight. 
b.  Parking Requirements: As established in Section 8.07 - Off Street Parking and Loading Requirements. 
c.  No permanent use of temporary dwellings, such as travel trailers or mobile homes, may be used for on-site dwelling or non-residential purposes. 
d.  Site Plan submittal is required. 
e.  No outside storage is permitted unless approved by a Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
6.  Compliance With State Laws and Federal Laws. No uses shall be allowed which are prohibited by State law or which operate in excess of State or National environmental or pollution standards as determined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Texas Air Control Board, Texas State Department of Health, or The Texas Water Quality Control Board, as the case may be. 
LI Zoning District Use Table 
P = Permitted Uses 
SUP = May Be Approved as Special Use Permit 
Additional uses permitted only by Planned Development Districts are listed in Section 8.04(l) 
- = Not Permitted 
Use 	SUP or P 
* All uses listed in Retail and Commercial Zoning District with the same conditions. 	P 
Amateur radio, TV, or CB antenna (50 ft. or less in height) 	P 
Assembly of light electronic instruments and devices (enclosed building) 	P 
Automobile/boat upholstery 	P 
Automobile reconditioning, body/fender repair 	P 
Automobile Repair, Major 	SUP 
Automobile Repair, Minor (Amended by Ord. No. 1828 on January 17, 2017) 	SUP 
Automobile Repair, Sales and Service (Amended by Ord. No. 1828 on January 17, 2017) 	P 
Building material and hardware (with outside storage) 	SUP 
Cabinet and furniture upholstery shop 	P 
Cemetery or mausoleum (new or expansion) 	SUP 
Contractor shop 	P 
High risk or hazard industrial manufacturing wholly enclosed within a building 	SUP 
Landscaping service 	SUP 
Industrial manufacturing with limited outdoor storage 	P 
Industrial manufacturing with outdoor use/storage 	SUP 
Light Manufacturing wholly enclosed within a building 	P 
Metal Recycling Center 	SUP 
Monuments and headstones sales with outside storage 	SUP 
Medical laboratory 	P 
Minor medical emergency clinic 	P 
Religious institution 	P 
Sexually oriented uses 	SUP 
Truck rental or leasing 	SUP 
* All uses listed in Retail and Commercial Zoning District with the same conditions. 	P 
 
V.  FP - Flex Space District. 
1.  General Purpose and Description. The purpose of the Mixed Use Flex Space District is to encourage the mixing of residential, retail, office and warehouse uses within an urban framework which is small in scale and compatible with adjacent developments. This section is also intended to promote flexibility in the development process. 
2.  Permitted Uses. The attached uses are permitted in the "FP" District, provided that such manufacturing or industrial operation shall not disseminate dust, fumes, gas, noxious odor, smoke, glare, or other atmospheric influence and which produces no noise exceeding the average intensity of noise of street traffic at that point and provided that such use does not create fire hazards on surrounding property. Flex Space zoning shall permit development only in accordance with a Site Plan, in accordance with this UDC, that has been approved by the City Council. Property zoned Flex Space may only be used and/or developed in accordance with its approved Site Plan. No amendment(s) to an approved Site Plan are permitted without City Council approval. A request to amend a Site Plan in a Flex Space district is a request to re-zone the tract. Uses permitted under an approved Site Plan are only permitted in strict accordance with the corresponding, approved Site Plan. 
The following uses of Land are authorized as permitted uses within the Flex Space District, strictly in accordance with an approved Site Plan as provided for herein below and within the UDC. Uses are further classified according to general categories of land uses. To the extent expressly authorized by these district regulations, a general use category shall be identified on a Site Plan. Upon approval of such plan, any use appearing in the use list, which is classified under such general category, is authorized to be established in accordance with the Site Plan, and any conditions attached thereto. 
a.  Principal Uses (as provided in the FP Land Use Table): 
1)  Residential uses; 
2)  Commercial uses; 
3)  Retail uses; 
4)  Office uses; 
5)  Warehouse uses; 
6)  Light Manufacturing uses; 
7)  Light Industrial uses. 
b.  Accessory Uses: The following uses shall be permitted as accessory uses, strictly in accordance with an approved Site Plan as provided for herein below: 
1)  Community, social, hobby or laundry facilities for use by occupants of a development within the district. 
2)  Recreation space and facilities including exercise facilities and weight rooms, tennis courts, racquetball, handball and volleyball courts, spas and swimming pools, for use by occupants of a development within the district. 
3)  Parking and parking structures. 
4)  Daycare. 
5)  Other uses customarily incidental to the permitted uses. 
3.  Height Regulations. 
Maximum Height - No building shall exceed fifty (50) feet in height unless the additional height is set back from the setback line/build to line one (1) additional foot for each two (2) feet of height above the 50-foot limit. 
A turret, spire or tower may exceed maximum height of a building provided that any such structure is no more than 15-feet higher than the maximum permitted height and has a floor area which is ten percent, or less, of the ground floor area of the building of which it is a part. 
4.  Density and Area Regulations. The density and area standards shall apply: 
a.  Maximum Lot Coverage: The combined area occupied by all impervious coverage (main structures, accessory structures and ground surfaces) shall not exceed eighty percent (80%) of the total lot area. 
b.  The area of an above grade parking structure is included in the calculations of lot coverage 
c.  The area of a porch or arcade fronting a public street is included in the calculation of lot coverage. 
d.  Minimum Density/Floor Area Ratio (FAR) - The gross minimum density/ FAR for the Mixed Use District shall be 1.5. 
e.  Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit: 
Efficiency - 600 square feet 
1 Bedroom - 750 square feet 
2 Bedroom - 900 square feet 
3 Bedroom - 1,000 square feet 
f.  Size of Lots. 
1)  Minimum Lot Width - two hundred feet (200'). 
2)  Minimum Lot Depth - two hundred feet (200'). 
g.  Size of Yards. 
1)  Build-to line: The build-to line for accessory and primary buildings, structures, walls and fences shall be ten feet (10') on all public street frontages except where landscape buffers are greater, then they shall meet the landscape buffer. Twenty- five (25) percent of any street frontage of a building shall be located five feet (5') from the front property line. 
a)  The zone between the right-of-way line and the build-to line shall be landscaped in accordance with the UDC. 
b)  There shall be no build-to-line/setback for temporary buildings, structures or tents erected in accordance herein, provided sidewalks are not obstructed. 
2)  Perimeter Setbacks: Primary buildings and parking structures shall be setback from the district boundary lines a minimum of ten feet (10'). 
3)  Overhangs and fireplaces: The minimum setback requirements shall apply in all cases, except that fireplaces, eaves, bays, balconies and fireproof stairways located above the first floor may extend up to a maximum of five feet (5') into the required setbacks. 
4)  Patios: Patios may not be constructed within the required setback zones. This limitation, however, does not apply to sidewalk cafes. 
5.  Other Regulations. 
a.  Parking: Off-street facilities shall be provided for all uses, in accordance with this section. 
1)  Parking garages shall be located behind and be wrapped (joined on three sides) by the proposed primary uses. 
2)  Parking space count shall be passed on proposed uses, as described in Section 8.07 of the UDC with credit being given for shared parking as described herein. 
3)  Parking garages shall not have frontage on public streets. 
4)  Ramps shall not be placed on the face of parking structures fronting, or visible from, public streets. 
5)  Steel parking garages and steel guard cables on garage facades are prohibited. 
6)  Off-street below grade parking is permitted to the lot lines, but must be designed to allow planting of landscape as defined in the UDC. 
7)  Shared Parking: Uses may join in establishing shared parking areas if it can be demonstrated that the parking for two or more specific uses occurs at alternating time periods. Required parking shall be determined based on parking demand for the peak parking period, as determined by a parking analysis study approved by the Planning Manager. 
b.  Exterior Appearance. 
1)  Materials: At least ninety percent (90%) of the exterior cladding of all exterior walls fronting or visible from public streets (including above grade parking structures) shall be of masonry construction exclusive of doors and windows. An applicant however may submit a design that employs alternative construction materials for exterior cladding with an application for a Flex Space District designation. The alternative may be approved by the City upon determination that such construction will result in an appearance that is compatible with surrounding buildings and the overall character of the district. 
2)  Upon a finding that the alternative design will result in an appearance that is compatible with surrounding buildings and the overall character of the district, waivers may be granted for alternatives employing a minimum of forty percent (40%) masonry cladding, provided that the ground floor of the structure (up to a height of twelve [12] feet), is a minimum of ninety percent (90%) masonry. 
a)  At least eighty percent (80%) of the exterior cladding of all walls not fronting, or not visible from public ways (including above grade parking structures) shall be masonry construction. 
b)  The exterior cladding, (excluding doors and windows), of all buildings, (including above grade parking structures), shall be composed of not more than three (3) materials, (excluding roofs). 
c)  The following materials are prohibited as primary cladding materials: 
i.  Wood or plastic siding. 
ii.  Wood roof shingles. 
iii.  Architecturally finished concrete block is permitted as a cladding material. 
iv.  Corrugated panels; galvanized steel, corrugated aluminum coated, zinc- aluminum coated, or unpainted exterior metal finish are prohibited, however architectural metal is permitted. 
d)  The following materials are prohibited as primary roofing materials: 
i.  Wood roof shingles. 
ii.  Composition shingles on any portion of a roof visible from any adjacent street. 
iii.  Corrugated panels; galvanized, corrugated aluminum coated, zinc- aluminum coated, or unpainted exterior metal finish are prohibited, however architectural metal is permitted. 
3)  Colors. 
a)  The dominant color of all buildings (including above grade parking structures) shall be shades of red, beige, gray with red tones (warm gray) and/or brown. Black and stark white shall not be used. There are no restrictions on accent colors, except that fluorescent colors are prohibited. 
b)  The roof colors shall be a shade of cool gray, warm gray, brown or red. 
4)  Windows: 
a)  Where a retail use occupies the first floor, at least seventy percent (70%) of the first floor exterior wall facing a thoroughfare, street, boulevard or parking plaza shall be transparent glazing. 
b)  The exterior wall surface of all buildings above the first floor shall not be more than fifty percent (50%) non-reflective, non-glare glass. 
c)  Glass is to be non-glare, clear or tinted, not reflective. 
5)  Walls attached to buildings shall be developed as architectural extensions of the buildings, constructed of the same material and in the same style. 
6)  All on-site lighting, landscaping and signs must meet the requirements of the UDC. 
6.  Screening: Screening within the Flex Space District shall comply with the provisions of the UDC and the following: 
a.  Mechanical equipment shall be screened from view of all public roadways and located to minimize noise intrusion off the lot. The required screening must be composed of the same exterior materials as the buildings on the lot, or through the use of masonry walls, ornamental fence (eighty [80] percent opaque), evergreen landscape material, or combination thereof. 
b.  All roof-mounted mechanical elements must be screened from view of the public right- of-way and neighboring properties. Screening must be architecturally compatible with the building design. 
c.  Loading, service and trash storage areas shall be screened from all public roadways. Refuse containers must be placed on a designed, reinforced concrete pad and approach, per the UDC. The required screening must be composed of the same exterior materials as the buildings on the lot. 
7.  Outside Sales and/or Commercial Promotions: 
a.  Any temporary outside sales shall be required to obtain a permit and be subject to the requirements of this section. 
b.  Temporary outside sales may be permitted for a period of fourteen (14) days each event with a maximum two (2) permits allowed per calendar year, providing such goods, products or merchandise is displayed on a sidewalk within ten feet (10') of the business building. 
c.  Temporary outside sales shall be deemed to include merchandise-dispensing units placed adjacent to, and outside of, a business building. 
d.  In order to qualify for a permit, the applicant must: 
1)  Provide a plan showing the location of the outside display. 
2)  Provide the City with a Site Plan showing location(s) of all tents (if applicable). Submit documentation showing compliance with all building and fire codes including, but not limited to, flame spread certificate(s). 
3)  Provide a map, plan, or drawing to indicate adequate off-street parking for patrons, employees and delivery trucks; such map, plan or drawing should also indicate that no fire lanes, streets or other public rights-of-way will be blocked as a result of the sale or promotion. 
4)  Provide for adequate trash and waste removal and cleanup of the area. 
5)  Comply with all other reasonable conditions imposed by the City. 
8.  Outside Storage or Outside Display: Except for the equipment and/or the materials stored on a construction site and used for a temporary construction project, the outside storage or outside display of equipment, building and/or other materials, goods and products shall be prohibited within the district, with the exception of outside dining shown on an approved Site Plan. 
9.  Flexible Standards. 
a.  Alternative Uses or Phases: In order to encourage an integrated development pattern of mixed uses over time within the district, it is understood that flexibility in the development of phases or sites may be necessary. Whenever an applicant of a Flex Space District proposes alternative land uses or phases of an approved Flex Space District, such alternative uses or phases shall be incorporated in a zoning amendment to the Flex Space District. The zoning amendment for alternative land uses or phases shall constitute a zoning change and shall follow the proceures. In no case, however, may the Council approve an alternative use not allowed in the Use Tables for the Flex Space District. 
b.  Flexible Design Standards: It is intended that the general conditions, as well as the dimensional and design standards set forth herein be flexible in order to encourage development in the Flex Space District. In some cases, the standards set forth may be varied. For requests other than those set out in herein, developer must request a waiver from a specific standard. The Council may approve such waiver in conjunction with its decision to establish or amend the district in those cases where the waiver addresses a standard applicable to the Site Plan. 
10.  Waiver Procedure. 
a.  Procedure: An application for a waiver to a development standard authorized under this article must be made by a property owner, lessee, or contract purchaser at the time of submission of an application to establish a Flex Space District. A contract purchaser or lessee must file with the application, a copy of the contract, or lease, or other form of written statement containing the property owners' endorsement of the application. The application shall be filed in duplicate with Community Development Department on forms provided by the City. Upon a determination that the waiver application is complete, the Planning Manager shall forward the request to the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council for decision in conjunction with its decision on the application to establish a Flex Space District. 
b.  Standards for Granting Waiver: The Planning and Zoning Commission in making its recommendations, and the City Council in deciding whether to grant the request for waiver, shall determine that the following standards are met: 
1)  The waiver for the specific development site is in harmony with the policies in the Comprehensive Master Plan. 
2)  The waiver is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this article and the zoning ordinance. 
3)  The waiver shall not adversely affect the use of neighboring property, and the public's use and enjoyment of public areas, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
4)  The waiver is in conformity with the approved Site Plan. 
c.  Lapse of Waiver: A waiver granted under this section shall lapse with the lapse of the approved Site Plan or amendment to the Flex Space Mixed Use District, in accordance with this article. 
11.  Amendments of a Site Plan. 
General Requirement: Amendments of any Site Plan shall be made in accordance with the procedure required for approval of the initial plan. Amendments to a Site Plan shall be considered amendment to the Flex Space Zoning District. 
12.  Design Requirements. 
a.  Day Care Facility: 
1)  Freestanding day care facilities shall not be permitted. 
2)  Day care facilities shall only be permitted on the ground floor level as an accessory use to (a) primary use(s). 
3)  Maximum allowable size for a day care facility shall be 5,000 square feet. 
4)  Parking for a day care facility shall be counted as shared parking except that daycare employees must be provided parking in conformance with the UDC parking standards. 
b.  Restaurant: A restaurant may be permitted in the Flex Space District as a conditional use, however, drive-through restaurants shall not be permitted. 
c.  Outdoor Seating Area: Use Patio Dining Criteria from Old Town Keller. 
13.  Compliance With State Laws and Federal Laws: No uses shall be allowed which are prohibited by State law or which operate in excess of State or National environmental or pollution standards as determined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Texas Air Control Board, Texas State Department of Health, or The Texas Water Quality Control Board, as the case may be. 
Flex Space Zoning District Use Table 
P = Permitted Uses 
SUP = May Be Approved as Special Use Permit 
Additional uses permitted only by Planned Development Districts are listed in Section 8.04(l) 
Use 	SUP or P 
Administrative, professional or corporate office 	SUP 
Accessory Dwelling as part of a primary structure 	SUP 
Assembly of light electronic instruments and devices (enclosed building) 	SUP 
Assembly of products including packaging 	SUP 
Assembly of radios/audio/visual equipment/communication equipment 	SUP 
Automobile Repair, Minor (Amended by Ord. No. 1828 on January 17, 2017) 	SUP 
Automobile Repair, Sales and Services (Amended by Ord. No. 1828 on January 17, 2017) 	SUP 
Batching plant (temporary) 	Permit 
Commercial engraving/printing (including newspapers) 	SUP 
Heating and air conditioning sales and services 	SUP 
Light Manufacturing wholly enclosed within a building 	SUP 
Office Warehouse 	SUP 
Offices, City, County, State, and Other Governmental 	SUP 
Overnight delivery and service center 	SUP 
Public Parking Garage associated with a building 	SUP 
Religious institution 	SUP 
Research and scientific laboratories 	SUP 
Restaurants 	SUP 
Retail 	SUP 
Technology/Research and Development 	SUP 
  
Section 8.04 - Planned Development Districts 
Planned Development Districts shall be used in conjunction with base zoning district, unless changed by zoning amendment. New base districts or changes in existing base districts may be requested at the same time planned development districts are requested. Unless otherwise specified, all uses in the base district are applicable for a planned development district. 
A.  General Purpose and Description. The Planned Development District is a district which accommodates planned associations of uses developed as integral land use units such as industrial districts, offices, commercial or service centers, shopping centers, residential developments of multiple or mixed housing including attached single-family dwellings or any appropriate combination of uses which may be planned, developed, or operated as integral land use units either by a single owner or a combination of owners. A Planned Development (PD) District may be used to permit new or innovative concepts in land utilization not permitted by other zoning districts in this Code. While greater flexibility is given to allow special conditions or restrictions, which would not otherwise allow the development to occur, procedures are established herein to ensure against misuse of increased flexibility. The minimum area for a Planned Development (PD) District shall be one (1) acre. 
B.  Permitted Uses. An application for a PD District shall specify the base district(s), the use or the combination of uses proposed. Uses which may be permitted in a PD must be specified if not permitted in the base district. In the case of residential PD districts for single-family or duplex categories, the proposed lot area shall be no smaller than the lot sizes allowed in the base zoning district except for minor reductions in a small percentage of the lots in order to provide improved design. In selecting a base zoning district, the uses allowed in the base district must be similar or compatible with those allowed in the PD. A PD designation may not be applied to the TC, Town Center district except for residential developments. PD designations shall not be attached to Specific Use Permit (SUP) requirements. Specific Use Permits allowed in a base zoning district are allowed in a PD only if specifically identified at the time of PD approval. 
C.  Planned Development Requirements. 
1.  Development requirements for each separate PD District shall be set forth in the amending Ordinance granting the PD District and shall include, but may not be limited to: uses, density, lot area, lot width, lot depth, yard depths and widths, building height, building elevations, building material coverage, floor area ratio, parking, access, screening, landscaping, accessory buildings, signs, lighting, hours of operation, project phasing or scheduling, management associations, and other requirements as the City Council and Planning and Zoning Commission may deem appropriate. 
2.  In the PD District, uses shall conform to the standards and regulations of the base-zoning district to which it is most similar. The base zoning district shall be stated in the granting Ordinance. All applications to the City shall list all requested deviations from the standard requirements set forth throughout this Code (applications without this list will be considered incomplete) specifically any deviation not requested is deemed to comply with this Code even if shown graphically on a Site Plan. The Planned Development District shall conform to all other sections of this Code unless specifically excluded in the granting Ordinance. 
3.  The Ordinance granting a PD District shall include a statement as to the purpose and intent of the PD granted therein. A specific list is required of modifications in each district or districts and general statement citing the reason for the PD request. 
D.  In establishing a Planned Development District in accordance with this section, the City Council shall approve and file as part of the amending Ordinance appropriate plans and standards for each Planned Development District. To facilitate understanding of the request during the review and public hearing process, the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall require, at minimum, a Conceptual Plan. A Detailed Site Plan may be submitted in lieu of a concept plan. All PD applications shall have a written proposal explaining all aspects of the requested PD including any deviations from this Code. 
1.  Conceptual Plan - This plan shall be submitted by the applicant at the time of the PD request. The plan shall show the applicant's intent for the use of the land within the proposed Planned Development District in a graphic manner and as may be required, supported by written documentation of proposals and standards for development. The City may prepare application form(s), which further describe and explain the following requirements: 
a.  General use; 
b.  Preliminary lot arrangements; 
c.  Size, type, height and location of buildings and building sites; 
d.  Building elevations; 
e.  Access; 
f.  Density; 
g.  Fire lanes; 
h.  Topography; 
i.  Boundary of PD area; 
j.  Existing physical features of the site, including existing streets, alleys and easements; 
k.  Location of future public facilities including streets, water, sanitary sewer, etc.; 
l.  Parking ratios; 
m.  Conceptual landscaping plans showing turf areas, screening walls, ornamental planting areas, wooded areas, and treed areas; and 
n.  Other information to adequately describe the proposed development and to provide data for approval which is to be used in drafting the final Detailed Site Plan. 
2.  Detailed Site Plan - This plan shall set forth the final plans for development of the Planned Development District and shall conform to the data presented and approved on the Conceptual Plan. Changes of detail on the Detailed Site Plan, which differ from the original Concept Plan, but do not alter the basic relationship of the proposed development to adjacent property, the uses permitted, or increase the density, building height or coverage of the site, the off-street parking ratio or reduce the yards provided at the boundary of the site, or does not significantly alter the landscape plans as indicated on the approved Conceptual Plan may be authorized by the City Council. Approval of the Detailed Site Plan shall be the basis for issuance of a building permit, but does not release the applicant of the responsibility to submit plans to the Building Official for a building permit. The detailed site plan shall describe and explain the following requirements in addition to those required in Sections 4.13 or 4.15 of this Code: 
a.  Specific uses and density; 
b.  Final lot arrangements including the land area of all abutting sites and the zoning classification thereof on an accurate survey of the tract with a topographical contour interval of not more than two feet (2'); 
c.  Site inventory analysis including a scaled drawing showing major existing vegetation, natural water courses, creeks or bodies of water and an analysis of planned changes in such natural features as a result of the development. This should include a delineation of any flood prone areas. 
d.  Scaled drawing showing proposed size, type, height and location of buildings and building sites for non-residential, multi-family or mixed used developments; 
e.  Scaled drawing showing proposed building lots and pad elevations for single family residential developments; 
f.  An architectural plan (elevations, etc.) showing elevations and signage style to be used throughout the development. Planned developments intended for custom single- family homes shall provide a summary of architectural requirements that will guide the design and construction of the homes.; 
g.  Scaled drawing of traffic circulation including points of egress and ingress; 
h.  A dimension control plan showing property lines and all dimensions for rights-of way, easements, setbacks (the minimum distance between buildings and property lines), the location of separate buildings and the minimum distance between buildings. Also to be included on the dimension control plan is the arrangement and number of off- street parking.; 
i.  Scaled drawing of fire lanes and emergency access if other than standard egress and ingress; 
j.  Topography; 
k.  Boundary of PD area; 
l.  Existing physical features of the site, including existing streets, alleys and easements; 
m.  Scaled drawing showing location of planned public or private streets and alleys, street widening or any street changes, curb cuts (width and curve radii); 
n.  Scaled drawing showing general location and description of proposed utility services including water lines/mains, sanitary sewer lines/mains, storm sewer, etc. Indicate whether these service lines are located in easements or rights-of-way; 
o.  Scaled drawing showing location of planned parks, playgrounds, school sites; 
p.  Parking ratios; 
q.  Conceptual landscaping plans showing turf areas, screening walls, ornamental planting areas, wooded areas, and treed areas; and 
r.  Other information to adequately describe the proposed development and to provide data describing standards, regulations, or other data pertinent to the development of the Planned Development District as appropriate to adequately explain or understand the request. 
E.  Approval Process and Procedure - The procedure for establishing a Planned Development District shall follow the procedure for zoning amendments as set forth in Section 8.02 (D). This procedure is further expanded as follows for approval of Conceptual and Detailed Site Plans. 
1.  If a Detailed Plan is submitted with the PD request, then a Conceptual Plan is not required. A Conceptual Plan or Detailed Site Plan, whichever is submitted with the PD request, shall be heard before both Planning and Zoning commission and City Council in public hearings. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the request request and make the final determination. 
2.  If a Concept Plan is submitted with the PD request, then a Detailed Plan will also be required. If the Detailed Site Plan conforms substantially to the conceptual Site Plan as approved by the City Council, then a public hearing on the Detailed Site Plan is not required. The staff shall review the Detailed Site Plan for conformance to the Concept Plan and other requirements set forth for a Detailed Site Plan. Approval of a Detailed Site Plan is required prior to issuance of a building permit. 
If the Detailed Site Plan is not in conformance with the Conceptual Plan, then additional public hearings are required by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council prior to approval of the Detailed Site Plan. If additional public hearings are required, additional processing fees will be assessed. After approval by the City Council, a building permit may be issued for the project. 
3.  The amending Ordinance establishing the Planned Development District shall not be approved until the Conceptual and/or Detailed Site Plan is approved. 
a)  The Detailed Site Plan may be approved in sections. When a Site Plan is approved in sections, then separate approvals for subsequent sections or phases will be required. 
b)  A Detailed Site Plan shall be submitted for approval within one (1) year from the date of approval of the Conceptual Plan for all or some portion of the Concept Plan. If a Detailed Site Plan is not submitted within one (1) year, the Concept Plan is subject to review by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council. If some portion of the project is not started within two (2) years, the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council may review the original Concept Plan or Detailed Site Plan to ensure its continued validity. If the City determines the Concept Plan is not valid, a new Concept Plan must be approved prior to a Detailed Site Plan for the PD District. Although a new Concept Plan or Detailed Site Plan may be required to be approved, this does not effect the validity of the PD in terms of uses, density, and other development standards permitted in the PD. 
F.  When a PD District is being considered, a written report from the Planning Manager or his/her designated representative, discussing the impact on planning, engineering, water utilities, electric, sanitation, building inspection, tax, police, fire, and traffic, and written comments from the applicable public agencies shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission prior to the Commission making any recommendations to the City Council. 
G.  All Planned Development Districts approved in accordance with the provisions of this Code in its original form, or by subsequent amendments thereto, shall be referenced on the Zoning District Map, and a list of such Planned Development, together with the category of uses permitted therein, shall be maintained as part of this Code. 
H.  Planned Development Ordinances Continued. Prior to adoption of this Code, the City Council has established various Planned Development Districts, some of which are to be continued in full force and effect. The ordinances or parts of ordinances approved prior to this Code specified in Article Eight shall be carried forth in full force and effect and are the conditions, restrictions, regulations, and requirements which apply to the respective Planned Development Districts shown on the Zoning Map at the date of adoption of this Code. 
I.  Uses or Developments Allowed Only by PD. Because of the uniqueness of the following uses in Keller, they shall be permitted by PD designation only. All planned developments shall provide for fifteen percent (15%) of the development in usable open space exclusive of street yard landscaping. This includes, but not limited to, landscaped hike/bike trail, open area recreational facilities, parks and playgrounds, water features and decorative objects such as fountains. Usable open space shall not include rooftops, accessory buildings, parking areas, driveways, turnaround areas, or the right-of-way or easement for streets or alleys. 
1.  Single-Family Attached Dwelling (Townhouse) 
2.  Patio Homes 
3.  Mobile Home Development 
4.  Private Street Residential Development 
5.  The following uses shall only be permitted in a Planned Development (PD) District that is specifically designated for such a use: 
a)  Airport. 
b)  Athletic stadium or field (private). 
c)  Theater-outdoor. 
d)  Batching plant (concrete or asphalt). 
e)  Wrecking yard, auto salvage, junkyard, or outside reclamation. 
f)  Industrial processing uses such as: 
1)  Canvas 
2)  Cellophane 
3)  Cement or hydrated lime manufacture 
4)  Clay products utilizing previously pulvarized clays and gas or electric kilns 
5)  Cork 
6)  Feathers 
7)  Felt 
8)  Fiber 
9)  Fur 
10)  Glass 
11)  Horn 
12)  Industrial manufacturing 
13)  Leather 
14)  Meat packing plant 
15)  Oil or gas extraction 
16)  Paint, not employing boiling process 
17)  Paper 
18)  Plastics 
19)  Precious/semi-precious metal or stone 
20)  Shell 
21)  Textiles 
22)  Tobacco 
23)  Wood 
24)  Yard  
Section 8.05 - U.S. Highway 377 North Overlay District 
A.  General Purpose and Description. The purpose of the U.S. Highway 377 North Overlay District is to implement additional development regulations within the U.S. Highway 377 North Corridor Plan. The regulations and standards of this overlay district are reflective of the high visibility and traffic volumes of the corridor. They are intended to create unique site design, building architecture, and streetscape that enhance the overall image of the corridor while remaining compatible with adjacent developed and planned residential neighborhoods. 
1.  Boundary. The U.S. Highway 377 North Overlay District encompasses land parcels on the east side of U.S. Highway 377 from Johnson Road north to the southern rights-of-way line of Marshall Ridge Parkway. The boundary of the District is shown in Figure 1. 
2.  Marshall Ridge Subdistrict. The U.S. Highway 377 North Overlay District contains one subdistrict - Marshall Ridge. The common boundary between the subdistrict and the rest of the overlay district is Mt. Gilead Rd. as depicted in Figure 3. 
B.  Permitted Uses. The U.S. Highway 377 North Overlay District amends the permissible uses of the base or underlying Commercial or Light Industrial zoning districts. Permissible uses within the U.S. Highway 377 North Overlay District are allowed in the same manner, by right or with approval of a Specific Use Permit, as in the underlying zoning district except as noted in "1.", 2.", and "3." below. 
1.  The following uses are prohibited within the U.S. 377 North Overlay District: Cemetery or Mausoleum (new or expansion); Fraternal Clubs, Lodges, Sororities and Fraternities, etc.; Freight or Truck Terminal Yard; Heavy Machinery Sales and Service; Heavy Vehicle Storage; Metal Recycling Collection Center; Monuments and Headstone Sales with Outside Storage; Newspaper Printing; Portable Building Sales with Outside Storage; Veterinarian Office with Outside Pens. 
2.  The following additional uses are permitted by right within the U.S. 377 North Overlay District: Retail, Office, Office-warehouse, Restaurant (without Drive-thru), Minor Medical Emergency Clinics, Public Parking Garage. 
3.  The following additional uses may be permitted with approval of a Specific Use Permit within the U.S. 377 North Overlay District: Restaurant (including Drive-thru); Uses not specifically provided here-in. 
C.  General Standards. The standards within this section apply to the entire U.S. 377 North Overlay District. 
1.  Access Management. In addition to the Design and Technical Construction Standards in Article Nine of this Code, the following shall apply: 
a.  Each site must have access to a median opening via private drive aisles, private streets, or public streets. The Director of Public Works may waive this requirement if topography, hydrology, or existing buildings or improvements make access to a median opening impractical. 
b.  In the event that access to a median opening is not available, each site must have two (2) points of access. One or both points of access may be off-site. 
2.  Parking. 
a.  Parking for all uses shall be provided in accordance with Section 8.07 of this Code; however, for developments with multiple uses with dissimilar parking demand characteristics, smaller parking ratios may be considered at the time of site plan approval. The minimum number of spaces shall be determined by a study following the procedures of the Urban Land Institute or Institute of Traffic Engineers parking reduction guidelines. 
b.  The maximum allowable number of off-street parking spaces shall be the minimum number of required off-street parking spaces plus ten percent (10%). Parking spaces in excess of the maximum allowable number of parking spaces may be provided in accordance with the one of the following conditions: 
1)  The parking in excess of maximum is constructed to mitigate storm water runoff. At a minimum, permeable paving and grassy swales/buffer strips, to convey storm water runoff from parking area to point of collection, shall be used to provide filtration and infiltration of storm water. 
2)  Additional landscaping is provided to mitigate the negative aesthetics of large fields of parking. In addition to the required landscape area and landscape improvements in Section 8.08 of this Code and in "3. Landscape Requirements" below, additional landscape areas and landscape improvements are provided as follows: 
a)  For each parking space constructed in excess of maximum, additional landscape area at the rate of seven (7) square feet per parking space shall be provided. 
b)  One additional canopy tree shall be provided for each three (3) parking spaces constructed in excess of maximum. The additional trees and landscape area shall be distributed in landscape areas within parking areas or adjacent to buildings and not in the landscape buffer. 
c)  No storm water mitigation measures or additional landscaping is required if excess parking is in elevated or below-grade parking structures. Parking structures are subject to area, yard, and bulk requirements of this Code. 
3.  Landscape Requirements. In addition to the required landscape area and landscape improvements in Section 8.08 of this Code, the following shall apply: 
a.  The required canopy trees for landscape buffers adjacent to thoroughfares shall not be placed in a linear arrangement with consistent spacing, but shall be in a random, free- form, and/or clustered arrangement. 
b.  Up to one-half (1/2) of the required canopy trees for landscape buffers adjacent to thoroughfares and parking lot landscaping may be substituted with ornamental trees at a ratio of two (2) ornamental trees for each canopy tree. Ornamental trees shall be a minimum of eight feet (8') in height at the time of planting. 
c.  Ornamental grasses may be used instead of shrubs for required foundation plantings. Similarly, ornamental grasses may be used for required parking lot screening provided the variety of the ornamental grass can satisfy the mature height and coverage requirements for such screening. Acceptable ornamental grasses are adapted or native ornamental grasses with low or medium water demand as listed for the North Central Texas region in the Texas Smartscape plant database. 
d.  Buffalo grass or other native turf grasses with a mature height of twelve inches (12") or less may be used for up to fifty percent (50%) of the total turf area. 
e.  Masonry screening walls, three feet (3') in height, may be used in place of or supplement the required parking lot screening. 
4.  Energy Conservation Incentive. This incentive applies to any new or existing development within the overlay district. For buildings with minimum energy performance ratings that meet the requirements of the 2009 International Energy Conservation Code or that exceed the requirements of the 2006 International Energy Conservation Code by fifteen percent (15%), the required number of parking spaces may be reduced by fifteen percent (15%) or two (2) spaces whichever is greater. 
D.  Marshall Ridge Subdistrict Standards. The standards within this section apply to only the Marshall Ridge Subdistrict. 
1.  Development Standards. Site orientation and layout, size of lot, size of yards, and building heights shall be in accordance with the standards of the underlying Commercial zoning district. 
2.  Design Standards. The purpose of these design standards is that buildings and sites should reflect a modern, contemporary interpretation of Prairie Style architecture. The overall building forms, materials, and colors of Prairie Style architecture should be maintained; however, bold colors, metal finishes, and building ornamentation may be utilized as noted below. 
a.  Architectural Character. 
1)  Buildings shall have a long and low building form with strong horizontal lines. Windows in geometric shapes and/or glass storefront may be arranged in ribbons to emphasize the horizontality of the overall building design. 
2)  Buildings shall contain or incorporate a minimum of two (2) of the following Prairie Style architectural elements: arcades, towers, foundation planter boxes, freestanding low masonry walls, mansard roofs, overhanging eaves, porticos, or awnings or canopies. 
3)  Building facades that face or front public streets or public ways shall comply with both of the criteria listed below. Building facades that do not face or front public streets or public ways shall comply with either criteria "a)" or "b)" below. 
a)  No building façade shall exceed a length of one-hundred feet (100') without a horizontal and vertical break or articulation in the façade. The horizontal and vertical break or articulation shall be a minimum depth/height of three feet (3') for a minimum length of twenty feet (20'). 
b)  Facades shall contain patterns of contrasting materials, material colors, and material textures that visually break up the horizontal and vertical expanse of the façade. 
b.  Building Materials. 
1)  The building materials for a minimum of ninety percent (90%) of the area of each building façade excluding the area of windows, storefront and/or other glass areas shall be: natural clay brick, integrally-colored split-face concrete masonry units, glass block, native or manufactured stone, rough-sawn or hewn wood, wood logs, fiber-cement materials, or cement or synthetic stucco. The remaining ten percent (10%) of each façade area may be any material allowed by building codes. 
2)  Integrally-colored split-face concrete masonry units, fiber-cement materials, ceramic tile, or cement or synthetic stucco shall not be used on more than fifty percent (50%) of each building façade area excluding the area of windows, storefront, and/or other glass. 
3)  Synthetic stucco shall only be used on portions of facades six feet (6') or greater above finish floor elevation. 
4)  Window and storefront glass shall be clear or tinted. The use of reflective glass is not allowed. Mullions and muntins shall be clear anodized or mill finish, or earth tone colors as detailed in "c. Building Exterior Colors" below. 
5)  Roof or mansard roof materials, visible from public or private streets and drive aisles, shall be standing seam metal, or metal, stone, clay, or concrete roof tiles. 
6)  Awning and canopies shall be metal, glass, fiberglass, or fabric. Plastic or similar materials for awnings and canopies are not allowed. 
c.  Building Exterior Colors. The natural materials used in Prairie Style architecture established a color palette of primarily earthen tones. A minimum of seventy percent (70%) of the exterior building colors shall be grey, green, beige, tan, orange, red, rust, brown or other earth tone colors. The remaining exterior building colors may be non-earth tone colors or metallic finishes. 
3.  Lighting, Street Furniture, and Sidewalk Requirements. 
a.  Lighting. 
1)  Streetlight lighting shall be Sternberg "Prairie" lighting with either single arm or double arms. Streetlights shall be installed along all public streets at street corners, drive approaches, and between drive approaches and street corners at a spacing of not more than eighty feet (80') on center. 
2)  Parking lot lighting, where used, shall be the same as streetlight lighting. 
3)  Decorative building-mounted lighting shall be Sternberg "520 Tinley" fixtures. 
4)  For required lighting in "1)", "2)", and "3)" above, other light standards and fixtures of similar Prairie, Mission, or Arts and Crafts styles may be used if found to be consistent with the design of this overlay district at the time of site plan review. 
5)  Canopies and awnings shall not be backlit. 
b.  Street furniture is encouraged at building entrances and along walks. Street furniture, if used, shall be Prairie, Mission, or Arts and Crafts styles. 
E.  Site Plan/Design Review Required. A detailed site plan as outlined in this Code shall be submitted for any new building or addition to existing buildings within the U.S. Highway 377 North Overlay District. Design review shall be a part of the site plan review process. The purpose of the design review is to ensure that buildings and sites are in conformance with site and architectural standards of this overlay district. 
F.  Variances to Standards. When special conditions exist that prevent strict compliance with the regulations in Section "C", General Standards, Section "D", Marshall Ridge Subdistrict Standards, the City Council, upon recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission, may authorize a variance or deviation from these regulations. The process for requesting a variance shall be in accordance with Article Two, Section 2.08 - Procedures for Variances from the Regulations of the Code. 
G.  Illustrations. 
 
Figure 1- Overall U.S. Highway 377 North Overlay District Boundary
 
Figure 3- Marshall Ridge Subdistrict Boundary
 
Figure 4 - Site and Parking Lot Lighting
 
Figure 5 - Furniture 
Section 8.06 - Building Design and Development Standards 
A.  Exterior Construction Requirements. 
1.  Residential Construction Standards. 
a.  SF-36 through 2F: All residential buildings and structures located in the residential districts SF-36, SF-30 through SF-8.4, and 2F shall be of exterior fire resistant construction having at least eighty percent (80%) of the total exterior walls above grade level and below the first floor plate line, excluding doors and windows, consisting of brick, stone, stucco, or material of equal characteristics as approved by the City in accordance with the City's building code and fire prevention code. Exterior Insulated Finishing System (EIFS) shall not be permitted. Strict adherence to this rule shall not be such as to prevent architectural creativity. 
b.  Multi-family (MF): All multi-family residential buildings shall meet the requirements as outlined within the MF district. 
c.  Manufactured homes shall meet all the above requirements for single-family residential construction standards. 
d.  Mobile Homes & Temporary Buildings shall adhere to the following standards: 
1)  Mobile homes shall be permitted only in a mobile home park and are exempt from the above construction requirements. 
2)  All other temporary buildings for dwelling or storage purposes may be permitted by an SUP with approval of the City Council. 
3)  Temporary Buildings for Keller Independent School District for classroom or other activities will be allowed with a site plan review by staff and a permit from the Community Development Department and shall be exempt from the construction standards requirements. All applicable building codes above shall be met for these structures. 
e.  Accessory buildings shall adhere to the following standards: 
1)  Accessory buildings one hundred twenty (120) square feet or less are excluded from the construction standards for residential construction. 
2)  Accessory buildings, larger than one hundred twenty (120) square feet up to two hundred (200) square feet may be constructed using lightweight masonry siding and/or lightweight masonry soffit boards as defined in the Definitions section of this Code and/or manufactured pre-finished wood siding, in lieu of other masonry construction materials. 
3)  All accessory buildings, larger than two hundred (200) square feet, in residential districts shall meet all requirements of this Code. 
4)  In Single Family-Low Density zoning districts (SF-36), accessory buildings of five hundred (500) square feet or less may be constructed using lightweight masonry siding and/or lightweight masonry soffit boards as defined in the Definitions section of this Code and/or manufactured pre-finished wood siding, in lieu of other masonry construction materials. 
5)  The use of exposed metal exterior walls and finishes shall be allowed only for barns and agricultural structures in the SF-36 zoning district. The use of storage containers shall not be allowed. 
f.  Detached carports shall adhere to the following standards: 
1)  Carports constructed entirely out of metal may be permitted if architectural metal is proposed. Columns and roof structure must be compatible with materials on main structure. Detached carports shall be located at the rear of the property and observe all building setback requirements. 
2)  The construction of one carport per lot, as an accessory building to a mobile home, will be permitted within legally platted mobile home parks or subdivisions and may be constructed entirely of metal. The location of the carport may be within the front, side or rear yard; and the maximum size shall not exceed four hundred (400) square feet. The carport structure, including poles and overhangs, shall have a setback of a minimum of three (3) feet from all property lines; and the carport roof shall not drain onto the adjacent lot. A building permit shall be required for the construction of a carport. 
g.  Exceptions to the construction requirements may be considered by the City Council, as applicable, based only on the following: 
1)  Architectural design and creativity. 
2)  Compatibility with surrounding developed properties. 
3)  Architectural variances may be considered for, but not limited to, Queen Anne, Victorian, English Tudor, Italian Villa, or Log designs. 
2.  Non-Residential Construction Standards. 
a.  All non-residential uses shall be of exterior fire-resistant construction in accordance with the City's building code and fire prevention code. 
b.  Building facades, excluding doors, windows and glass wall construction, shall be constructed with a minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) of stone or brick. Portland cement stucco shall be allowed as noted in "c" below. Strict adherence to this rule shall not be such as to prevent architectural creativity. Other materials or a combination of brick, stone, stucco and other materials may be considered based on architectural creativity at the time of site plan review by the City Council. 
c.  The use of three-quarter inch (3/4") Portland cement stucco with a minimum fire rating of one hour shall be permitted provided the area of the Portland cement stucco does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total façade area excluding doors, windows and glass wall construction. 
d.  The use of textured concrete blocks (quick brick), colored split-face blocks, or any other wall surface material shall be noted on the site plan elevations and may be approved by the City Council at the time of site plan review. 
e.  Exposed concrete, concrete block, or metal finishes shall not be permitted. 
f.  The use of exposed metal exterior walls and finishes may be allowed, in the Light Industrial (LI) zoning district if approved by Specific Use Permit (SUP). Exposed metal exterior walls fronting or siding on public streets shall be prohibited. When metal exterior finishes are permitted, the use of corrugated panels is prohibited; profiled panels, deep ribbed panels and concealed fastener systems are permitted and shall have a finish of a permanent material such as a baked or enamel finish or painted to the wall manufacturer's standards. The use of galvanized, corrugated aluminum coated, zinc-aluminum coated, or unpainted exterior metal finish is prohibited. Metal exterior walls shall be compatible in color with the principal buildings and existing surrounding structures. 
g.  Roof material shall be asphalt composition, standing seam metal, stone, clay or concrete roofing tile. The roof material shall be shown on the site plan and any future changes to the roof material or color shall be approved by an amended site plan. Adjacent buildings within a development shall have similar roof materials to provide for compatibility among individual buildings. Pad sites within a development shall have consistent roof material and color to create a consistent theme for the development. 
h.  Carports constructed entirely out of metal may be permitted if architectural metal is proposed. Carports shall be shown on the site plan and shall be compatible in design and material with the main structure. Carports shall be located on the side or rear of the property and shall observe all building setback lines. 
i.  Temporary Buildings shall adhere to the following: 
1)  Temporary buildings to be used for field office or other construction purposes may be permitted for a specific period of time in accordance with a permit issued by the Community Development Department and subject to periodic renewal for cause shown. Temporary buildings are exempt from the construction standards requirements. Upon completion or abandonment of construction or expiration of permit, such field offices and building shall be removed at the satisfaction of the Community Development Department. 
2)  Temporary Buildings for Keller Independent School District for classroom or other activities will be allowed with a site plan review by the Development Review Committee and a permit from the Community Development Department. 
3)  All other temporary buildings shall be allowed only with a Specific Use Permit approved by the City Council. 
j.  Building Colors and Exterior Light Effects for Non-Residential Buildings 
1)  Building colors shall be compatible with one another. Preferred colors of buildings and accessory structures are earth tones (red, brown, tan, off-white, green). The use of florescent paint, florescent colors and the extensive use of bright colors on buildings as commercial identity or signage shall not be permitted. 
2)  Service doors, down spouts, utility boxes and panels, and other similar features on the buildings shall be painted to match the primary masonry material on the building. 
3)  The use of lighted stripes, exposed neon tubular lights or similar material on buildings or accessory structures shall not be permitted. 
4)  Back-lit canopies or awnings shall not be allowed. Hard plastic awnings are prohibited. Suspended metal, masonry and fabric awnings are allowed. 
B.  Design Standards for Non-Residential Buildings. 
1.  Purpose of Design Review. The standards for architecture within the City of Keller are intended to reflect its Master Plan goal that new development will be "high quality" and "an aesthetic asset to the community." To ensure a consistent appearance of development, certain criteria are addressed. To create a positive overall development character, all structures within a development shall share an attractive and uniform appearance. Key issues for all buildings within a development include: 
a.  A unified design theme. 
b.  A standard of high quality construction and consistency in appearance. 
c.  Respect for the contextual setting of the development within its district. 
2.  Review and approval of all architectural design shall be conducted by the Development Review Committee as part of the development review process. The submission of all building elevations, and material/color samples as determined necessary to evaluate compliance is required. A detailed site plan as outlined in this Code shall be submitted for each use in the development. The Planning Manager or the City's consulting architects may also require any other reasonable and pertinent information necessary for design review. Design review of non-residential projects is required to ensure that community- wide development is in conformance with design guidelines for the Master Plan and the Unified Development Code. 
C.  Design Standards and Site Layout. 
1.  The following concepts apply to non-residential development site design review process: 
a.  Formal Streetscape along Street Frontages 
b.  Compatible Architectural Styles 
c.  Create Street Edge with Architecture 
d.  Shared Access - Reduce Curb Cuts 
e.  Low Monument Signage 
f.  Parking to Side and/or Rear of Building Preferred 
g.  Hip or Mansard Roof 
h.  Rear and Side Yard Landscaping Required 
2.  Site layout shall reinforce street edge and create pedestrian-scaled open spaces. Large parking lots in front of buildings, along the street frontage, shall be avoided when possible. 
3.  Building fronts and entries shall be oriented toward streets, unless otherwise approved. If a building sides to a street, the side façade shall be treated in the same architectural style and material as the front façade. Service entrances fronting on streets are prohibited. 
4.  Buildings shall have a recognizable main entry, which should relate directly to the primary street frontage. Entry points may be indicated by a change of materials, roof or canopy features, a variation in wall planes, or other acceptable means which relate to pedestrian scale. 
5.  All buildings shall have horizontal and vertical façade articulations every fifty feet (50'), which may be expressed as offset wall planes, pier and column effects, or other acceptable means. 
6.  Buildings with façades longer than fifty feet (50') shall have their façades broken up into smaller areas through the use of varying facades setbacks, arcades, awnings, canopies, architectural features such as plazas, columns, or other acceptable means. 
7.  Retail uses and buildings shall have as much storefront glass on the ground floor as possible so as to enliven the façade and open it up to pedestrian involvement. For uses over ten thousand (10,000) square feet with expansive facade areas without windows, an expression of windows with elements such as display windows or opaque windows with canopies and awnings may be considered. 
8.  Rooflines shall be interrupted with gables or other architectural elements to break up the building profile. 
9.  At the intersection of the facade and roof planes, there shall be a projecting cornice element of brick, or cast stone. Cornice detailing shall be added around the entire building. 
10.  Windows along streets shall be equally spaced with a specific rhythm and shall not create long areas of flat solid spaces along streets. Varying window size and height based on the interior functions is discouraged. 
11.  All façades of a building that are visible from a street, adjacent developments, public open spaces or parking lot, shall have the same architectural features as the front facade. This shall not only be limited to the same roof treatment, but shall also include building materials, façade articulation and window treatment. 
12.  All buildings, at minimum, shall carry the same roof treatment around the entire building including the rear side. 
13.  The design of visible roof structures shall be of shed, hip, gambrel, mansard and gable styles. Roofs should be of such height, bulk and mass as to appear structural even when the design is non-structural. Flat roofs may be considered when incorporated with acceptable design or mansard roof. Mansard roofs shall have a pitch of not less than 1:1. 
14.  Roof top mechanical/electrical equipment shall be screened with an extension of the facade or a compatible roof design such as mansard roof. The screening of equipment with metal screening or other material shall not be allowed. 
15.  All non-residential buildings shall have window head and sill details which, utilizes either projecting elements or materials of a contrasting color and texture, which will highlight the window treatment. 
16.  Elements of franchised architecture may be permitted, but only if they complement or are otherwise compatible with adjacent development. 
17.  Outside storage is prohibited unless approved as part of a Site Plan. This includes vending machines, ice machines, and similar uses. 
18.  Uses utilizing shopping carts may have cart returns in parking lots. This area shall be contained with 6" curbs. Metal corrals are not allowed. 
D.  Service Area Design and Requirements. 
1.  To reinforce the professional image of each development site, all service areas and mechanical equipment, noise and odors shall be located at the rear of the property and screened from views using walls, berms, shrubs, trees and/or a combination of materials. 
2.  Service areas and trash receptacles shall be located at the rear of the property and shall not face a street. The dumpster shall be screened with a masonry wall compatible in material and color with the primary building. Solid metal doors shall be utilized for dumpster screening closure. A pedestrian access point shall be provided for access to a dumpster location to facilitate access without opening the gate (see Section 8.18 - Figure 19). 
3.  Loading docks, truck service entrances, service entrances/overhead doors for automobile/boat oriented uses or any use requiring overhead service doors shall not face a street. These areas shall be designed to blend into the site and have low visual impact. 
4.  Unless otherwise noted, the screening requirement shall be masonry screening. Any alternatives shall be shown on the site plan and be specifically approved based on the visual impact for the use. The following uses shall be screened: 
a.  Trash compactors and bins 
b.  Stored equipment or manufactured items 
c.  Storage tanks and pumps 
d.  TV, microwave, radio and cell phone antennas 
e.  Irrigation controllers and backflow preventers (may be live screening) 
f.  Electrical transformers and control boxes (may be live screening) 
g.  Air-conditioning units 
h.  Loading and truck service areas 
i.  Shipping and receiving dock doors must blend with the architecture of the building they serve 
j.  Truck dock and trash bin areas 
k.  Ground-mounted mechanical equipment 
l.  Sound equipment 
m.  Sources of odor must be contained 
Reference: Sections 8.11, 8.12, and 8.13 for guidelines on screening  
Section 8.07 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements 
A.  Purpose. To secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to lessen congestion on public streets; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation; to conserve the value of buildings; and to encourage the most appropriate use of land. Minimum off-street parking and loading shall be provided as set forth in the following schedules and provisions. Parking for uses not provided here-in shall be considered by the DRC based on studies produced by the Institute of Transporation Engineers, Traffic Impact Analyses provided and professional observation. 
B.  General Provisions for Off-Street Parking. 
1.  All off-street parking shall be provided on the same site as the use it is to serve. 
2.  Unless otherwise noted in this Code, all parking spaces, driveway approaches, driveways, and drive aisles shall be located on a paved concrete, asphalt or alternative surface. Permissible alternative surfaces are concrete, brick, or natural stone pavers on compacted sub-grade and base sufficient to support the vehicle's Gross Vehicle Weight Rating. The paved parking surface area must encompass the entire footprint of the vehicle. 
3.  No parking space, garage, carport, or other automobile storage space shall be used for the parking or storage of any heavy load vehicle (see Article Three - Definitions for Heavy Load Vehicle). 
4.  No vehicle, including boats, camper trailers, trailers, or other similar vehicle shall be parked within the street rights-of-ways of major thoroughfares as shown on the Thoroughfare Plan, including state controlled roads. 
5.  Parked vehicles on private property shall not encroach on any right-of-way, sidewalks, or parkways (unpaved portion of rights-of-way). 
6.  In all zoning districts, parking and loading areas shall not be used for the sale, repair, storage, dismantling or servicing of vehicles or equipment; or for the storage of materials or supplies, or for any other use in conflict with the parking and loading areas (i.e., advertising or open storage of materials). A maximum of two (2) vehicles, owned by the property owner or with the permission of the property owner, may be displayed for the purpose of sale, lease, or similar purposes on private property. 
C.  Residential Districts. In all subdivisions platted after December 15, 1992, garages shall not face or be in view from a public street unless allowed with a Planned Development zoning district or the following provisions of this Code. 
1.  J-Swing garages are permitted only in the SF-8.4 (Single Family-8,400 square foot lots) and smaller zoning classifications and when permitted by a PD (Planned Development) district. The maximum garage area, including any accessory uses associated with the garage, shall not exceed seven hundred (700) square feet. 
2.  Side entry garages where lot frontage is only to one street (not a corner lot) shall have a minimum of twenty-five feet (25') from the door face of the garage to the side or rear property line for maneuvering. 
3.  Side entry garages on a corner lot where the driveway is from the side street shall have a minimum of twenty feet (20') from the door face of the garage to the side property line. 
4.  A detached front facing garage located behind the main structure is permitted. The garage door(s) exposure to the street shall not exceed one hundred forty-four square feet (144'). 
5.  An attached front facing garage is permitted, in lieu of a detached garage, if located at the rear of the lot, with a minimum of forty-five feet (45') behind the property line. The garage door(s) exposure to the street shall not exceed seventy-two square feet (72'). 
6.  An attached front facing garage is permitted with a porte-cochère design that shields a part of the garage door(s) exposure. 
7.  Detached carports shall be allowed only in the rear yard meeting all setback requirements. A building permit is required and shall be approved by the Community Development Department. 
D.  Non-Residential and MF Districts - Special Off-Street Parking Provisions. 
1.  All off-street parking, maneuvering, loading, and storage areas shall be paved to a minimum of six inches (6") of reinforced concrete over six inches (6") cement-limed or crushed limestone stabilized base compacted to ninety-five percent (95%) density, or an alternative section approved by the Director of Public Works. Approaches shall be paved to a minimum of seven inches (7") of reinforced concrete over six inches (6") cement- limed or crushed limestone stabilized base compacted to nine-five percent (95%) density. 
2.  Each standard off-street surface parking space size shall be in accordance with the City design standards (see Section 8.18 - Illustrations for parking design standards). 
3.  All parking and loading spaces, and vehicle sales areas on private property shall have a vehicle stopping device installed so as to prevent parking of motor vehicles in any required landscaped areas, to prevent vehicles from hitting buildings, and to prevent any parked vehicle from overhanging a public right-of-way line, or public sidewalk. Parking shall not be permitted to encroach upon the public right-of-way in any case. All vehicle maneuvering shall take place on-site. No public right-of-way shall be used for parking, backing or maneuvering into or from a parking space. 
4.  Handicap parking space(s) shall be provided according to the City's adopted Building Code and be in addition to the minimum parking requirements. 
5.  Storage of motor vehicles, other than the property owners' vehicles, in any zoning district is prohibited. Motor vehicles sales lots or any lot/area used for such a purpose shall be allowed only by approval of a Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
6.  To ensure that all requirements set forth in this section are carried forward, it will be the responsibility of the owner of the property to adequately maintain the facility and comply with this Code. All parking areas shall be kept free of trash, debris, vehicle repair operation or display and advertising uses. The parking area layout, location and number of provided spaces shall not change without approval of the Community Development Department. 
7.  Off-street stacking requirements for drive-through facilities. 
a.  A stacking space shall be an area on a site measuring eight feet (8') by twenty feet (20') with direct forward access to a service window or station of a drive-through facility which does not constitute space for any other circulation driveway, parking space, or maneuvering area. The following stacking requirements may be used as a guide but may be modified at the time of site plan review based on use and design of this facility: 
1)  For financial institutions with drive-through facilities, each teller window or station, human or mechanical five (5) stacking spaces. 
2)  For each service window of a drive-through restaurant, a minimum of six (6) spaces. 
3)  For kiosks, a minimum of two (2) stacking spaces for each service window. 
4)  For each full service car wash, vacuum or gas pump lane, a minimum of seven (7) stacking spaces. 
5)  For each self-service (drive-through/automated) wash bay, a minimum of three (3) stacking spaces in addition to the wash bay. 
6)  For each self-service (open bay), a minimum of two (2) stacking spaces in addition to the wash bay. 
7)  For automobile quick lube facilities, a minimum of three (3) stacking spaces in addition to the service bay. 
E.  Off-Street Loading Spaces - All Districts. 
1.  All retail, commercial, and industrial structures, on an as needed basis, shall provide and maintain an off-street area for the loading and unloading of merchandise and goods at a ratio of at least one (1) space for the first twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of gross floor area and one (1) space for each additional twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof. A loading space shall consist of an area of a minimum of twelve (12) by thirty (30) feet. All drives and approaches shall provide adequate space and clearances to allow for the maneuvering of trucks off-street. Each site shall provide a designated maneuvering area for trucks. These requirements may be modified based on use at the time of site plan review. 
2.  All loading areas and service bay doors shall be designed where loading doors or docking areas are not directly visible from streets. These areas shall be fully screened with a screening wall. Live landscaping may be allowed based on use or location. 
3.  All loading areas shall be designed to minimize the impact on adjacent uses. If loading areas are adjacent to residential (single-family, duplex, or multi-family) developments or zoning districts, loading and unloading hours shall be restricted to 6:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M. 
4.  Garage doors or service bays for auto/boat motor vehicle related uses shall not face a street. 
F.  Parking Access from a Public Street - All Districts. 
1.  In the approval of a Detailed Site Plan, consideration shall be given to providing entrance/exit drives which extend into the site to provide adequate queuing of vehicles on the site. If a deceleration lane is not provided, a minimum distance of 100' from a major thoroughfare must be included as shown on the Thoroughfare Plan. 
2.  In all Districts (except all Single-Family and Townhome Zoning Districts) building plans shall provide for entrance/exit drive(s) appropriately designed and located to minimize traffic congestion or conflict within the site and with adjoining public streets as approved by the City. 
a.  Based upon analysis by the City, if projected volumes of traffic entering or leaving a development are likely to interfere with the projected peak traffic flow volumes on adjoining streets, additional right-of-way and paving in the form of a deceleration lane or turn lane may be required of a developer in order to reduce such interference. 
b.  The determination of additional right-of-way or paving requirements shall be made at the time the final site plan is submitted for approval. 
3.  Vehicular access to non-residential uses shall not be permitted from alleys serving residential areas. 
G.  Parking Requirements Based on Use. At the time any building or structure in any district is erected, structurally altered, or changes use needing additional parking, there shall be provided off street parking spaces in accordance with the following requirements. Any parking space(s) necessary to meet the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) do not count toward the fulfillment of the parking requirements of this Code. The below requirements may be modified at the time of site plan review on a case by case basis. 
1.  Assisted Living - One (1) space per two (2) units. 
2.  Art gallery/museum - Three (3) spaces per one thousand (1000) square feet of gross floor area. 
3.  Automobile parts sales (indoors) - One (1) space per four hundred (400) square feet of floor area. 
4.  Automobile sales or service - One (1) space per five hundred (500) square feet of floor area. 
5.  Bank, Savings and Loan, or similar institution - One (1) space per three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area. 
6.  Bed and breakfast facility - One (1) space per guest room in addition to the require- ments for a normal residential use. 
7.  Bus or truck repair, parking, storage area, or garage - One (1) space for each five hundred (500) square feet of floor area or repair garage with a minimum of five (5) spaces. 
8.  Business or professional office - 
Gross Floor Area (sq. ft.) Parking Requirements 
• less than 10,000 sq. ft.  1 per 330 sq. ft. 
• 10,000 to 75,000 sq. ft.  1 per 400 sq. ft. 
• 75,000 sq. ft. & over   1 per 450 sq. ft. 
9.  Car wash (self-service) - One (1) space per washing bay and one (1) space per vacuum cleaner bay. 
10.  Car wash (full-service) - One (1) space per one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor area. 
11.  Church, rectory, or other place of worship - One (1) parking space for each three (3) seats in the main auditorium. 
12.  College or University - Four (4) spaces per one-thousand (1000) square feet of gross floor area. 
13.  Community Center- Three (3) spaces per one-thousand (1000) square feet of gross floor area. 
14.  Commercial Amusement (indoor) - Three (3) spaces per one-thousand (1000) square feet of gross floor area, or as follows: 
a.  Billiard - Five (5) spaces per thousand (1000) square feet of gross floor area. b. Bowling - Four (4) spaces for each alley or lane. 
c.  Bingo - One (1) space for three (3) seats (design capacity) or one (1) per one hundred (100) square feet of total floor area, whichever is greater. 
d.  Gymnasium - Five (5) spaces per thousand (1000) square feet of gross floor area. 
e.  Indoor jogging - Five (5) spaces per thousand (1000) square feet of gross floor area. 
f.  Indoor Tennis - Three (3) spaces for each court. 
g.  Movie theater - One (1) for every three (3) seats. 
h.  Raquetball - Two (2) spaces for each court 
i.  Roller skating or Ice skating rink Five (5) spaces per thousand (1000) square feet of gross floor area. 
j.  Soccer complex - Thirty eight (38) spaces per field. 
k.  Swimming pool - Five (5) spaces per thousand (1000) square feet of gross floor area. 
l.  Weight lifting - Five (5) spaces per thousand (1000) square feet of gross floor area. 
m.  All areas for subsidiary uses not listed above or in other parts of this section (such as restaurants, office, etc.), shall be calculated in with the minimum specified for those individual uses. 
15.  Commercial amusement (outdoor) - Ten (10) spaces plus one (1) space for each five hundred (500) square feet over five thousand (5000) square feet or as follows:. 
a.  Golf course - Twelve (12) spaces per hole. 
b.  Water park - Seventy eight (78) spaces for each acre. 
16.  Commercial wedding/event center - One (1) space for three (3) persons (design capacity). 
17.  Condominium - One and a half (1.5) space per unit. 
18.  Convenience store (with fuel pumps) - One (1) space per one hundred forty (140) square feet of floor area plus one (1) space for each three (3) gasoline pump units (a unit may have up to six (6) nozzles for gasoline disbursement). Spaces in pump areas qualify as spaces for the parking requirement. 
19.  Convenience store (without fuel pumps) - One (1) space per three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area. 
20.  Convention center - One (1) space for three (3) persons (design capacity). 
21.  Copy shop - One (1) space per three hundred thirty (330) square feet of floor area. 
22.  Child Care - One (1) space for four (4) students (design capacity). 
23.  Dry cleaner - One (1) space per three hundred (300) square feet of floor area. 
24.  Dance Hall, Aerobics, Assembly or Exhibition Hall Without Fixed Seats - One (1) space for three (3) persons (design capacity). 
25.  Flea Market - One (1) space for each five hundred (500) square feet of site area. Dirt or gravel parking lots are not permitted. 
26.  Fraternity, Sorority, or Dormitory - One (1) parking space for each two (2) beds on campus, and one and one-half (1½) spaces for each two beds in off campus projects. 
27.  Furniture or Appliance Store, Wholesale Establishments, Clothing or Shoe Repair or Service - Two (2) parking spaces plus one (1) additional parking space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area over one thousand (1,000). 
28.  Hardware Store - Two (2) parking spaces plus one (1) additional parking space for each five hundred (500) square feet of floor area over one thousand (1,000). 
29.  Hospital - Two and a half (2.5) spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area. 
30.  Hotel - One (1) per room for the first two hundred fifty (250) rooms and .85 space per room for each room over two hundred fifty (250), plus one (1) space per five (5) restaurant/lounge area seats, plus one (1) space per three hundred (300) square feet of meeting/conference areas. 
31.  Industrial Uses - One (1) space for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area. 
32.  Library - Three and a half (3.5) spaces per thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area. 
33.  Lodge or Fraternal Organization - One (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area. 
34.  Machinery or Heavy Equipment Sales - One (1) space per five hundred (500) square feet of gross floor area. 
35.  Manufacturing - One and one-third (1.3) spaces per one thousand (1,000) fquare feet of gross floor area. 
36.  Medical or Dental Office - One (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area. Facilities over 100,000 square feet shall use the parking standards set forth for hospitals. 
37.  Mini-Warehouse - One (1) space per five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross storage area plus one (1) space per three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area. 
38.  Mobile Home or Mobile Home Park - Two (2) spaces for each mobile home plus additional spaces as required herein for accessory uses. 
39.  Mortuary or Funeral Home - One (1) parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor space in slumber rooms, parlors or individual funeral service rooms. 
40.  Motel - One (1) per room for the first two hundred fifty (250) rooms and .85 space per room for each room over two hundred fifty (250), plus one (1) space per three hundred (300) square feet of meeting/conference/business office areas. 
41.  Motor-Vehicle Salesroom and Used Car Lots - One (1) parking space for each five hundred (500) square feet of sales floor for indoor uses, or one (1) parking space for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of lot area for storage, sales and parking area, whichever is greater. 
42.  Multi-family - One (1) space per each efficiency or one (1) bedroom unit; One and a half (1.5) spaces per each two (2) bedroom unit; Two (2) spaces per each three (3) bedroom unit; half (0.5) a space per each additional bedroom 
43.  Nursing Home - One (1) space per per thousand (1000) square feet of gross floor area. 
44.  Office, general - One (1) space per three hundred fifty (350) square feet of gross floor area. 
45.  Office, government - One (1) space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area. 
46.  Pharmacy without drive-thru - One (1) space per three hundred fifty (350) square feet of gross floor area. 
47.  Pharmacy with drive-thru - One (1) space per four hundred fifty (450) square feet of gross floor area. 
48.  Places of Public Assembly Not Listed - One (1) space for each three (3) seats provided. 
49.  Race track, horses or dogs - One (1) for each three (3) seats plus one (1) space for each employee. Stable areas shall provide storage areas for horse trailers. 
50.  Retail or Personal Service Establishment, Except as Otherwise Specified Herein - One (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area. 
51.  Retirement Home - One and a third (1.3) space for each dwelling unit. 
52.  Restaurant (Full-Service), Private Club, Night Club, or Cafe - One (1) parking space for each one hundred fifty (150) square feet of gross floor area. 
53.  Restaurant (Fast-food or Drive-In Type) - One (1) parking space for each one hundred (100) square feet of seating and waiting area. 
54.  Rooming or Boarding House - One (1) parking space for each sleeping room. 
55.  Sanitarium, Convalescent Home, Home for the Aged or Similar Institution - One (1) parking space for each five (5) beds. 
56.  School, Elementary (grades K-6) - One (1) parking space for each five (5) students (design capacity). 
57.  School, Secondary, or Middle (grades 7-8) - One (1) parking space for each ten (10) students (design capacity). 
58.  School, High School (grades 9-12) - One space for each two (2) students, faculty and staff (design capacity). 
59.  Supermarket - Three and eight tenths (3.8) spaces per thousand (1,000) gross floor area. 
60.  Theater, Indoor or Outdoor (live performances), Sports Arena, Stadium, Gymnasium or Auditorium (except school auditorium) - One (1) parking space for each three (3) seats or bench seating spaces. 
61.  Townhouse, Patio Home, or Single Family Residential - Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit. 
62.  Truck stops - One (1) truck parking space for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet of site area plus one (1) vehicle parking space per two hundred (200) square feet of building area. 
63.  Veterinarian Clinic - One and three quarters (1.75) space per thousand (1000) square feet of gross floor space. 
64.  Warehouse or Wholesale Type Uses - One (1) space for two thousand (2,000) square feet of gross floor area. 
H.  Rules for Computing Number of Parking Spaces. In computing the number of parking spaces required for each of the above uses, the following rules shall govern: 
1.  "Floor Area" shall mean the gross floor area of the specific use. 
2.  Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be constructed up to the next whole number. 
3.  The parking space requirements for a new or unlisted use not specifically mentioned herein shall be the same as required for a use of similar nature. If the proposed use is not similar to any of the uses listed herein, a determination shall be made by the Planning Manager in accordance with the requirements for the most closely related use specified in this section. 
4.  For buildings that have mixed uses within the same structure (such as retail and office), the parking requirement shall be calculated for the most intensive use. In cases where the design of the interior of the structure is not practical for alteration, the parking requirement may be calculated for each use within a structure for buildings over 40,000 square feet. 
5.  In the case of mixed uses (different buildings) in the TC and PD Districts, only the parking spaces required shall equal the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately. Up to thirty percent (30%) of the parking spaces required for a theater, stadium or other place of evening entertainment (after 6:00 P.M.), or for a church, may be provided and used jointly by banks, offices, and similar uses not normally open, used, or operated during evening. Shared parking must be on the same parking lot. Reduction due to shared parking shall be determined by the Planning Manager. To assure retention of the shared parking spaces, the parties concerned shall properly draw and execute a document expressing the same and shall file this agreement with the application for zoning variance. 
I.  Location of Parking Spaces. All parking spaces required herein shall be located on the same lot with the building or use served, except as follows: 
1.  Where an increase in the number of spaces is required by a change or enlargement of use or where such spaces are provided collectively or used jointly by two (2) or more buildings or establishments, the required spaces may be located on a remote lot if approved at the time of site plan review. 
2.  On-street parking as approved on a site plan. 
3.  Public parking spaces as provided by the City of Keller. 
J.  Use of Required Parking Spaces, Non-Residential Districts. Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be used only for their respective purposes and shall not be used for storage, sales, or display of boats, trailers, campers, motor vehicles or other goods, materials, products for sale, advertising or other purposes. Temporary displays as part of a special event may be approved by the Community Development Department.  
Section 8.08 - Landscape Requirements 
A.  Purpose. Landscaping is accepted as adding value to property and is in the general welfare to the City. Therefore, landscaping is hereafter required of all new development. 
B.  Scope and Enforcement. The standards and criteria contained within this section are deemed to be minimum standards and shall apply to all new developments and existing developments that require building permits for additions and alterations. Additionally, any use requiring a Specific Use Permit or a Planned Development zoning designation must comply with these landscape standards. The provisions of this section shall be administered and enforced by the Planning Manager or his/her designee. 
C.  Permits. No permits shall be issued for any non-residential and multi-family development until a detailed landscape plan is submitted as part of a Site Plan as required in Section 4.15 - Non- Single Family Residential Construction Process. Prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for any building or structure, all screening and landscaping shall be in place in accordance with the approved landscape plan. 
D.  Maintenance. The owner, tenant and/or their agent, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping. All required landscaping shall be maintained in a neat and orderly manner at all times. This shall include, but not to be limited to, mowing (of grass of six inches (6") or higher), edging, pruning, fertilizing, watering, weeding, and other such activities common to the maintenance of landscaping. Landscaped areas shall be kept free of trash, litter, weeds, and other such material or plants not a part of the landscaping. All plant material shall be maintained in a healthy and growing condition as is appropriate for the season of the year. Plant materials which die shall be replaced with plant material of similar variety and size, within ninety (90) days. Trees with a trunk diameter in excess of six inches (6") measured twenty-four inches (24") above the ground may be replaced with ones of similar variety having a trunk diameter of no less than three inches (3") measured twenty-four inches (24") above the ground. A time extension may be granted by the Planning Manager if substantial evidence is presented to indicate abnormal circumstances beyond the control of the owner or his agent. Failure to maintain any landscape area in compliance with this section shall result in the disapproval and revocation of any issued certificate of occupancy associated with the occupancy of said area. 
E.  General Standards. 
1.  All required landscaped open areas shall be completely covered with living plant material. Artificial landscaping materials such as wood chips and gravel may be used under trees, shrubs and other plants. 
2.  Plant materials shall conform to the standards of the recommended plant list for the City of Keller (see Article Nine - Recommended List for Required Landscape Areas). Grass seed, sod and other material shall be clean and reasonably free of weeds and noxious pests and insects. 
3.  Grass areas shall be sodded, plugged, sprigged, hydro-mulched or seeded except that solid sod shall be used in swales, earthen berms or other areas subject to erosion. 
4.  Ground covers used in lieu of grass in whole and in part shall be planted in such a manner as to present a finished appearance and reasonably completed coverage within one (1) year of planting. 
5.  All required landscaped open areas shall be provided with adequate and inconspicuous irrigation systems. 
6.  Earthen berms shall have side slopes not to exceed 33.3 percent (three feet (3') of horizontal distance for each one foot (1') of height). All berms shall contain necessary drainage provisions as may be required by the City Engineer. 
7.  Small shrubs shall be trimmed to a height no greater than three feet (3'). Ornamental trees shall be trimmed from the base up to a minimum height of three feet (3'). 
F.  Minimum Landscaping Requirements for Non-Residential and Multi-Family. 
1.  Buffers. 
a.  Minimum thirty-foot (30') landscape buffer adjacent to all thoroughfares with four (4) or more lanes as classified on the current Comprehensive Thoroughfare Plan. 
b.  Minimum fifteen-foot (15') landscape buffer adjacent to all other public streets. 
c.  Minimum thirty-foot (30') landscape buffer adjacent to all properties with residential uses or zoning or when residential zoning or uses are across the street from the side or rear yard of a non-residential or multi-family development. 
d.  Minimum ten-foot (10') landscape buffer adjacent to side and rear property lines when adjacent to non-residential uses or zoning. This provision does not apply in cases of shared driveways or parking between lots. 
2.  Buffer Trees. 
a.  Minimum four inch (4") caliper canopy trees in a straight spaced based on projected mature tree canopy widths near the center of the thirty-foot (30') landscape buffer adjacent to thoroughfares with four (4) or more lanes. To allow visibility of signage, trees may be planted in clusters to allow spacing between trees to be a maximum of sixty feet (60'). (Amended by Ord. No. 1799 on July 5, 2016) 
b.  Minimum two (2) ornamental trees per fifty linear feet (50') of frontage planted in clusters or linear arrangement within the thirty-foot (30') landscape buffer adjacent to thoroughfares with four (4) lanes or more. 
c.  Minimum three inch (3") caliper canopy trees spaced based on projected mature tree canopy widths in a straight line near the center of all other required buffers. To allow visibility of signage, trees may be planted in clusters to allow spacing between trees to be a maximum of sixty feet (60'). (Amended by Ord. No. 1799 on July 5, 2016) 
d.  Existing trees of equal or greater size located within a required buffer may be counted toward the buffer tree requirement. New trees must be added to barren areas within buffer and trees may be arranged in formal masses instead of a straight line if existing trees are present anywhere inside the buffer. 
3.  Landscaping Requirement for Parking Lots. 
a.  Parking lots shall be 100% screened with shrubs or berms adjacent to all public streets. Berms shall be a minimum of three feet (3') in height and shrubs shall be a minimum of two feet (2') in height at time of planting. Shrubs shall be planted and maintained so as to form a continuous, unbroken, solid visual screen which will be three feet (3') high within one (1) year after time of planting. 
b.  All parking lot islands must be a minimum of nine feet (9') in width and twenty feet (20') in length. 
c.  No more than twelve (12) consecutive parking spaces shall be allowed without the interruption of a landscaped island. 
d.  For large parking lots with several rows of parking spaces, a minimum ten-foot (10') wide continuous landscaped island shall be provided at various locations to break up the expanse of paving. 
e.  The ends of all parking aisles must be terminated with a landscaped island. 
f.  An island the size of one (1) parking space shall contain one (1) large three-inch (3") caliper canopy tree and an island the size of two parking spaces shall contain two (2) large three-inch (3") caliper trees. 
g.  Continuous islands perpendicular to parking spaces must contain large three-inch (3") caliper canopy trees spaced at one (1) tree per forty feet (40'). 
h.  A minimum of 15% of all parking lots shall be landscaped. 
i.  If the number of parking spaces exceed the Code requirements by more than ten percent (10%), a fifty (50) square foot of additional landscaping shall be provided for each additional parking space. 
j.  Foundation planting a minimum of five feet (5') in width shall be provided at the fronts and sides of buildings and shall consist of a combination of groundcovers, shrubs, and ornamental trees. 
G.  Minimum Landscaping Requirements for Residential. 
1.  A minimum of two (2) large canopy trees with a minimum three-inch (3") caliper shall be planted in the required front yard of all new single-family uses. Existing trees of equal or greater size within the required front yard may be counted toward this requirement. 
2.  A minimum of two (2) large canopy trees with a minimum three inch (3") caliper shall be planted in the required side yard adjacent to a street of all new single-family uses on corner lots. Existing trees of equal or greater size within the required side yard adjacent to a street may be counted toward this requirement. 
H.  Tree Preservation. All new developments must fully comply with the requirements of Section 8.19 - Tree and Natural Feature Preservation. 
I.  Sight Distance and Visibility. 
1.  Rigid compliance with these landscaping requirements shall not be such as to cause visibility obstructions and/or blind corners at intersections. Whenever an accessway intersects a public street or when two (2) public streets intersect, a triangular visibility area, as described below, shall be created. Landscaping within the triangular visibility area shall be designed to provide unobstructed cross-visibility at a level between three (3) and six (6) feet. Trees may be permitted in this area provided that they are trimmed in such a manner that no limbs or foliage extend into the cross-visibility area. The triangular areas are: 
a.  The areas of property on both sides of the intersection of an accessway and public right-of-way shall have a triangular visibility area with two (2) sides of each triangle being a minimum of ten feet (10') in length from the point of intersection and the third side being a line connecting the ends of the other two (2) sides. 
b.  The areas of property located at a corner formed by the intersection of two (2) or more public rights-of-way shall have a triangular visibility area with two (2) sides of each triangle being a minimum of twenty-five feet (25') in length from the point of intersection and the third side being a line connecting the ends of the other two (2) sides. 
2.  Landscaping, except required grass and low ground cover, shall not be located closer than three feet (3') from the edge of any accessway pavement. 
3.  In the event other visibility obstructions are apparent in the proposed landscape plan, as determined by the City Engineer, the requirements set forth may be reduced to the extent to remove the conflict.  
Section 8.09 - Sign Regulations 
A.  Purpose. This section provides standards for the erection and maintenance of signs within the City of Keller. All signs erected, altered, changed, constructed, relocated, or replaced after the effective date of this Code shall comply with the requirements of this Code at the time of sign permit. The general objectives of these standards are to promote health, safety, morals, general welfare, convenience, and enjoyment of the public. 
1.  To promote the safety of persons and property. 
2.  To allow orderly sharing of commercial and non-commercial messages. 
3.  To enhance the appearance and economic value of the streetscape. 
4.  To protect the public welfare. 
B.  Administration. The provisions of this Code shall be administered by the Planning Manager or designated representative and enforced by City Staff. 
1.  Permit Required. No sign shall be erected, altered, changed refaced, constructed, relocated, replaced or repaired until a permit has been issued. It shall be an affirmative defense to this requirement that the sign type is listed as not requiring a permit elsewhere in this chapter. 
a.  Permit Fee. A permit shall not be issued until the permit fee has been paid. The permit fee for a sign permit shall be the fee set out in the current fee schedule adopted by the City. A fee shall be charged for temporary signs for non-profits and religious institutions. 
b.  Permit Application. A permit application must be made to the Community Development Department in order to obtain a permit. All applications for permits shall include; 
1)  A drawing to scale of the proposed sign, that labels the type of material, height and width dimensions, and lighting specifications. 
2)  All existing signs maintained on the premise. 
3)  A drawing of the lot plan and building façade and dimensions indicating the proposed location of the sign, and sign specifications. 
c.  All new permanent signs require an inspection. Inspections may be completed with the Site Final, Certificate of Occupancy Inspection, or separately, as appropriate. 
2.  Sign Exemptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to the following and no permit shall be required: 
a.  A sign or marker giving information about the location of underground electric transmission lines, telegraph or telephone properties and facilities, pipelines, public sewers, or water lines or other public utilities. 
b.  Signs as governed by State law. When a City Ordinance is pre-empted by state law, state law will govern. 
c.  Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection, when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other similar materials. 
d.  Flags, emblems, and insignia of any governmental body. 
e.  Decorative displays for holidays or public demonstrations which do not contain advertising. 
f.  Indoor signs that are at least three feet (3') from window. 
g.  Signs approved with a Special Event Permit, Seasonal Sales or Temporary Vendor Permit. Special Event signs may be located in the Median of Bear Creek Parkway between Rufe Snow Drive and Keller Smithfield Road. 
h.  Street number signs not exceeding one (1) square foot in area. 
i.  Government signs including national flag or state flag, or to limit flags, insignia, legal notices, or informational, directional, or traffic signs which are legally required or necessary to the essential functions of government agencies (State, Federal, Keller Independent School District, and the City of Keller). 
j.  Signs on temporary construction trailers. 
3.  Nonconforming Signs. 
a.  Nonconforming signs shall not be enlarged, extended, structurally reconstructed, or altered in any manner, except that the sign face may be replaced or altered to reflect a change in ownership, business name or logo, or other message. 
b.  Nonconforming signs may remain, provided that they are maintained in good repair, except as follows: 
1.  A nonconforming sign or the structure supporting the sign which is damaged or destroyed to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or more of the current replacement value shall be removed or brought into compliance with this Code. 
2.  A nonconforming sign or the structure supporting the sign shall be removed if the sign is damaged or destroyed to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or more. 
3.  If the damage or destruction is less than fifty percent (50%), the sign must be under repair within thirty (30) days and all repairs must be completed within three (3) months. The sign shall not be enlarged in any manner. 
4.  When a nonconforming sign, or a substantial part of the sign is damaged, destroyed, taken down, or removed, it may not be re-erected, reconstructed, or rebuilt except in full compliance and conformance with this Code. For purposes of this section, substantial shall mean if the cost of repair exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the cost of a new sign of the same construction and size. A nonconforming, on-premise, detached sign which is required to be relocated due to expansion of public right-of- way may be relocated on the same lot or tract, provided there is no more than one (1) detached sign per lot or tract. The relocation shall occur within six (6) months following completion of the road. 
4.  Special Exception. 
a.  Any exception to this Code shall be presented in writing to the Planning Manager and shall be not be allowed unless approved by City Council after receiving a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission. In reviewing a requested special exception to the sign code the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council may consider: 
1.  Whether the requested exception will not adversely affect public safety, 
2.  Whether the requested exception will not adversely affect surrounding properties, 
3.  Whether the requested exception will be in harmony with the spirit and purpose of this sign code, 
4.  Whether special conditions exist which are unique to the applicant or property, 
5.  Whether the requested exception demonstrates increased quality and standards, and 
6.  Whether the requested exception will be aesthetically appropriate in the area. 
5.  Special Sign Districts. 
a.  A Special Sign District may be established for the purposes of promoting the character a unique area with separate and specific sign regulations. 
b.  A Special Sign District may be established as part of a Planned Development Zoning District or separately. If established separately from a Planned Development Zoning District, a Special Sign District shall be approved by City Council after receiving a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
C.  Sign Measurements. 
1.  Sign Area. For the purposes of this section, sign area shall be measured as follows: 
a.  Square or rectangular signs shall be measure as the length times the height of the sign (Figure 26, Section 8.18). 
b.  Irregular shaped signs shall be measured as the sum of the areas of rectangles, triangles, circles, or combination thereof necessary to enclose the sign face (Figure 27, Section 8.18). 
c.  Signs composed of individual cutout letters or figures shall be measured as the sum of areas of rectangles, triangles, circles, or combination thereof necessary to enclose the letters or figures (Figure 28, Section 8.18). 
d.  For double-faced signs with less than thirty inches (30") between faces, and less than a thirty-degree interior angle between faces, only one side shall be counted as the total area. Where the faces are not equal in size, the larger sign face shall be used as the basis for calculating sign area (Figure 29, Section 8.18). 
e.  Total sign area shall include all masonry supports and frames. 
2.  Sign Height. Sign height shall be measured as follows: 
a.  When measuring sign height, the height of the entire structure, including decorative and structural elements must be included. Monument and freestanding signs shall be measured from the base of the sign. Wall and attached signs will be measured from the lowest point of the sign or its supporting structures to the highest point of the sign or its supporting structures. 
b.  Berming or increasing the ground height to increase sign height is not permitted. Height measurement shall be from average grade if berms are used. 
c.  Clearance for a projecting sign is measured from the base of the building, or sidewalk passing under the sign to the lowest point of the sign or its supporting structure. 
3.  Distance. 
a.  Whenever a minimum distance between signs is indicated, it means the horizontal distance measured from the closest points of each sign as if each sign's closest point touched the ground. 
b.  Whenever a minimum setback distance is indicated, it means the horizontal distance measured from the closest two points as if the sign's closest point touched the ground. 
D.  General Standards. 
1.  Prohibited Signs. 
a.  Moving, flashing, intermittently-lighted, changing colors, beacons, revolving or similarly constructed signs are not allowed in any zoning district. It shall be an affirmative defense if such signs are otherwise allowed in this Code. 
b.  No person shall attach any sign, paper, or material, or paint, stencil, or write any name, number (except house or street address numbers) or otherwise mark on any sidewalk, curb, gutter, or street. 
c.  No person shall attach or maintain any sign upon any tree, utility pole, light pole or similar structure. 
d.  Signs shall not display gestures or words that are obscene, profane, or pornographic in nature or any other manner that is illegal under State or Federal law. 
e.  Signs over or in public rights-of-way are prohibited, except movement control, traffic control devices, street signs, way-finding, entry-way or portal signs, or directional signs placed by the City or State. Projected banner signs over the U.S. Highway 377/Main Street right of way are allowed in Old Town Keller district if part of a special event and in compliance with Texas Department of Transportation guidelines. 
f.  All off-site (off-premise) signage is prohibited unless specifically allowed by this Code. 
g.  Pole signs are prohibited. Monument sign bases must be at least the width of the sign. 
h.  Signs attached to or upon any a trailer, skid, or similar mobile structure or vehicle shall be prohibited where any such vehicle is allowed to remain parked in the same location, or in the same vicinity, at frequent or extended periods of time, where the intent is apparent to be one of using the vehicle and signs for purposes of advertising an establishment, service, or product. 
i.  Internally illuminated boxed cabinet wall signs are prohibited. 
j.  Exposed neon tubing is prohibited unless used in reverse can letters. 
k.  Abandoned signs' sign copy should be removed when the tenant leaves the space. The supporting structure may remain for future tenants. 
l.  Off-premise signs are prohibited unless specifically allowed elsewhere in this code. 
2.  Hazards & Nuisances. 
a.  Signs shall not create a hazard due to collapse, fire, collision, decay, disrepair, location, or abandonment. 
b.  Signs shall not obstruct firefighting or police surveillance. 
c.  Signs shall not create traffic hazards by confusing or distracting motorists, or by impairing the driver's ability to see pedestrians, obstacles, or other vehicles, or to read traffic signs. 
d.  Signs shall not obstruct or create a nuisance to persons using the public rights-of-way. 
e.  Sign shall not be located in a manner that could constitute a hazard or nuisance. 
f.  No sign shall be illuminated to an intensity or brightness to a degree that could constitute a hazard or nuisance. 
3.  Maintenance. 
a.  Signs shall be kept in well-maintained condition at all times to prevent deterioration, oxidation, rust, discoloration, or other unsightly conditions and in a safe condition free from all hazards including but not limited to faulty wiring and loose fastenings so as not to be detrimental to public health and safety. Signs that are not well-maintained, including but not limited to signs that are weathered, shall be removed. 
b.  Signs shall not create urban blight due to lack of maintenance. 
4.  Design Standards. 
a.  Signs may be internally or externally illuminated unless stated otherwise in this code. 
b.  No internally illuminated sign shall be erected within one hundred and fifty feet (150') of a single family or two-family residential development, unless the lighting is shielded from view of the residential development by the building, walls, or other permanent features. The distance shall be measured in a straight line. 
c.  All permanent signs shall be constructed of quality materials including aluminum, masonry stone, brick, stucco, molded plastics and acrylic. 
d.  All temporary signs shall be made of professional materials including plastic, wood, metal, corrugated plastics. Temporary banner signs shall be made of cloth, plastic or other fabric-like flexible material. 
e.  All supporting hardware shall be concealed from view or integrated into the sign design. 
f.  All signs, including temporary signs, must be printed and professional in appearance. No handwritten or spray painted signs are allowed, except window signs may be hand painted or applied directly to the window using paints or similar media. 
g.  Signs shall be located a minimum of five feet (5') from the public right-of-way and shall comply with require visibility triangles. 
h.  Signs for buildings in a multi-use development approved as part of one preliminary site evaluation or zoning application shall be compatible in design, size, material and lighting. 
i.  The Old Town Keller (OTK) and Town Center (TC) zoning districts have additional design standards and sign allowances. Please see Section 8.03 (Q) for Old Town Keller Standards and Section 8.03 (P) for Town Center Standards. 
5.  Temporary Sign Regulations. 
Section 8.09 (D.5) Table 1 - Temporary Sign Regulations 
Type 	Max. Size (in square feet) 	Number permitted 	Duration 	Zoning 	Additional Standards 
Banners 	24 sf 	1 per building or lease space elevation 	7 days 	All 	Allowed four times per calendar year. Banners must be attached to buildings. 
Grand Opening 	50 sf 	No limit 	30 days 	All 	Must use within 180 days of Certificate of Occupancy. Banners, pennants, flags, small balloons and yard signs may all be used. 
Weekend Real Estate Directional Signs 	4 sf 	1 per intersection, 8 total per listing 	5:00 pm Friday to 10:00 pm Sunday 	All 	Signs must be on private property and not in the ROW. No permit required. 
Real Estate Directional Signs 	4 sf 	1 per intersection, 8 total per listing 	8:00 am to 7:00 pm Monday-Friday 	All 	Signs must be on private property and not in the ROW. No permit required. 
Yard Signs (for sale, garage sale, etc.) 	8 sf 	1 per lot 	None specified 	All Residential 	No permit is required. 
The sign may not be illuminated. 
1 may be located outside of gated subdivisions 
Neighborhood Event Signs 	24 sf 	1 per neighborhood entrance 	7 days 	All Residential 	Signs must be removed 24 hours after event. This permit may only be issued twice per calendar year per subdivision. 
Residential Construction and Development Signs 	32 sf and 8' tall 	2 	Until 80% of homes sold or apartments rented 	All Residential 	A sign(s) must be erected on property which is currently under development. A development sign may also be erected on undeveloped property for future use if within six (6) months of future development. Fence wrap (mesh screening) on chain link fence may be used in lieu of a development sign. 
Searchlights 	Not Applicable 	1 	72 hours 	All Non-Residential 	Allowed only in conjunction with a grand opening sign permit. 
Inflatable Signs 	50 sf 	1 	72 hours 	All Non-Residential 	Allowed only in conjunction with a grand opening sign permit. 
Commercial Construction and Development Signs 	32 sf and 8' tall 	1 	Until Certificate of Occupancy is issued 	All Non-Residential 	A sign must be erected on property which is currently under development. A development sign may also be erected on undeveloped property for future use if within six (6) months of future development. Fence wrap (mesh screening) on chain link fence may be used in lieu of a development sign. 
Portable Signs 	50 sf 	1 per intersection 	7 days 	All Non-Residential 	Only allowed for non-profit institutions based in Keller to advertise events. Only allowed five permits per calendar year 
Directional Signs 	12 sf 	12 	7 days for annual events 1 day for more frequent events 	All Non-Residential 	Only allowed in conjunction with events open to the public. 3' max height. Allowed in ROW to direct people to events open to the public. 
Signs at Polling Places 	See Sub-Section D.5.d below 
 
a.  Signs at Polling Places. This subchapter is specific to Town Hall as a polling location. Signs are allowed at Town Hall only during the time it is used as a polling location during voting periods and only insofar as required by state law and the the following time, place and manner requirements are met: 
1)  Time. In accordance with Texas Election Code §61.003, signs shall be allowed at polling sites during early voting periods or on Election Day. Signs so posted must be removed within forty-eight (48) hours after the close of the early voting period or the close of the polls on Election Day, whichever is applicable. 
2)  Place. 
a)  No signs or campaign literature are permitted on City property, except as required by Texas Election Code section 61.003 or 85.036. This prohibition includes all locations, so long as there is no polling site at that location, including city hall, city service center, library, Keller Pointe, public parks, fire stations, police departments and water pumping stations. 
b)  For so long as required by Texas Election Code section 61.003 and 85.036, all public property upon which there is located a polling place, outside the area described in §61.003, and within the area which is allowed to have signs posted shall meet the following requirements: 
i.  The sign shall only be allowed to be located in the granite bed around the fountain on the North side of Keller Town Hall. 
ii.  The sign cannot be a traffic or safety hazard. 
iii.  The sign should be attached to a stake not to exceed a 9 gauge diameter (American Wire Gauge standard (AXG) driven into the ground well clear of tree roots, irrigation lines and any other underground vegetation or structures. 
3)  Manner. 
a)  Only three (3) signs per candidate or ballot measure proposition. 
b)  Signs must be self-supporting. 
c)  Signs cannot be illuminated. 
d)  Signs shall not have any moving elements. 
e)  Signs shall not exceed four feet (4') in height. 
f)  The sign shall not exceed three (3) square feet in area. 
6.  Attached Signs General Standards. 
Section 8.09 (D.6) Table 2 - Attached Signs Wall Signs 
Wall Signs*No combination of attached signage shall exceed twenty percent (20%) of the area of the façade on which it is mounted. For the purpose of multitenant buildings, only the individual lease space shall be considered. 
Type (per Transportation Plan) 	Setback 	Max. Size 	Max. Width 	Number 	Zoning Districts 	Additional Standards 
Local Streets 	= 100' 	40 sf 	75% of building or lease space width. Sign must be a minimum of 1 foot from the edge of the lease space. 	1 per building elevation or lease space elevation visible from a public street or with a public entrance 	Non-residential, Multi-Family or Commercial Buildings in Residential Districts 	Signs must be mounted parallel to walls and may not project above the roof or project more than eighteen inches (18") from the wall, see Figure 11 Section 8.18. Staff may approve signs mounted on the roof if there is no other feasible area and the sign does not project about the roofline. 
	>100' 	60 sf 				
Collector and Arterials with four lanes 	=100' 	80 sf 				
	>100' 	100 sf 				
Arterials with six or more lanes 	=100' 	180 sf 				
	>100' 	200 sf 				
 
Section 8.09 (D.6) Table 3 - Attached Signs Additional Types 
Additional Attached Sign Types *No combination of attached signage shall exceed twenty percent (20%) of the area of the façade on which it is mounted. For the purpose of multitenant buildings, only the individual lease space shall be considered. 
Type 	Max. Size 	Number 	Zoning Districts 	Additional Standards 
Building Identification 	Not Applicable 	2 per building 	Multi-family 	No signs or words shall be over 18" in height. Signs shall not be mounted on roofs and shall not project above the roof. 
Incidental 	4 sf 	1 per elevation 	All 	Permitted in addition to primary sign, no permit required 
Protective 	1 sf 	1 per premise 	All 	4" letter height maximum. No permit required. 
Auxiliary Signage 	50 sf (all Auxiliary Signs combined) 	3 per building 	All Non-Residential 	Only permitted on commercial buildings of twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet or larger or restaurants of five thousand (5,000) square feet or larger. 
Window Signs 	Not Applicable 	Not Applicable 	All Non-Residential 	May not cover more than twenty five percent (25%) of the window area per building elevation or lease space elevation. No permit required. 
Awning Sign 	20 sf 	1 per awning face 	All Non-Residential 	Maximum 9" tall lettering. Awning must be an attached fabric awning and signage must be on the valance. 
Canopy Sign 	None 	2 	All Non-Residential 	Maximum 24" tall lettering. Canopy must be a free-standing structure. 
Projecting sign 	20 sf 	1 	OTK 	The premise or occupancy may not have to detached sign on the premise. The sign shall have a minimum of ten feet (10') clearance. The sign may project up to 4' from building surface but not over any public right-of-way, except on Main Street in OTK with a TXDOT permit, see Figure 10 Section 8.18. 
Shingle Sign 	4 sf 	1 allowed per street frontage 	OTK 	The sign shall have a minimum of ten feet (10') clearance. May project up to 4' from building surface. Sign shall not project over any public right- of-way, expect on Main Street in OTK with a TXDOT permit. 
Movement Control 	6 sf 	Not Applicable 	All Non- Residential 	Maximum 4" letter height. No permit required. 
Murals 	There are no set standards for murals. All proposed murals must be approved by City Council after 
recommendation from the Public Arts Board. 
 
7.  Detached Signs General Standards. 
Section 8.09 (D.7) Table 4 - Commercial District Detached Signs 
Detached Type 	Max. Size 	Number 	Height 	Width 	Zoning Districts 	Additional Standards 
Single Tenant Building 
(<25,000sf) Monument Sign 	60 sf 	1 	6' 	None 	All Non- residential except TC (Town Center) 	• Signs shall have a minimum 6" masonry frame on sides, bottom and top, or a minimum of 50% of the sign area shall be masonry material matching the primary building material in color and finish. 
• Individual lots that have more than 600 feet of frontage along a public right-of-way, other than an alley, may have 1 additional detached sign. 
• Manually changed message boards are allowed as part of a sign but shall not occupy more than 50% of the sign copy area and are included in the total sign area. 
• An electronic message board sign may be permitted as part of a monument sign for religious institutions and governmental entities only (federal, state, county, city, and school district) provided that the area of the electronic message board sign does not exceed 50% of the total allowable monument sign area and meets setbacks from residential property for internally illuminated signs. Electronic message boards shall include automatic dimmers so that brightness does not exceed 0.3 foot-candles above ambient light conditions and timers to turn signs off between 10 p.m. and 7 a.m. 
Single Tenant Building 
(=25,000sf) Monument Sign 	75 sf 	1 	8' 			
Multi-Tenant Building 
(<5,000 ft)Monument Sign 	60 sf 	1 	6' 			
Multi-Tenant Building 
(=5,000 ft and <15,000 sf) Monument Sign 	70 sf 	1 	8' 			
Multi-Tenant Building 
(=15,000 ft and <25,000 sf) Monument Sign 	90 sf 	1 	10' 			
Multi-Tenant Building 
(=25,000 sf) Monument Sign 	96 sf 	1 	12' 			
Menu Board Sign 	32 sf combined 	2 	8' 	None 	All Non-residential 	Allowed only in conjunction with a drive-thru facility. Size may be increased to 40 square feet if one sign is utilized. Signs shall not face a public right-of-way that serves the front of the building. 
Movement Control Sign 	6 sf 	No Limit 	4' 	None 	All Non-residential 	The letters shall not exceed 4" in height. 
Landmark Sign 	490 sf per side 	1 per 500' frontage 	35' 	14' 	TC 	See Section 8.03 (P) for additional standards. 
Sandwich Board 	8 sf 	1 	48" 	None 	TC and OTK 	Must be placed inside at the end of each business day. No permit required. 
Flags 	60 sf 	No Limit 	No Limit 	None 	All Non-residential 	Private logos, business logos, or advertisements are not permitted on flags in all non-residential districts. If height is equal to or exceeds 30' then engineered plans are required. 
Protective 	1 sf 	1 	2' 	None 	All Non-residential 	Maximum letter height 4". No permit required. 
Unified Lot Sign 	See Sub-Section E.7.c, below. 
 
Section 8.09.(D.7) Table 5 - Residential District Detached Signs 
Monument or Detached Type 	Max. Size 	Number 	Height 	Width 	Zoning Districts 	Additional Standards 
Multi-Family 	32 sf 	1 per entry point 	8' 	None 	Multi-family 	A minimum 6" masonry frame and 2' masonry base matching the primary building material in color and finish is required, see Figure 12 Section 8.18. 
Business, Religious institution, or non-residential use Located in Residential Zoning 	32 sf 	1 per lot 	8' 	None 	All Residential 	• A minimum 6" masonry frame and 2' masonry base matching the primary building material in color and finish is required. 
• An electronic message board sign shall be permitted as part of a monument sign for religious institutions and governmental entities only (federal, state, county, city, and school district) provided that the area of the electronic message board sign does not exceed 50% of the total allowable monument sign area and it meets the 150' setback from residential property for internally illuminated signs. Electronic signs of any kind shall include automatic dimmers so that brightness does not exceed 0.3 foot-candles above ambient light conditions and timers to turn signs off between 10 p.m. and 7 a.m. 
• Individual lots that have more than six hundred (600) feet of frontage along a public right-of-way, other than an alley, may have one (1) additional detached sign. 
Subdivision Entry 	32 sf 	1 per entry point 	8' 	None 	Single Family and Two-Family Residential 	A minimum 6" masonry frame and 2' masonry base is required. 
Subdivision Message Board 	32 sf 	1 per subdivision 	8' 	None 	Single Family and Two-Family Residential 	Message boards shall be located internal to the neighborhood. For residential subdivisions with more than one hundred (100) lots, two (2) permanent message boards will be allowed. Internally illuminated signs shall not be permitted. 
Flags 	60 sf 	No Limit 	30' 	None 	All Residential 	Private logos, business logos, or advertisements are not permitted on flags in residential districts. If height is equal to or exceeds 30' then engineered plans are required. 
Movement Control 	6 sf 	No Limit 	4' 	None 	All Residential 	The letters shall not exceed 4" in height. Internally illuminated signs shall not be permitted. 
Protective 	1 sf 	1 	2' 	None 	All Residential 	Maximum letter height 4". No permit required. 
 
a.  Unified-lot signs may be used in lieu of detached monument signs and shall comply with the area, height, setback, spacing, and design standards for detached monument signs. 
1)  One unified-lot sign per street front may be placed on a premise consisting of two or more contiguous lots and/or tracts of land where each property owner has entered into a binding agreement to treat their separate properties as one lot for the limited purpose of signage. The agreement shall contain a legal description of the properties subject to the agreement; state that the parties, their heirs and assigns forego any rights to additional freestanding signs on the premises covered by the agreement; state that the agreement is a covenant running with the land to be filed and made a part of the Deed Records of Tarrant County, Texas; and that the agreement cannot be amended or terminated without the consent of the Planning Manager or designee. 
2)  A unified-lot sign agreement shall not be effective until a true and correct copy of the agreement is filed in the Deed Records of Tarrant County, Texas, and a file- marked copy is filed with the Planning Manager or designee. 
3)  Individual lots or tracts of land that are a part of a unified-lot agreement shall not be entitled to any other free-standing street front signage.  
Section 8.10 - Accessory Building and Use Regulations 
A.  General Provisions. 
1.  In a single-family or multi-family district, an accessory building or use is a subordinate or incidental building or use detached from the main building, not used for commercial purposes. A home occupation may be allowed in an accessory building as a subordinate use. The combined area of all accessory buildings on a lot shall be less than fifty percent (50%) of the main structure, unless approved by a SUP. 
2.  In non-residential districts, an accessory building or use is a subordinate building or a subordinate use in the primary building, the use of which is secondary to and supportive of the main building. Accessory buildings shall not be permitted without a main building or primary use being in existence. Living quarters may be utilized in non-residential districts if occupied by the owner or manager of the non-residential use and shall not exceed two thousand (2,000) square feet. 
3.  All accessory buildings shall be complimentary to the main structure, constructed of brick or stone or the same material as the main structure(s). 
4.  Accessory buildings shall not contain full kitchen facilities unless approved as an accessory dwelling unit. 
5.  Detached accessory buildings shall be prohibited in front of the main building. Detached carports shall be located at the rear of the property and observe all building setback requirements. Covered parking may be approved in the front of the buildings by SUP. 
6.  All side and rear setback requirements of the zoning district shall be met. 
7.  Accessory buildings are not allowed in easement areas or alleys. Accessory buildings one hundred twenty (120) square feet or less are allowed to be a minimum of five feet (5') from the side and rear property lines. Accessory buildings one hundred twenty (120) square feet or less on residential properties zoned for patio homes shall meet the minimum side setback requirements of its respective zoning district 
8.  Accessory buildings are not permitted without a main structure unless on tracts of two (2) acres or more and used solely for agricultural purposes. Workshops, garages, or similar uses shall not be considered as agricultural purposes. In such case, a minimum of one hundred foot (100') front building setback is required. 
9.  The maximum height of an accessory building shall not exceed fifteen feet (15') unless approved by the Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA) or by a Specific Use Permit (SUP), whichever is applicable, for additional height (see definition of Building Height). Accessory buildings of less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height. 
10.  There shall be no more than two (2) detached accessory buildings per single-family lot and they must be separated by a distance of not less than ten feet (10'). 
11.  Wood shingles are not permitted for accessory buildings. 
12.  Detached carports are considered as accessory buildings and shall meet the requirements of this section. 
13.  The use of storage containers may be allowed for a limited time such as moving or construction with a permit. Extended use of storage containers may be considered with an SUP. 
B.  Accessory Dwelling Units. Detached accessory dwelling units in the residential districts shall be allowed as an incidental residential use of a building on the same lot as the main dwelling unit and used by the same person or persons of the immediate family, and meet the following standards: 
1.  The accessory dwelling unit shall be constructed behind the main dwelling on a lot with a minimum area of one-and-a-half (1.5) acres. 
2.  All accessory dwelling units require approval of a Specific Use Permit by the City Council. 
3.  Setback requirements shall be the same as for the main structure. 
4.  Accessory dwelling units shall be constructed from the same materials as the main building. 
5.  Accessory dwellings units are not permitted without the main or primary structure.  
Section 8.11 - Fencing Requirements in Residential Zoning Districts 
A.  A fence permit shall be required for the following: 
1.  All new fence construction. 
2.  The replacement of an existing fence of more than eight (8) linear feet being replaced in the same location other than Agricultural Fencing. 
3.  The replacement of greater than fifty percent (50%) of the total linear feet of perimeter Agricultural-type fencing located in SF-36 Zoning District on lots two (2) acres or greater. 
4.  The relocation of any portion of fencing regardless whether the same panels are being used. 
A permit is not required for replacement of posts or hardware if there is no replacement of panels. 
B.  When sixty percent (60%) or greater of the total linear feet of a Legal Non-Conforming fence, the fence shall adhere to the standards of the current applicable Code. The percentage of linear feet being replaced cannot exceed more than fifty-nine percent (69%) in a twelve (12) month period from the date of the previous approved fence permit to retain the legal non-conforming status. 
C.  All fences shall be kept in good repair and shall not create urban blight. Dilapidated fences shall be repaired or replaced in accordance with provisions of this Code. Wood fences may be painted or stained with natural wood colors. Iron fences may be painted. No bright unnatural colors are allowed on any fencing. Fencing of the same material(s) must be a consistent color. 
D.  Fences shall be constructed of wood, ornamental metal, tubular steel, masonry, composite decking, live material, or a combination thereof. Vinyl fencing is strictly prohibited. The Community Development Director or his/her agent may consider alternative fencing material for residential-zoned properties on a case-by-case basis. E. All replacement privacy wood fences adjacent to a thoroughfare, as shown on the Thoroughfare Plan, shall be constructed of Cedar material with posts set in concrete and Cedar top and bottom caps. The fence shall be stained with Ready Seal or an equivalent wood sealant material. All new wood fences and replacement of Legal Non-Conforming fences more than sixty percent (60%) of total linear feet shall comply with this provision (Section 8.17 Figure 19). 
F.  Fences for non-residential uses allowed in residential districts such as schools and churches shall be constructed of ornamental metal, tubular steel, masonry or a combination thereof. Vinyl fencing is strictly prohibited. 
G.  Chain link perimeter fencing is prohibited in all zoning districts. Chain link fencing may be considered for interior fencing as follows: 
1.  Fencing of dog runs and athletic enclosures on residential properties which cannot be seen from the street or adjacent properties. If the chain link fence can be seen from adjacent properties at grade level, the fence shall be vinyl clad in black, green or tan. The maximum height for athletic enclosures may not exceed ten feet (10'). 
2.  Existing chain link fencing on residential properties if no more than sixty percent (60%) of the fence is being replaced and no other replacement of fencing has been done in the previous twenty-four (24) months. 
3.  Galvanized chain link fencing may be allowed with a permit on a temporary basis for construction purposes or special events and must be removed before the request of the final inspection of the building and/or site at the end of the special event, respectively. 
H.  Barbed wire, electrical fencing, slick wire, pipe fencing, pipe and cable fencing, composite decking, and utility fencing panels or any combination thereof may be used for farm or ranching purposes on land located in SF-36 Zoning District on lots two (2) acres or greater. Vinyl fencing is strictly prohibited.I. The maximum height requirements, as measured from the grade of the property, shall be as follows for lots other than corner lots: 
1.  Thirty-six inches (36") for front yard and side yard in front of the main structure in SF-8.4, SF-10, SF-12, and SF-15 zoning districts and is constructed of split rail, open wood, ornamental metal, tubular steel, composite decking, or similar open-faced material. Vinyl fencing is strictly prohibited. 
2.  Six feet (6') for front yard and side yard in front of the main structure in SF-20, SF-25, SF-30, and SF-36 zoning districts if lot size is an half-acre (21,780 sq. ft.) or greater and is constructed of open-style wood, ornamental metal, tubular steel, composite decking, similar open-faced material, or any combination thereof. Vinyl fencing is strictly prohibited. Fences located in these zoning districts may also use open-style wood fencing with a thin-gauge wire screen attached directly behind the wood. Corner lots are required to have a visibility triangle in accordance with this Code (see Section 8.08.I.b). 
a)  Drive gates at the street are permitted for properties in SF-20, SF-25, SF-30, and SF-36 zoning districts where lot size is an half-acre (21,780 sq. ft.) or greater and fencing is installed in the front and/or side yards. Such gates must adhere to the following criteria: 
1.  Swinging drive gates must swing in towards the property and not out towards the street and 
2.  All drive gates directly adjacent to a street must be inset for a minimum distance of twenty-five feet (25') from the edge of the curb or pavement and 
3.  All drive gates directly adjacent to a thoroughfare as shown on the Thoroughfare Plan must be inset for a minimum of fifty feet (50') from the edge of the curb or pavement. 
3.  Eight feet (8') for side or rear yards not adjacent to any street, park, or trail. 
4.  Six feet (6') for side or rear yards adjacent to any street, park, or trail. 
5.  Special exceptions for fence heights over these maximums may be made for properties of exceptional topography or necessary finished floor elevations to aid in screening when standard fence heights are inadequate. This determination will be made by the Director of Community Development or his/her designee. 
J.  Corner lots shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  The location of fences for corner lots adjacent to a street shall be in accordance with the building setback line as shown on the final plat. If a property is not platted, the location of fences shall comply with the building setback requirements of the zoning district that the property is located in. The distance for corner lots may be reduced to eight feet (8') from the property line if the fence is constructed of ornamental metal, tubular steel, or similar material. Vinyl fencing is strictly prohibited. Live screening is allowed outside of the fence and must have a vision clip so as not to impede the vision of traffic. 
2.  If a corner lot is adjacent to a subdivision's screening wall, a private fence may be placed beyond the required setback line in order to align with the subdivision screening wall. In such cases, the fence shall meet all other requirements of this Code. 
3.  The height of a fence adjacent or perpendicular to a screening wall shall not exceed the height of the subdivision's screening wall or any other fence constructed by the developer at the time of initial development. 
K.  All fences in or adjacent to parks, open space and common space areas, drainage easements and drainage ways (including floodplains and floodways) shall be constructed of an open style fence and may be constructed of , ornamental metal, tubular steel, or similar material. Masonry columns may be considered in conjunction with one of the aforementioned materials; such columns require the approval of the Public Works Director or his/her designee when requested in or adjacent to a drainage easement or drainage way. Fences located on unusual topography adjacent to drainage ways may use alternative fencing materials as identified within this section of the Unified Development Code with the approval of the Public Works Director. Vinyl fencing is strictly prohibited. Wood fencing shall not be allowed immediately behind the required open fencing. 
L.  Allowable wood fences adjacent to streets, schools, parks, alleyways, or other public spaces shall have the finished side facing the public space. All fence posts and structural components shall be placed on the interior of the lot. 
M.  Swimming Pool Fences. Swimming pool fences shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  Swimming pools shall have a fence of a minimum of four feet (4') in height with self-closing, self-latching gates. Openings in the fence shall not allow passage of a 4-inch-diameter sphere. 
2.  A dwelling, accessory building, or apartment building may be used as part of a fence enclosure, provided that all entrances into the swimming pool area or court are equipped with gates as described herein, or doors with latches or locks. 
3.  The fence may be constructed of wood, ornamental metal, tubular steel, or other approved material. 
N.  Temporary Construction Fences. Temporary Construction fences shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  Galvanized chain link fencing is allowed on a temporary basis with a permit for non-residential projects and residential projects of five or more lots while under construction, with a permit. 
2.  Fence wrap (mesh screening) 80 % or greater opacity is required in conjunction with chain link fencing on the following types of projects: 
a)  Non-residential projects; 
b)  Residential subdivision projects of five (5) or more lots; 
c)  All projects which are adjacent to or visible from a thoroughfare. 
3.  Advertisement may be allowed to be printed on fence wrap in lieu of a Development Sign and must be listed on the fence permit application. Proposed advertising graphics shall be included as part of the permitting process for the fence wrap and chain link fence. If mesh screening is utilized for advertisement, a development sign is not required. Advertisement of project name, project elevation, construction company, lending agency, and all other compaines related to the project may be allowed on every other panel, but no more than fifty percent (50%) of the fence wrap may be utilized for this purpose. The background of the fence wrap shall be white. 
O.  Special exceptions may be considered by a variance request. This request must be made by application to the Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA). 
(Ord. No. 1960, § 2(Exh. A), 12-17-2019)  
Section 8.12 - Fencing requirements in multi-family and non-residential districts 
A.  A fence permit shall be required for any new fence construction or replacement of an existing fence. 
B.  All fences shall be kept in good repair and shall not create urban blight. Dilapidated fences shall be repaired or replaced in accordance with provisions of this Code. 
C.  All fencing for multi-family and non-residential districts shall be shown on the site plan for the development and be approved as part of the site plan approval. 
D.  Fencing shall be constructed of wrought iron, tubular steel, masonry, live screening, or a combination thereof. 
E.  Wood, barbed wire, or chain link fencing is prohibited unless specifically requested on a site plan and approved by the City Council. When a site plan is not applicable, the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council may consider variances to this requirement. 
F.  Fencing shall not exceed eight feet (8') in height unless specifically approved on a site plan by the City Council.  
Section 8.13 - Screening Wall Requirements 
A.  Screening walls shall be constructed of masonry material such as brick, stone, concrete panels, or similar materials consistent in material, finish, and color with the primary buildings within the development or adjacent buildings in the area. Screening walls shall be a minimum of six feet (6') in height. An eight feet (8') wall may be required on a case-by-case basis at the time of the site plan review. The wall finish shall be consistent on both sides. 
B.  Screening walls are required when a non-residential or multi-family development is constructed adjacent to a single-family or two-family residential use or zoning district. The construction responsibility is with the multi-family or the non-residential development. 
C.  Screening walls are required between multi-family and non-residential uses or zoning districts. 
The  construction responsibility is with the non-residential use. 
D.  Screening walls are required if a single-family development is being constructed adjacent to a developed multi-family or a developed non-residential use without a screening wall in place. The single-family residential development is required to construct a screening wall in accordance with this Code. 
E.  Screening walls are required around refuse storage, trash compactor, and loading areas. 
F.  Screening walls are required around outside storage areas. Storage of material shall not exceed the height of the screening wall. 
G.  Screening walls are required for ground mounted utilities and heating/cooling units. 
H.  Alternative screening methods may be requested as part of the site plan review process and may be approved by the City Council. 
I.  Screening wall plans are required to be submitted to the City for review and permitting and shall be signed and sealed by a Structural or Civil Engineer licensed by the State of Texas. All screening wall plans shall be submitted at time of Building Permit application in accordance with the application requirements listed in Section 4.14 - Landscaping and Screening Wall Plans. 
J.  All screening walls shall be kept in good repair and shall not create urban blight. Dilapidated screening walls shall be repaired or replaced in accordance with provisions of this Code. Repairs or replacements shall match the existing material (brick, panel, stone, etc.) colors. 
*** Refer to Section 5.10 for Single Family Residential Thoroughfare Screening.***  
Section 8.14 - Public Arts Fee Requirements 
A.  Purpose. 
1.  The purpose of a public art fee requirement is to establish art for the enjoyment, happiness, welfare, and morals of the public, to provide a variety of cultural opportunities within convenient distances from a majority of the residential and non-residential areas, to heighten awareness and appreciation for the arts, to foster development projects respond to the distinctive characteristics of the community and their specific locals, to enhance economic development and cultural tourism, and to provide a method to implement the City of Keller Public Arts Master Plan. 
2.  This section is adopted to provide public art and public art areas as a function of land development in the City of Keller. The City Council has determined public art areas are necessary for the public welfare. Furthermore, the only adequate procedure to provide for public art throughout the City is by integrating a requirement for art dedication into the procedures for planning and developing property in the City. 
B.  General Requirements. These requirements shall apply to all single-family, two-family, multi- family residential, and non-residential developments in the City of Keller. 
1.  A fee for public art is required for all residential developments of five (5) lots or more, for all new non-residential or mixed-use development projects, and for all redevelopments of non-residential or mixed use projects where the floor area is increased by twenty five percent (25%) or more. 
2.  Public Arts Fees: 
a.  All fees shall be sufficient to acquire public art, at a price set forth in the City of Keller Code of Ordinances Chapter 2, Administration, Article 1, In General, Section 2-270, Administrative Fees. 
b.  Payments received may be used only for public art acquisition, installation, and/or administration. 
c.  For residential developments, payments shall be received prior to the filing of the final plat for public improvements and prior to the final inspection for individual homes. 
d.  For non-residential or mixed-use developments, payments shall be received prior to the final plat or site inspection, as applicable.  
Section 8.15 - Supplemental Regulations 
A.  Front Yards. 
1.  On all corner lots, the front yard setback shall be observed along the frontage of both intersecting streets, unless approved specifically otherwise on a final plat (see Section 8.18 - Figure 4). Where single-family, duplex and townhome lots have double frontage, extending from one street to another, or are on a corner, a required front yard shall be provided on both streets unless a side or rear yard building line has been established along one frontage on the plat, in which event only one required front yard need be observed (see Section 8.18 - Figure 6). The side and/or rear yards in the case of single-family, duplex and townhome uses shall be identified and the front of the structure shall not face the side or rear yard. 
2.  Where the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting streets is divided by two or more zoning districts, the front yard shall comply with the requirements of the most restrictive district for the entire frontage (see Section 8.18 - Figure 5). 
3.  The front yard shall be measured from the property line to the front face of the building, covered porch, covered terrace or attached accessory building. Eaves and roof extensions or a porch without posts or columns may project into the required front yard for a distance not to exceed four feet (4'), and subsurface structures, platforms or slabs may not project into the front yard to a height greater than thirty inches (30") above the average grade of the yard (see Section 8.18 - Figure 8). 
4.  Minimum front yard setbacks and lot widths for lots with predominate frontage on the curved radius of a dedicated cul-de-sac street shall be as follows: 
Zoning District 	Minimum Lot Width* 	Minimum Front Yard 
SF-36 	120' 	40' 
SF-30 	120' 	40' 
SF-25 	120' 	40' 
SF-20 	100' 	40' 
SF-15 	90' 	40' 
SF-12 	80' 	40' 
SF-10 	70' 	30' 
SF-8.4 	60' 	30' 
Townhome (2F) 	60' 	30' 
*Measured at the front building line 
 
5.  Visual clearance shall be provided in all zoning districts so that no fence, wall, architectural screen, earth mounding or landscaping three feet (3') or higher above the street center line obstructs the vision of a motor vehicle driver approaching any street, alley, or driveway intersection as follows: 
a.  At a street intersection, clear vision must be maintained for a minimum of twenty-five feet (25') across any lot measured from the corner of the property line in both directions (see Section 8.18 - Figure 21). 
b.  At an intersection with an alley, this clearance must be maintained for ten feet (10') (see Section 8.18 - Figure 21). 
c.  Shrubs and hedges three feet (3') or less in height, as measured from the centerline of the street, may be located in the visual clearance areas of all districts. 
6.  Gasoline service station pump islands may not be located nearer than eighteen feet (18') to the property line adjacent to a public street. Pump islands for a gasoline filling station may extend beyond the front building line but shall not be closer than fifteen feet (15') to any property line not adjacent to a public street provided that other requirements of this Code are met. 
7.  Where a future right-of-way line has been established for future widening or opening of a street or thoroughfare, upon which a lot abuts, then the front, side, or rear yard shall be measured from the future right-of-way line. 
8.  Satellite dishes are prohibited in the front yard area of any district. Only one satellite dish shall be permitted per residential lot or primary structure. 
B.  Side Yards. 
1.  On a corner lot used for one or two-family dwellings, both street exposures shall be treated as front yards on all lots platted after July 6, 1960 except that where one street exposure is designated as a side yard. In such case, a building line shall be designated on an approved plat with a minimum side yard of fifteen feet (15') or more. On lots which were official lots of record prior to the effective date of this Code, the minimum side yard adjacent to a side street shall comply with the minimum required side yard for the respective district. 
2.  Every part of a required side yard shall be open and unobstructed except for accessory buildings as permitted herein (see Section 8.10 for exceptions) and the ordinary projections of window sills, belt courses, cornices, and other architectural features not to exceed twelve inches (12") into the required side yard, and roof eaves projecting not to exceed thirty-six inches (36") into the required side yard. Air conditioning compressors and similar equipment are permitted in the side yard. 
C.  Special Height Regulations. 
1.  In the districts where the height of buildings is restricted to two (2) or two and one-half (2½) stories towers, antennas, and architectural features may extend for an additional height not to exceed fifty feet (50') above the average grade line of the building. 
2.  Amateur radio antennas and other transmitting and receiving devices of microwave or electromagnetic waves for broadcasting use, shall not interfere with radio or television reception of adjoining property owners, and shall comply with all regulations of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). In no manner shall the use of such equipment infringe upon adjoining property owners. Satellite dishes and other similar antennas shall be permitted on the roof as long as satellite dishes do not exceed three feet (3') in diameter and antennas do not exceed fifty feet (50') in height as measured from the ground. 
D.  Seasonal/Temporary Uses. 
1.  Temporary locations for sale of merchandise are prohibited in the city limits of Keller unless approved by a Specific Use Permit (SUP). 
2.  Temporary sale of merchandise may be allowed as part of a special event. 
3.  Seasonal uses and sale shall be limited to may be allowed for 30 days, twice annually by permit in all zoning districts. 
4.  The following information is required for submittal to the Community Development Department for review at the time of application: 
a.  The full name of the person(s) applying for a permit, address and telephone number, if any, and, if the merchant is selling on behalf of an organization, the name and address of the parent organization. 
b.  A letter from the property owner which authorizes the merchant to use the property for the purpose of temporary outdoor sales. Such letter shall bear the property owner's name, address, phone number and signature. 
c.  A copy of a limited sales tax permit issued by the state or proof that the goods are not subject to such sales tax. 
d.  A statement of the type of goods or wares to be sold. 
e.  Provide a copy of a current health certificate of merchandise of edible quality is to be sold; however, this shall not apply to the sale of candy, nuts or other edibles prepared and packaged by a nationally recognized manufacturer or a Texas manufacturer meeting standards imposed by state and local health codes, if such packages are unbroken. 
f.  Submittal of two (2) sets of a site plan, drawn to scale and legible, indicating the following: 
1)  Stands, shelters, trailers, tents and buildings on the property. 
2)  Lighting and electrical equipment (temporary power pole, generator, etc.) 
3)  Location and number of parking spaces. Indicate if parking area is paved or unpaved. Indicate all drive approaches. Curb jumping or on-street parking is not permitted. 
4)  Location, type and size of signage. One (1) temporary sign is allowed and requires a sign permit (32 square foot maximum). 
5)  If a tent is to be erected, a separate tent permit is required. 
6)  Electrical permit application for all proposed work. All electrical work shall be performed by a licensed master electrician and shall comply with the electrical Ordinance. 
7)  Plumbing permit application for all proposed plumbing work. All plumbing work shall be performed by a licensed master plumber and shall comply with the plumbing Ordinance. 
5.  All required permits and inspections shall be completed prior to any seasonal sales lot opening for business. 
6.  At no time shall any fire lane or emergency access be blocked or obstructed. 
7.  Trees, stands, equipment, trash, signs, lighting and shelters shall be removed by permit holder. 
8.  Each temporary seasonal sales permit issued under this division shall be subject to cancellation for violation of any provisions applicable to this policy. 
E.  Fruit/Vegetable Stands. Fruit and vegetable stands shall be permitted only with a Specific Use Permit and shall follow the requirements of the Seasonal Use Permit prior to operation. 
F.  Asphalt or Concrete Batching Plant (Temporary). A temporary asphalt or concrete batching plant permit may be approved by the Development Review Committee, subject to the following conditions. Any exceptions to the following conditions shall require approval of the City Council. 
1.  The batching plant site shall comply with the applicable provisions of City, State and Federal laws. 
2.  The batch plant shall not be located within six hundred feet (600') of any inhabited residence, whether in Keller or an adjacent municipality. 
3.  Hours of operation will be limited to Monday through Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., and Saturday, 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Aggregate trucks shall be prohibited from hauling to or from the site on Sunday. 
4.  No portion of the batch plant or its operation shall be located on a public street. 
5.  The batch plant shall only furnish concrete, asphalt, or both to the specific project for which the temporary permit is issued. The placement of a temporary batching plant for a private project is restricted to the site of the project. 
6.  The temporary plant shall be operated in a manner that eliminates unnecessary dust, noise and odor (as illustrated by, but not limited to covering trucks, hoppers, chutes, loading and unloading devices and mixing operations, and maintain driveways and parking areas free of dust). 
7.  The site must be clear of all equipment, material and debris upon completion of the project. 
8.  All public improvements that are damaged during the operation of the temporary batching plant must be repaired or replaced within thirty (30) days of completion of the project. 
9.  Upon expiration of the temporary permit and cessation of activities, the Director of Public Works or his designee and permitee shall walk the site to verify compliance with these special conditions. 
G.  Carnival or Circus (Temporary). A temporary use permit for a carnival, circus or special event may be issued by the Building Official, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Applications for a permit shall be made no less than ten (10) days prior to the date such temporary carnival, circus or special event shall commence operation. 
2.  The fee for such permit shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00). Non-profit organizations, school districts, and special events such as political rallies, tent meetings, festivals, revivals, bazaars, and other similar activities, shall be exempt from paying said fee. 
3.  The application for permit shall contain the following: 
a.  Name, address and telephone number of person, organization or company conducting the event. 
b.  Date or dates of the carnival, circus, or special event. 
c.  A plan showing in detail the different component parts of the temporary carnival, circus, or special event, including all shows, concessions, amusements, businesses and the location of each on the property. 
d.  A written lease or agreement from the owner of such property stating permission to the applicant to operate a temporary carnival, circus or special event on said property. 
e.  Proposed location and size of parking area. 
f.  Location and quantity of sanitary facilities. 
g.  The appropriate number of persons who are attending and, if applicable, the number and types of animals and vehicles that will constitute such event. 
h.  The location and orientation of loudspeakers or sound amplification devices, if any. 
i.  Proof of public liability insurance with minimum combined limits of one million dollars ($1,000,000). However, notwithstanding the foregoing, non-profit organizations, the Keller Independent School District, and special events, such as political rallies, tent meetings, festivals, revivals, bazaars, and other similar activities shall be exempt from providing proof of liability insurance, if there are no mechanical amusement rides or exotic animals, as defined in The City's Code of Ordinances. 
j.  Any other information that the City shall deem necessary under the standards for issuance. 
4.  Safe and orderly movement of normal traffic shall not be substantially interrupted. 
5.  The temporary use shall not impede the movement of fire fighting equipment or ambulances. 
6.  Waste from animals shall be removed daily from the premises. Animals shall not be kept closer than three hundred feet (300') to any residence or commercial establishment during non-operating hours of such event. 
7.  The application shall be reviewed by the Community Development, Police and Fire Departments for security, fire and safety related issues. 
8.  The permit will be valid for a maximum of five (5) days. 
H.  Garage Sale. A garage sale shall be subject to the following conditions: 
1.  A garage sale shall only be permitted as a temporary accessory use to a single-family detached or single-family attached dwelling. 
2.  An individual garage sale shall not exceed three (3) consecutive days. 
3.  The number of garage sales shall be limited to two (2) per calendar year per household. 
4.  Subdivision/community wide garage sales shall be allowed two (2) per calendar year. 
5.  Garage sale signs shall comply with sign regulations of this Code (see Section 8.09). 
I.  Radio, Television, Telecommunication, and Microwave Towers. 
1.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, telecommunications antennas, when such are permitted by federal law and the laws of the State of Texas, shall be regulated and governed by the following use regulations and requirements: 
a.  Telecommunications towers. 
1)  Telecommunications towers shall be permitted only with an SUP in any zoning district after the applicant has filed an application in the form required by the City of Keller for such use. 
2)  The responses in the application to be submitted shall be complete and satisfy all of the requirements of the application before the application shall be considered to have been submitted and shall also include the following additional requirements: 
a)  Tower height, including antenna array, may not exceed one hundred twenty feet (120'). 
b)  Telecommunications towers must be a minimum of two hundred feet (200') or three (3) to one (1) distance to height ratio, whichever is greater, from structures used for residential purposes. 
c)  New telecommunications towers must be a minimum distance of five thousand feet (5,000') from another telecommunications tower. 
d)  All guys and guy anchors are located within the buildable area of the lot according to the base zoning of the property on which the tower is proposed to be located and not within the front, rear, or side yard setbacks and no closer than five feet (5') to any property line. 
e)  The base of the tower is enclosed by security fencing. 
f)  Equipment buildings must be similar in color and character to the main or adjoining building or structure or blend with the landscaping and other surroundings immediately adjacent to it and be screened by a wrought iron fence with evergreen hedge, or a masonry wall. 
g)  The tower is erected and operated in compliance with current Federal Communication Commission and Federal Aviation Administration rules and regulations and other applicable federal and state standards. 
h)  A telecommunications tower must be: 
i.  Used by three (3) or more wireless communications providers; or 
ii.  Designed and built so as to be capable of use by three (3) or more wireless communications providers including providers such as cellular or PCS providers using antenna arrays of nine (9) to twelve (12) antennas each within fifteen vertical feet (15') of each other with no more than three degrees (3°) of twist and sway at the top elevation and the owner of the tower and the property on which it is located must certify to the City that the antenna is available for use by another wireless telecommunications provider on a reasonable and nondiscriminatory basis and at a cost not exceeding the market value for the use of the facilities. If the property on which the tower is proposed to be located is to be leased, the portions of the actual or proposed lease that demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this paragraph shall be submitted with the SUP zoning application. 
i)  All towers will be of a tapering monopole construction, except that another type tower shall only be allowed upon a showing that it would cause less visual impact on surrounding property than a similar monopole structure. 
j)  No lettering, symbols, images, or trademarks large enough to be legible to occupants of vehicular traffic on any adjacent roadway shall be placed on or affixed to any part of a telecommunications tower, antenna array or antenna, other than as required by FCC regulations regarding tower registration or other applicable law. 
k)  The need for the requested site and the nature of any existing sites shall be documented as set forth in the application. 
l)  Telecommunications towers should be constructed to minimize potential safety hazards. Telecommunications towers shall be constructed so as to meet or exceed the most recent EIA-222 standards and prior to issuance of a building permit the Building Official shall be provided with a Texas registered professional engineer's certification that the tower's design meets or exceeds those standards. Guyed towers shall be located in such a manner that if the structure should fall along its longest dimension, it will remain within property boundaries and avoid habitable structures, public streets, utility lines and other telecommunications towers. 
m)  Telecommunications towers and equipment buildings shall be located to minimize their number, height and obtrusiveness to minimize visual impacts on the surrounding area and in accordance with the following requirements: 
i.  Ensure that the height of towers and monopoles has the least visual impact and is no greater than required to achieve service area requirements and potential collocation, when visually appropriate. 
ii.  Demonstrate that the selected site for a new monopole and tower provides the least visual impact on residential areas and the public rights-of-way. analyze the potential impacts from other vantage points in the area to illustrate that the selected site provides the best opportunity to minimize the visual impact of the proposed facility. 
iii.  Site telecommunication facilities to minimize being visually solitary or prominent when viewed from residential areas and the public rights-of- way. the facility should be obscured by vegetation, tree cover, topographic features, and buildings or other structures to the maximum extent practicable. 
iv.  Place telecommunication facilities to ensure that historically significant buildings and landscapes are protected. the views of and vistas from architecturally and/or historically significant structures should not be impaired or diminished by the placement of telecommunication facilities. 
v.  The commission may recommend a variance and the council may grant a variance to a requirement for telecommunications towers when it is determined that such a variance better accomplishes the city vision than would a strict application of the requirement. such variance shall be no greater than necessary to accomplish those policies. 
n)  No signals or lights or illumination shall be permitted on a monopole unless required by the Federal Communications Commission, the Federal Aviation Administration, or the City of Keller. 
o)  If any additions, changes, or modifications are to be made to the monopole, the Development Review Committee (DRC) shall have the authority to require proof, through the submission of engineering and structural data, that the addition, change, or modification conforms to structural wind load and all other requirements of the current Building Code adopted by the City of Keller. 
p)  Telecommunication tower owners shall submit an annual report of service providers using the tower to the Planning Manager. Telecommunication towers which have not been used for a period of one year shall be removed from a site. The last telecommunication service provider to use a tower shall notify the Planning Manager or designee within thirty (30) days that use of a tower has been discontinued. 
q)  Back haul providers shall be identified and have all necessary approvals to operate as such, including holding necessary franchises, permits and certificates and the method of providing back haul, wired or wireless, shall be identified. 
r)  The applicant shall fully and accurately complete a questionnaire supplied them by The City of Keller designed to gather information to assist in making a decision regarding the SUP application. In order to assist the staff, the commission and the council in evaluating visual impact the applicant shall submit color photo simulations showing the proposed site of the tower with a photo-realistic representation of the proposed tower as it would appear viewed from the closest residential property and from adjacent roadways. 
s)  The tower complies with all ordinances of the City not in conflict with this section. 
3)  In addition to the usual application fee, the applicant shall reimburse the City for the actual cost to the City for the services of an engineer should one be required to review the application and provide engineering expertise, up to a maximum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
b.  Antennas mounted on existing structures. 
1)  Antennas mounted on buildings. 
a)  Roof-mounted telecommunications antennas are allowed on non-residential buildings in all zoning districts without further zoning proceedings, provided a non-whip antenna does not exceed the height of the building by more than ten feet (10') and is screened from view from any adjacent public roadway and provided a whip antenna does not exceed the height of the building by more than fifteen feet (15') and is located no closer than fifteen feet (15') to the perimeter of the building. Prior to installation of a roof- mounted antenna, the department of building inspections shall be provided with an engineer's certification that the roof will support the proposed antenna and associated roof-mounted equipment. Roof-mounted antennas and associated equipment may be screened with enclosures or facades having an appearance that blends with the building on which they are located or by locating them so that they are not visible from an adjacent public roadway. The application process is required for roof-mounted antennas. 
b)  Building-mounted telecommunications antennas of the nonwhip type are allowed on nonresidential buildings in all zoning districts without further zoning proceedings, provided the antenna is mounted flush with the exterior of the building so that it projects no more than thirty inches (30") from the surface of the building to which it is attached; and the antenna's appearance is such as to blend with the surrounding surface of the building. This may not be applicable if the extension of the antenna is fully incorporated into a steeple or other component of the building that exceeds thirty inches (30") and will be considered by the DRC on a case-by- case basis. 
c)  ssociated equipment shall be placed either within the same building or in a separate building which matches the existing building in character and building materials or blends with the landscaping and other surroundings immediately adjacent to the separate building housing the equipment. Associated equipment for roof-mounted antennas may be located on the roof of the building if it is screened from view from any adjacent public roadway. 
i.  Telecommunications antennas are allowed without further zoning on existing utility and telecommunications towers and structures exceeding fifty feet (50') in height, provided that the antenna does not exceed the height of the structure by more than ten feet (10') if a non-whip type or fifteen feet (15') if a whip type. Existing utility and telecommunications towers and structures may be rebuilt if necessary to support the load of the new antenna without further zoning if the rebuilt tower or structure is substantially similar in appearance to the existing tower or structure it replaces. Antennas installed on structures in the right-of-way require a license or other authorization from the City of Keller. 
ii.  Telecommunications antennas located on existing structures are not subject to the five-thousand-foot separation requirement. 
iii.  When an application for a building permit to locate a telecommunications antenna on an existing building or other structure is made, the applicant shall provide (as part of the application) the Department of Community Development with color photo simulations showing the site of the existing structure with a photo-realistic representation of the proposed antenna and the existing structure or any proposed reconstruction of the structure as it would appear viewed from the closest residential property and from adjacent roadways. The applicant shall also submit photographs of the same views showing the current appearance of the site without the proposed antenna. 
3.  Telecommunications antennas shall not be constructed or used within the City of Keller without all approvals and permits first having been secured. 
4.  Within thirty (30) days of the enactment of this Code and as part of their annual report each January thereafter, providers of personal wireless services, as that term is defined by federal law, operating in the City of Keller shall provide the City with any updates to the above documents. 
5.  It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution for a violation of a provision of this section that compliance with the provision would prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services as defined by federal law. In addition, any entity that desires to erect or utilize telecommunication facilities that would be prohibited by the ordinances or regulations of the City dealing with zoning and land use may apply for such use and the City Council may, upon a showing that strict application of the regulation would prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting personal wireless service as defined by federal law, vary the subject regulation, consistent with the spirit and intent of this section, to the extent necessary to prevent the prohibition. 
J.  Handicap Accessibility. All non-residential buildings and parking areas shall conform to the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1991, as may be amended, accessibility guidelines or the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards. 
K.  Minimum Dwelling Unit Area. Minimum dwelling unit areas specified in this Code shall be computed exclusive of breezeways, garages, open porches, carports, and accessory buildings. 
L.  Performance Standards. 
1.  In all zoning districts, any use indicated in the permitted use list shall conform in operation, location, and construction to the performance standards as administered by the City, County, State, or Federal agencies. All uses, including those, which may be allowed by Planned Development (PD) or Specific Use Permit (SUP), shall conform in operation, location, and construction to appropriate performance standards for noise, smoke, and particulate matter, odorous matter, fire, or explosive hazard material, toxic and noxious matter, vibration, and glare. 
2.  All Federal and State pollution, noise, and requirements for toxic waste disposal shall be observed. 
M.  Livestock. Livestock may be kept on private property in compliance with the Keller Code of Ordinances, Section 3-240, provided no retail business is conducted on the premises except as provided under home occupation (see definition for Home Occupation). The property owner's privately owned horses, mules, donkeys and ponies shall not have a maximum number allowed on their property. The boarding or keeping of horses other than the owner's shall be a maximum of one (1) horse, mule, donkey or pony per acre not to exceed a total number of three (3). (See requirements for metal barns.) 
N.  Assisted Living Facilities (ALF) (7 or 8 residents) in Single-Family Residential Districts. (Amended by Ord. No. 1809 on September 6, 2016) 
1.  General Purpose and Description. Assisted Living Facilities (ALF) in single-family residential areas are intended to promote and encourage alternative and suitable living environments for an aging population and provide another option to maintain family life in Keller. Assisted Living Facilities shall maintain its residential character to blend within residential neighborhoods. 
2.  Number of Residents. The regulations listed within this section shall apply to Assisted Living Facilities consisting of more than six (6) residents. The maximum number of residents within an Assisted Living Facility shall be eight (8) persons. 
3.  Location of Assisted Living Facilities (ALF). 
a.  A Specific Use Permit is required for Assisted Living Facilities consisting of 7 or 8 residents for all properties in any SF zoning districts. 
b.  No Assisted Living Facility shall be located within one-half (1/2) mile of another Assisted Living Facility, measured from property line to property line. 
4.  Floor Area Requirements. 
a.  Minimum house size for an Assisted Living Facility is two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet. 
b.  A minimum bedroom floor area per person shall be required. Floor area requirements shall be measured from interior walls of all rooms, excluding closets, stairs, and thickness of walls, toilet rooms, mechanical rooms, laundry, and corridors. 
c.  A minimum of one hundred twenty (120) square feet of interior living space shall be provided per facility resident. Interior living space shall include sleeping space and all other interior space accessible on a regular basis to all facility residents. 
d.  A full bathroom with toilet, lavatory, and tub or shower, shall be provided for every bedroom. 
5.  New Construction/Redevelopment. All Assisted Living Facilities, either new construction or conversion of an existing single- family residence, shall meet all development standards listed under this section of the UDC. 
6.  Building Exterior. 
a.  When located in a residential zoning district, all parts of the structure shall be maintained in a character consistent with the residential neighborhood in which it is located in terms of gross floor area, building design and lot coverage. 
b.  Assisted Living Facilities shall meet the residential construction standards for residential structures in Section 8.06 (A.1) of the UDC. 
c.  Assisted Living Facilities shall meet the height requirements within its respective zoning district. 
7.  Landscaping. 
a.  A minimum of two (2) large canopy trees with a minimum three-inch (3") caliper shall be planted in the required front yard of all new single-family uses and in the required side yard adjacent to a street of all new single-family uses on corner lots. Existing trees of equal or greater size within the required front yard may be counted toward this requirement. 
b.  All Assisted Living Facilities shall comply with the tree preservation requirements for non-residential developments as stated in Section 8.19 (C.3) of the UDC. 
8.  Screening/Fencing. Residential fencing shall be required and shall be in accordance with residential fencing standards in Section 8.11 of the UDC. 
9.  Accessory Uses. 
a.  All accessory structures shall be constructed of materials complimentary to the main structure and shall be subject to the requirements stated in Section 8.10. 
b.  Open Space/garden. 
c.  No on-site dumpster shall be permitted on the property. 
10.  Parking. 
a.  Driveways shall be paved with concrete or all-weather surface. 
b.  All parking shall be in accordance with the residential parking standards as stated in Section 8.07 of the UDC. 
c.  All residential structures shall be returned to its original state prior to its conversion to an Assisted Living Facility if being converted back to a single-family residence. 
11.  Signage. 
a.  No external (detached monument or attached building) signage shall be allowed. b. No temporary signage shall be allowed. 
12.  Site Lighting. Lighting shall be in accordance with the residential lighting and glare standards in Section 8.16(C) of the UDC. 
13.  Dumpster. No on-site dumpster shall be permitted on the property. 
14.  Fire Protection. 
a.  Commercial kitchen are not required. A hood suppression system is required in all kitchens. 
b.  Fire suppression system shall be required for all Assisted Living Facilities, regardless of occupancy and/or building square footage. The type of fire suppression system shall be in accordance with International Fire Code (IFC) requirements. 
c.  Fire hydrant location and coverage requirements for residential structures as stated in Section 5.16 of the UDC shall be required. 
15.  Site Plan Requirement. 
a.  All Assisted Living Facilities are required to submit a Site Plan application and meet the application requirements per Section 4.15 of the UDC. 
b.  All site plans shall be considered for approval by the City Manager or his/her designee if it complies with best professional practices and meets all applicable requirements of this Code for development. 
c.  Any variances would be required to be considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission for recommendation and City Council for approval.  
Section 8.16 - Lighting and Glare Standards 
A.  Purpose. Standards for controlling lighting and glare are set forth to reduce the annoyance and inconvenience to property owners and traffic hazards to motorists. These standards are intended to allow reasonable enjoyment of adjacent and nearby property by their owners and occupants while requiring adequate levels of lighting of parking areas. 
B.  Non-Residential Site Lighting and Glare Standards. 
1.  A photometric plan is required to be submitted with all site plans for non-residential uses, which are adjacent to residential zoning or use, showing the light intensity within and around the perimeter of the site. 
2.  Any use shall be operated so as not to produce obnoxious and intense glare or direct illumination across the bounding property line from a visible source of illumination of such intensity as to create a nuisance or detract from the use or enjoyment of adjacent property. All outside lights shall be made up of a light source and reflector so selected that acting together, the light beam is controlled and not directed across any bounding property line. The allowable maximum intensity measured at the property line of a residential use in a residential district shall be two-tenths (0.2) foot candles. Light poles shall be placed on the site a setback equal to its height from all adjacent residential property. Wall packs shall be designed to match the building in color and shall directly shine down without spill over onto residential properties. Any alternative lighting technique may be considered on a case-by-case basis and approved by City Council at time of site plan review. 
3.  All off-street parking areas for non-residential uses, which are used after dark, shall be illuminated beginning one-half (½) hour after sunset and continuing throughout the hours of business operation. If only a portion of a parking area is offered for use after dark, only that part is required to be illuminated in accordance with these standards. However, the portion offered for use shall be clearly designated. Lighting within the parking areas shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
a.  Intensity. 
1)  Minimum at any point on the parking area surface to be at least six-tenths (0.6) foot candles initial, and at least three-tenths (0.3) foot candles maintained or one-third (1/3) of the average, whichever is greater. 
2)  Illumination shall not exceed an average of one (1) foot candle at ground level and shall distribute not more than two-tenths (0.2) foot candles of light upon any adjacent residentially zoned or residentially used property. 
b.  A lighting plan shall be submitted with the site plan showing the type, location, and height of fixtures which are adjacent to residential zoning or use. Light poles and fixtures shall be consistent throughout a planned development or property platted as one project. This includes pad sites developed at various times by separate owners within a development 
c.  Light source height shall fit the character of the development as approved by the DRC. Decisions of the DRC may be appealed to the City Council for a final decision. Street lights and other traffic safety lighting are exempt from this standard. Streetlights and other traffic safety lighting are exempt from this standard. 
d.  Decorative lighting shall be placed in large parking lots to breakup a vast area of concrete and to provide human scale lighting within the parking lot, building, and adjacent to buildings. The locations will be reviewed at the time of site plan review. Decorative building lighting shall be applicable for a means to break up a massive facade, adjacent to residential zoning or fronting on a thoroughfare. 
C.  Residential Lighting and Glare Standards. Residential lighting for security and night recreation use is permitted in all residential districts provided the following requirements are met: 
1.  Light source height shall fit the character of the development as approved by the DRC. Decisions of the DRC may be appealed to the City Council for a final decision. Street lights and other traffic safety lighting are exempt from this standard. 
2.  Lighting shall not directly shine on adjacent dwellings or produce more than two-tenths (0.2) foot candles of light upon an adjacent property. 
D.  Luminaries. Light sources shall be of a down-light type, indirect, diffused, or shielded type luminaries installed and maintained so as to reduce glare effect and consequent interference with use of adjacent properties and boundary streets. Bare bulbs above seventy-five (75) watts and strings of lamps are prohibited except for temporary lighting as provided in this Code. 
E.  Special or Temporary Lighting: Low Wattage. 
Bare bulbs or strings of lamps are prohibited, except during holidays special lighting shall be permitted for a maximum time period of thirty (30) days for each holiday used. Christmas tree sales lots are considered a temporary holiday use for the purpose of this section. 
F.  Permanent Outdoor String Lighting. In the Old Town Keller and Town Center Districts only, the permanent installation of commercial-grade outdoor light strings shall be permitted as landscape accentuation or patio lighting. Such light strings shall be resistant to ultraviolet light exposure and shall have molded bases with weatherproof seals. Only medium base, intermediate base, and candelabra bases are allowed.  
Section 8.17 - Cluster Mailbox Unit Shelters (CBU Shelters) 
A shelter for any United States Postal Service (USPS)- required CBUs in districts permitting residential units is required and shall meet the following additional requirements: 
A.  Type and Size: The CBU shall be a part of a principal structure (i.e. clubhouse) or a stand alone accessory building (open-air or enclosed) that extends shelter to a minimum of five (5) feet beyond the CBUs' collective footprint. The CBU shall be designed to compliment the development, using similar and complimentary materials and color schemes. 
B.  Location: The CBU shall be located on a lot deeded to a homeowners' association or Public Improvement District (PID), whichever is approved by the City Council as the maintenance authority for the subdivision. The CBU, shall be no more than 50 feet from an off-street motorized vehicle parking lot as measured from curb to open-air building footprint or enclosed building entrance. 
C.  Parking: In addition to satisfying the minimum and maximum off-street Motorized Vehicle Parking space requirements specified by Section 8.07 for other uses on the lot, the following minimum and maximum off-street short-term (marked and signed for 10-minute maximum) motorized vehicle parking space requirements must also be met: 
Number of Mailboxes 	Minimum Short-Term Parking Spaces 	Maximum Short-Term Parking Spaces 
48 or fewer 	3 	3 
49 - 304 	3 or 12 maximum, whichever is greater 	3 plus 1 for each additional 32 mailboxes or portion thereof above 48 mailboxes 
305 or more 	12 maximum 	11 plus 1 for each additional 48 mailboxes or portion thereof above 304 mailboxes 
  
Section 8.18 - Illustrations 
 
Figure 1 - Lot Width
 
Figure 2 - Lot Area & Depth
 
Figure 3 - Yards
 
Figure 4 - Corner Lots
 
Figure 5 - Front Yard Where Zoning Changes in a Block
 
Figure 6 - Double Frontage Lots
 
Figure 7 - Floor Area Ratios
 
Figure 8 - Methods of Measuring Front Yards
 
Figure 9 - Measuring Building Height
 
Figure 10 - Sign Projections
 
Figure 11 - Attached Signs Which are Not Permitted
 
Figure 12 - Monument Sign Requirements
 
Figure 13 - Off-Street Maneuvering For Loading Area
 
Figure 14 - 90° Layout
 
Figure 15 - 45° Layout With Two-Way Traffic
 
Figure 16 - 60° Layout With Two-Way Traffic
 
Figure 17 - 45° Layout With One-Way Traffic
 
Figure 18 - 60° Layout With One-Way Traffic
 
Figure 19 - Thoroughfare Fencing Detail
 
Figure 20 - Pedestrian Access for Typical Waste Container Screening Closure
 
Figure 21 - Typical Waste Container Screening Gate
 
Figure 22 - Fence and Sight Requirements for Corner Lots
 
Figure 23 - J-Swing Garage
 
Figure 24 - Side Entry Garage
 
Figure 25 Sandwich Board Style Sign
 
Figure 26 Square Sign Measurement
 
Figure 27 Irregular Sign Measurement
 
Figure 28 Letter Sign Measurement
 
Figure 29 Angle between Sign faces 
Section 8.19 - Tree and Natural Feature Preservation 
A.  Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this Article is to promote site planning that furthers the preservation of mature trees and natural areas, to protect trees during construction; to facilitate site design and construction that contribute to the long term viability of existing trees; and to control the removal of trees when necessary. It is the further purpose of this Article to achieve the following broader objectives: 
1.  Prohibit the indiscriminate clearing of property. 
2.  Achieve the City's Future Land Use Plan goals as set by citizens through the appointed boards and the City Council. 
3.  Maintain and enhance property values and a positive image for the attraction of new residents and business enterprises to the City. 
4.  Protect healthy quality trees that contribute to noise reduction, air quality, glare reduction, and promote the natural ecological environmental and aesthetic qualities of the City. 
5.  Promote site planning that is sensitive to the location of existing trees in an effort to save quality trees evenly distributed across the City to reduce the need to overplant public property. 
6.  Provide for a permitting and enforcement procedure. 
B.  Tree Removal Permit Required. 
1.  The clear-cutting of land as defined in this Code is prohibited and all permits for tree removal shall be subject to this Code (see Section 8.20 - Exhibit B). 
2.  No grading or tree removal shall take place on any undeveloped property without obtaining a tree removal permit unless exempted by this Code. 
3.  All trees not listed as a protected tree within this Code may be removed with a tree removal permit. 
4.  The removal of selected trees from within a densely forested area when done in a professionally accepted manner shall be allowed as a single permit upon approval by the Development Review Committee. Approval will only be granted when it is determined that the selective thinning is being done in a manner that would enhance the environment and likelihood of survival for the remaining trees. 
5.  Where protected tree removal is allowed through exemption or by a tree removal permit and the root system is intertwined with protected trees which are intended to be saved, the tree shall be removed by flush cutting with the natural level of the surrounding ground. Where stump removal is also desired, stump grinding shall be allowed, or upon approval of the City, a trench may be cut between the two trees sufficient to cut the roots near the tree to be removed, thereby allowing removal of the remaining stump without destruction of the root system of the saved tree. 
C.  Requirements for New Developments. All projects/developments that have not submitted final plat/construction plans, site plan or building permit, whichever is applicable, as of the effective date of this Code shall be subject to the requirements for tree protection and replacement specified herein. Approval of development plans for compliance with this Code may be by the City Council, Planning and Zoning Commission, or City Staff, whichever is applicable by City regulations. Developer must demonstrate that all options have been considered to preserve as many trees as possible in accordance with this Code. 
1.  Single-Family Residential Subdivision Developments. 
a.  A developer shall submit an aerial photo of the property showing the tree coverage. An overlay of the proposed development showing all improvements including rights-of- way, easements, lot patterns, etc., shall be superimposed on the aerial photo. This document shall be provided with the submittal of a zoning application. If zoning is not applicable for a property, then this document shall be submitted at time of platting. The aerial photo and plan overlay shall be to the scale of a minimum of 1"=100' and must be legible and clear to read. The aerial photo shall also be of recent date taken within two (2) years or less of the submittal date. If the scale is impractical for the project, alternatives may be considered by the Development Review Committee. Aerial photographs may be rejected for submittal if it does not meet the above requirements. 
b.  A tree survey and preservation plan for all areas of soil disturbance and construction activity including all work within rights-of-way and easements shall be submitted with the zoning application. If zoning is not applicable for a property, then this document shall be submitted at time of preliminary site plan evaluation or construction plans, whichever is first. (Amended by Ord. No. 1818 on October 18, 2016) 
1).  The tree survey and preservation plan shall be approved and signed by a certified arborist and licensed surveyor. (Amended by Ord. No. 1818 on October 18, 2016) 
2).  The information submitted on a tree survey and preservation plan shall not be older than two (2) years. (Amended by Ord. No. 1818 on October 18, 2016) 
3).  The tree survey and preservation plan will be reviewed in conjunction with grading plans and these plans must be consistent with each other. (Amended by Ord. No. 1818 on October 18, 2016) 
c.  The requirement of a tree survey and preservation plan may be appealed to the Planning and Zoning Commission. If sufficient information is provided to review the various provisions of this Code and the Commission determines that a tree survey and preservation plan is not necessary, the Commission may recommend that this requirement may be waived by the City Council. The City Council shall make the final decision on whether a tree survey and preservation plan is necessary for a development. (Amended by Ord. No. 1818 on October 18, 2016) 
d.  All trees within street rights-of-way, utility or drainage easements as shown on an approved final plat/construction plans as approved by the City may be removed following the execution of a development agreement and approval of a tree protection plan by the Public Works Department and shall be exempt from the tree protection and replacement requirements specified herein. All other tree removal activity shall be in conjunction with a building permit for individual lots and shall conform to the requirements of this Code. 
e.  In cases of severe drainage issues related to the site, the City Staff and/or the developer may request from the Commission to perform lot grading and pad site preparation in conjunction with or following the clearing of rights-of-way and easements but prior to the issuance of building permit(s). In order for the Commission to consider the request for pad site grading in advance of issuance of a building permit, a tree survey as defined in Article Three, an erosion control plan including erosion control seeded mat placement and a tree removal plan shall be submitted. The erosion control mat shall be placed over all graded areas to remain unimproved for more than five (5) calendar days post grading. The tree removal plan shall reflect a minimum finished floor elevation of the slab. The proposed pad site shall not exceed the maximum pad site area as defined in this Code. The Commission makes recommendation to the City Council that they grant permission for trees in other areas such as proposed ponds, amenity center, etc., to be removed at the time of right-of-way clearing, however the tree removal in these areas shall be mitigated in accordance with this Code. City Council may consider granting the request for advance lot grading shall be final. The decision of the City Council is final. 
2.  Undeveloped Single-Family Residential Lot Owned by Home Builder/Individual Owner. 
a.  A tree survey and protection plan showing all protected trees and all proposed improvements within the lot shall be submitted with a building permit application. (Amended by Ord. No. 1818 on October 18, 2016) 
b.  A tree removal permit is required prior to any new construction on an undeveloped lot or additions to existing lots/structures. This permit may be obtained in conjunction with a building permit or as a separate permit. A separate permit must meet all the criteria of this Code and will not be accepted if a building permit is imminent. (Amended by Ord. No. 1818 on October 18, 2016) 
c.  All area within the building pad as defined in this Code including driveway and public sidewalk as shown on a site plan approved by the City may be removed and shall be exempt from the tree protection and replacement requirements specified herein. An additional twenty percent (20%) of total remaining quality trees on a lot may be removed without penalty for other construction purposes such as parking, patio, septic tank and lateral lines, swimming pool and deck areas. Any additional tree removal in excess of twenty percent (20%) shall be subject to the tree replacement and mitigation requirements defined herein. 
3.  Non-Residential Development. 
a.  A developer/applicant shall submit an aerial photo of the property showing the tree coverage at the time of zoning or specific use permit application, whichever occurs first. An overlay of the proposed development showing all improvements including rights-of-way, easements, lot patterns, etc., shall be superimposed on the aerial photo. This document shall be provided with the submittal of a concept plan for zoning, development plan, zoning exhibit. The aerial photo and plan overlay shall be to the scale of a minimum of 1"=50' and must be legible and clear to read. The aerial photo shall also be of recent date taken within two (2) years or less of the submittal date. If the scale is impractical for the project, alternatives may be considered by the Development Review Committee. Aerial photographs may be rejected for submittal if it does not meet the above requirement. 
b.  A tree survey and tree preservation plan showing all protected trees and all proposed improvements shall be submitted with a planned development zoning change, Specific Use Permit, site plan, preliminary site evaluation or engineering plans, whichever comes first. (Amended by Ord. No. 1818 on October 18, 2016) 
1).  The tree survey and preservation plan shall be approved and signed by a certified arborist and licensed surveyor. (Amended by Ord. No. 1818 on October 18, 2016) 
2).  The information submitted on a tree survey and preservation plan shall not be older than two (2) years. (Amended by Ord. No. 1818 on October 18, 2016) 
3).  The tree survey and preservation plan will be reviewed in conjunction with grading plans and these plans must be consistent with each other. (Amended by Ord. No. 1818 on October 18, 2016) 
c.  A tree removal permit is required fo all non-residential developments and may be obtained in conjunction with a building permit or as a separate permit. 
d.  All trees within street rights-of-way, utility or drainage easements, building pads, driveways, and fire lanes as shown on an approved site plan may be removed and shall be exempt from the tree protection and replacement requirements specified herein. An additional twenty percent (20%) of the remaining quality trees may be removed without penalty for parking lots and/or for grading and drainage purposes. Any additional tree removal in excess of twenty percent (20%) shall be subject to the tree replacement and mitigation requirements as defined herein. 
D.  Requirements for Developed Homestead. The owner of property of five (5) acres or less that is used for a homestead shall be exempt from the tree protection and replacement requirements specified herein. Developed Homesteads of more than five (5) acres, shall be subject to the requirements of Section 8.19 (E), Agricultural Property. Properties identified on the City Zoning Map or the Future Land Use Map as non-residential shall not be exempt from the requirements of this Code. 
E.  Requirements for Agricultural Property. No fee shall be charged to make application for a tree removal permit for the removal of protected trees located on real property having an agricultural tax exemption. However, if within any twelve (12)-month period, tree removal permits for the removal of twenty (20) or more protected trees are issued for the same agricultural property or tract, or any of its portions, the agricultural zoning district classification of such property cannot be changed, nor can an application for approval of a development plan, planned development or zoning amendment relative to such property be made, for a period of sixty (60) months following the most recent twelve (12) month period during which twenty (20) or more protected trees were removed from such agricultural zoned property. 
The property owner may request from the Community Development Department to make an on-site inspection of the property to be cleared and provide the City the purpose and reason for the clearing. If the Planning Manager or his/her designee determines the clearing of land to be for a legitimate, agricultural reason, the a tree removal permit may be issued. The decision of the Planning Manager may be appealed to the City Council. 
F.  Requirements for Municipal/Public Domain Property, Rights-of-way and Easements. 
1.  All construction and maintenance activities within municipal/public domain property, rights-of-way or easements by the City, franchise utility companies, cable providers, telecommunication providers, and cemeteries shall be in accordance with this Code and may be subject to the requirements for tree protection and replacement specified herein if extensive quality trees are removed for the project 
2.  A tree removal permit shall not be required and trees may be removed within the public right-of-way and franchise utility easements. However, no construction or maintenance activity shall begin until construction plans showing protected trees to be removed and the limit of construction activity have been approved by the Director of Public Works. Franchise utility companies are exempted from this requirement 
3.  A tree removal permit shall be required, and trees may not be removed without a permit, for construction or maintenance activity within private easements for the extraction, collection and transmission of natural gas or other minerals. Franchise utility companies shall be exempted from this requirement. 
4.  The parks and Recreation Department shall administer a plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees in municipal/public domain property. 
5.  A list of trees acceptable for planting along streets, within parks or other public areas or for replacement and mitigation is attached to this Code. Trees other than those listed as acceptable may be planted only upon approval of the Development Review Committee. 
6.  The City shall have the right to plant, prune, and maintain street trees and park trees within the municipal/public domain property as may be necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public properties. The City may remove or cause or order to be removed any tree or part thereof that is in an unsafe condition, or that by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or other public improvements, or which is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. 
G.  Exceptions. A tree removal permit shall be issued and tree protection and replacement requirements shall not be required under any of the following circumstances. The burden of proof as a qualified exemption is upon the remover of a tree. 
1.  Approved Plans: All construction activities for which final construction plans and building permit applications have been submitted prior to the effective date of this Code shall be exempt. 
2.  Diseased Trees: The tree is diseased, damaged beyond the point of recovery, or in danger of falling as determined by the Development Review Committee prior to the removal of the tree. The removal of a diseased tree by the City or an individual is required to reduce the chance of spreading the disease to adjacent healthy trees. 
3.  Public Safety: The tree endangers the public health, welfare or safety and immediate removal or pruning is required. 
4.  Utility Service Interruption: The tree has disrupted a public utility service due to a tornado, storm, flood or other act(s) of God. Removal shall be limited to the portion of the tree reasonably necessary to reestablish and maintain reliable utility service. 
5.  Landscape Nursery: All licensed plant or tree nurseries shall be exempt from the requirements of this Code as they pertain to those trees planted and growing on the premises of said licensee that are so planted and growing for the sale or intended sale to the general public in the ordinary course of said licensee's business. 
H.  Permit Review and Approval Process. 
1.  Authority for Review: An application for a tree removal permit shall be submitted to the Community Development Department for building permit purposed or Public Works Department for infrastructure improvements, grading or drainage purposed, whichever is applicable during the construction process (see Section 8.20 - Exhibit B). 
2.  The Development Review Committee shall be responsible for the review and approval of all requests for tree removal permits submitted in accordance with the requirements specified herein. 
3.  The Review Committee may defer the approval of a tree removal permit to the Planning and Zoning Commission for any reason. The decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be final. 
4.  Any decision made by the Review Committee may be appealed to the Planning and Zoning Commission for recommendation to the City Council. The decisions of the City Council shall be final. 
5.  The City shall establish administrative procedures necessary to facilitate the implementation and enforcement of this Code. 
6.  A request for a tree removal permit must be submitted and approved prior to the removal of any protected tree in the City unless the tree is exempt under a provision of this Code. 
7.  All tree removal permits shall be accompanied by a payment made to the City in the amount specified by City Council. 
8.  Either an aerial photo and transparency and/or a tree survey shall be submitted with any tree removal permit as determined by the Development Review Committee and must include the items referenced in this Code and its appendices. 
9.  Permits for tree removal issued in connection with a building permit or site plan shall be valid for the period of that building permit's or site plan's validity. Permit(s) for tree removal not issued in connection with a building permit or a site plan shall become void one hundred eighty (180) days after the issue date on the permit. Upon expiration, a new permit shall be required. 
10.  The appropriate body as described herein, being either the Development Review Committee, Planning and Zoning Commission, or the City Council shall consider a tree removal permit based on the following criteria: 
a.  Whether or not a reasonable accommodation or alternative solution can be made to accomplish the desired activity without the removal of the tree; 
b.  The cost of preserving the tree as a factor of the project's cost; 
c.  Whether the tree is worthy of preservation given its age and remaining life expectancy, current health, and any other influential factors as determined by the Community Development Department and the Parks Department. In the event there is disagreement between the two departments, a disinterested third party arborist may be retained for a professional opinion; 
d.  The effect of the removal on erosion, soil moisture, retention, flow of surface waters, and drainage systems; 
e.  The need for buffering of residential areas from the noise, glare, and visual effects of non-residential uses; 
f.  Whether the tree interferes with a utility service; 
g.  Whether the proposed tree replacement pursuant to the Tree Replacement Requirements hereof adequately mitigates the removal of the tree; 
h.  Any other factors deemed to be in the interest of preserving or protecting the health, safety and welfare of the City of Keller and its citizens. 
I.  Tree Replacement Requirements. 
1.  In the event that it is necessary to remove a protected tree as specified in this Code, the party removing the tree shall be required to replace the protected trees being removed with quality trees as defined herein (see Section 8.20 - Exhibit I). A sufficient number of trees shall be planted to equal or exceed the diameter (measured at eighteen inches (18") above ground level of each tree removed. This mitigative measure is not meant to supplant good site planning. Tree replacement will be considered only after all design alternatives, which could save more existing trees, have been evaluated and reasonably rejected. Said replacement trees shall be a minimum of three-inch (3") diameter (measured at eighteen inches [18"] above ground) and seven feet (7') in height when planted. 
2.  At the time of review, the agent responsible for placement, the time of replacement, and the location of the new trees will be determined by the Development Review Committee. The replacement trees shall be located on the same property that trees were removed whenever possible. However, if this is not feasible, they may be placed on a designated property as agreed to by the Planning and Zoning Commission. If the Planning and Zoning Commission approves the planting of replacement trees more than thirty (30) days after the removal of protected trees, the applicant shall provide the Community Development Department with an affidavit that all replacement trees will be planted within six (6) months. A replacement tree that dies within two (2) years of the date it was planted must be replaced by another replacement tree in compliance with this Code. 
3.  The applicant may request from the Planning and Zoning Commission for recommendation to the City Council to make a payment into the Tree Reforestation Fund in lieu of planting the replacement trees if planting is not feasible. The funds shall be used only for purchasing and planting trees on public property or acquiring wooded property that shall remain in a naturalistic state in perpetuity. The fee payment amount shall be established in the City's Fee Schedule. The schedule may be periodically updated by the City without changing this Code. (Amended by Ord. No. 1818 on October 18, 2016) 
J.  Tree Transplantation. The City may request to enter a property following the approval of a tree removal permit, or development plans for a property to inspect the site for any trees marked for removal that may be transplanted. The City will pay all costs associated with the removal and transplantation of designated trees to public parks, public facilities or public rights-of-way. 
K.  Tree Protection. A major purpose of this Code is to protect all protected trees, which are not required to be removed, to allow approved construction to occur. The following procedures are required: 
1.  All construction plans shall include the necessary documents as requested by the Development Review Committee to review the tree preservation plan. 
2.  The following activities shall be prohibited within the limits of the critical root zone of any protected tree subject to the requirements of this Code. 
a.  Material Storage: No materials intended for use in construction or waste materials accumulated due to excavation or demolition shall be placed within the limits of the critical root zone of any protected tree. However, this restriction shall not apply to material storage in areas exempt from the tree protection and replacement requirements (e.g., building pad, driveway, patios, parking lot, etc.) 
b.  Equipment Cleaning/Liquid Disposal: No equipment shall be cleaned or other liquids deposited or allowed to flow overland within the limits of the critical root zone of a protected tree. This includes, without limitation, paint, oil, solvents, asphalt, concrete, mortar or similar materials. 
c.  Tree Attachments: No signs, wires or other attachments, other than those of a protective nature, shall be attached to any protected tree. Fencing attached to a tree via "U" nails or bent nails when only at points of tangency with the trees are allowed. 
d.  Vehicular Traffic: No vehicular and/or construction equipment traffic or parking shall take place within the limits of the critical root zone of any protected tree other than on an existing street pavement. This restriction does not apply to single incident access within the critical root zone for purposes of clearing underbrush, establishing the building pad and associated lot grading, vehicular traffic necessary for routine utility maintenance or emergency restoration of utility service or routine mowing operations. 
e.  Grade Changes: No grade changes shall be allowed within the limits of the critical root zone of any protected tree unless adequate construction methods are approved by the Development Review Committee or if grading is as directed by the City's drainage inspector. 
f.  Impervious Paving: No paving with asphalt, concrete or other impervious materials in a manner that may reasonably be expected to kill a tree shall be placed within the limits of the critical root zone of a protected tree. If a protected tree die within five (5) years of issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for non-residential construction or final building inspection for residential construction, due to construction activity or impervious paving around the critical root zone of the tree, the property owner shall submit a mitigation plan and tree replacement in accordance with this Code shall be required. 
3.  A protected tree shall be considered to be preserved only if a minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) of the critical root zone is maintained at undisturbed natural grade and no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the canopy is removed due to building encroachment. 
4.  The following procedures shall be followed on all types on construction projects (i.e. residential subdivisions, commercial, multi-family, industrial developments, residential builders and municipal/public). 
a.  Tree Flagging or Marking: Trees that are shown on an approved plan by the City for preservation/protection shall be flagged with bright fluorescent orange vinyl tape or ribbon wrapped around the main trunk at a height of four and one-half feet (4.5') or more such that it is very visible to workers operating construction equipment. Trees that are marked for preservation/protection shall have protective fencing in accordance with the requirements of this Code. 
b.  Protective Fencing: In those situations where a protected tree is so close to the construction area that construction equipment might infringe on the root system or is within twenty feet (20') of the construction area, a protective fencing shall be required between the outer limits of the critical root zone of the tree and the construction activity area. Four feet (4') high protective fencing shall be supported at a maximum of ten feet (10') intervals by approved methods. At regular intervals, signs shall be required that states in English and in Spanish, "Tree Protection Area. No grading, parking vehicles, or storing equipment permitted. Violators may be fined." All protective fencing shall be in place prior to commencement of any major site work involving heavy equipment for construction of utilities and roadways and shall remain in place until all site work has been completed. This provision does not apply to clearing the right-of-way for the purpose of access to the site for site preparation. (Amended by Ord. No. 1818 on October 18, 2016) 
c.  Protective fencing shall not be required for clearing the rights-of-way for the purpose of access to the site. Once the site is accessible by heavy equipment, protective fencing shall be placed in accordance with this Code. 
L.  Tree Pruning Restrictions. No protected tree shall be pruned in a manner that significantly disfigures the tree or in a manner that would reasonably lead to the death of the tree. 
1.  Allowed Pruning: Protected trees may be strategically pruned to allow construction or demolition of a structure. All pruning shall take place in accordance with approved Arboricultural techniques and the recommendations of Exhibit G. Reasonable pruning of trees also may be performed or contracted to be performed by the owner of the tree when unrelated to construction activity. 
2.  Required Pruning: The owners of all trees adjacent to public right-a-way shall be required to maintain a minimum clearance of thirteen and one-half feet (13.5') above the traveled pavement or curb of a public street. Said owners shall also remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs that constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The City shall also have the right to prune trees overhanging within public right-of- way that interfere with the proper spread of light along the street from a street light or interfere with visibility of any traffic control device or sign or as necessary to preserve the public safety. 
3.  Tree Topping: It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or City department to top any street tree, park tree or other tree on public property. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this Code at the determination of the City. 
M.  Tree Planting Restrictions. 
1.  Overhead Lines: Any required replacement trees shall not be planted within an area such that the mature canopy of the tree will be within ten feet (10') of overhead utility lines. 
2.  Underground Utilities: Any required replacement trees or street trees shall not be planted within five feet (5') of underground public utility lines, including water lines, sewer lines, transmission lines or other utilities. No trees may be planted within five feet (5') of a fire hydrant. 
3.  Street Corners: No street tree shall be planted closer than twenty-five feet (25') of any street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curb lines. 
N.  Enforcement. 
1.  Permit Required: No development or grading activity shall commence until all applicable requirements of this Code are met and a notice to proceed or a tree removal permit has been issued for the site. 
2.  Acceptance of Improvements: No acceptance of public improvements shall be authorized until it is determined that all requirements of this Code are met and all fines for violations of this Code have been paid to the City or otherwise disposed of through the Municipal Court. No acceptance of public improvements shall be authorized until all replacement trees have been planted or appropriate payments have been made to the Tree Reforestation Fund. 
3.  Certificate of Occupancy: No Certificate of Occupancy for non-residential construction or final building inspection for residential construction shall be issued until it is determined that all requirements of this Code are met and all fines for violations of this Code have been paid to the City or otherwise disposed of through the Municipal Court. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued until all replacement trees have been planted or appropriate payments have been made to the Tree Mitigation Fund. 
4.  Notwithstanding the above provisions, public improvements may be accepted and Certificate of Occupancy may be issued before all trees have been replaced if an escrow account is established by the City in the amount equal to the prevailing rate for installed trees with a two (2) year guarantee, plus fifteen percent (15%) to cover administrative costs. 
O.  Penalty. 
1.  Any person, firm, corporation, agent, or employee thereof who violates the provisions of this Code by removing trees without a permit shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction hereof shall be fined in an amount not to exceed two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) per caliper inch of the tree(s) removed or damaged not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000) per incident. 
2.  A person firm, corporation, agent, or employee thereof violates any other provisions of this Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction hereof shall be fined a minimum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) but not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000) per incident. The unlawful injury, destruction or removal of each protected tree shall be considered a separate incident and each incident subjects the violator to the maximum penalty set forth herein per tree. 
P.  Appendices. It is anticipated that the attached appendices will be changed periodically by the Review Committee in response to changes in the administration of this Code.  
Section 8.20 - Tree Preservation Exhibits 
Exhibit A - Quality Trees 
Large Trees 	
 Common Name 	 Botanical Name 
 Afghan (Eldarica) Pine 	  Pinus eldarica 
 American Elm 	  Ulmus americana 
 Arizona Cypress 	  Cupressus arizonica 
 Bald Cypress 	  Taxodium distichum 
 Black Walnut 	  Juglans nigra 
 Buckeye, Texas 	  Aesculus arguta 
 Oak (Bigelow, Bur, Chinquapin, Durrand, 
 Lacey, Live, Shumard, Southern Live, Texas Red) 	  Quercus spp. 
 Caddo Maple 	  Acer saccharum var. caddo 
 Cedar Elm 	  Ulmus crassifolla 
 Chinese Pistache 	  Pistachia chinensis 
 Deodar Cedar 	  Cedrus deodora 
 Eastern Red Cedar 	  Juniperus virginiana 
 Lacebark Elm 	  Ulmus Parvifolia 
 Pecan 	  Carya illinoiensis 
 Red Cedar 	  Juniperus virginiana 
 Southern Magnolia 	  Magnolia grandiflora 
 Texas Ash 	  Fraxinus texensis 
 Texas Hickory 	  Carya texana 
 Thornless Honey Locust 	  Gleditsia triacanthos 
 Western Soapberry 	  Sapindus drummondii 
Understory Trees 	
 Common Name 	 Botanical Name 
 Birds of Paradise 	  Caesalpinia gilliesii 
 Carolina Buckthorn 	  Rhamnus caroliniana 
 Crepe Myrtle (tree form) 	  Lagerstroemia indica 
 Desert Willow 	  Chilopsis linearis 
 Eastern Red Cedar 	  Juniperus virginiana 
 Eves Necklace 	  Sophora affinis 
 Hollywood Juniper 	  Juniperus chinensis 'Torulosa' 
 Japanese Black Pine 	  Pinus thunbergiana 
 Juniper, Blue Point 	  Juniperus chinensis 'Blue Point' 
 Juniper Wichita Blue 	  Juniperus scopulorum 'Wichita' 
 Little Gem Magnolia 	  Magnolia grandiflora 'Little Gem' 
 Mexican Buckeye 	  Ungnadia speciosa 
 Mexican Plum 	  Prunis mexicana 
 Possumhaw Holly 	  Ilex decidur 
 Red Buckeye 	  Aesculus pavia 
 Redbud 	  Cercis canadensis 
 Rose of Sharon 	  Hibiscus syriacus 
 Rusty Blackhaw Viburnum 	  Viburnum rufidulum 
 Texas Buckeye 	  Aesculus arguta 
 Texas Persimmon 	  Diospyros texana 
 Vitex 	  Vitex agnus-castus 
 Winter/Bush Honeysuckle 	  Lonicera fragrantissima 
 Wax Myrtle 	  Myrica cerifera 
 Yaupon Holly 	  Ilex vomitoria 
 
Exhibit B - Tree Removal Permit Application
 
Exhibit C - Construction Plan Requirements 
The following shall be required as a part of all construction plans submitted to the City when tree removal or tree protection is required during any phase of site work or construction. 
1.  A Tree Preservation Detail Sheet shall include the following at a minimum. 
a.  The requirements of Section 8.20 (I), (J), (K), (L), and (M) shall be noted. 
b.  A graphics legend to be used throughout the plans for the purposes of showing the following: Trees to be flagged, protective fencing, trees requiring bark protection, boring, areas of cut and fill impacting protected trees. 
c.  Graphic tree exhibit showing the features of a tree to include the critical root zone, trunk, canopy, drip line and method of caliper measurement (see Section 8.20 - Exhibits D & E). 
d.  Graphic exhibits showing methods of protection to include snow fences, boarded skirts, etc. 
e.  Graphic exhibits showing construction methods to include grade changes, boring, trenching, etc. 
f.  Graphic exhibits showing appropriate pruning practices (see Section 8.20 - Exhibit G). 
2.  All requirements of the Tree Preservation section within this Code shall be shown graphically as needed on the construction plans. 
 
Exhibit D - Tree Exhibit
Critical Root Zone CCRZ): The area of undisturbed natural soil around atree defined by a concentric circle with a radius equal to the distance from the trunk to the outermost portion of the drip line. 
Drip Line: A vertical line run through the outermost portion of the canopy of a tree and extending to the ground. 
 
Exhibit E - Measurement Methods
Diameter Measurement: The diameter of the protected tree shall be measured as shown. The diameter of a multi-trunk tree shall be determined by adding the total diameter of the largest trunk to the diameter of each additional trunk. 
Exhibit F - Example Builder Site Plan
 
Exhibit G - Tree Pruning Recommendations 
 
  
  
TREE PRUNING 
Trees must have codominant stems, as shown on the left. If a codominant stem must be removed, cut at an angle outside of the bark ridge as shown in the insert at right. Avoid leaving any stub. 
TREE PRUNING 
When removing a branch, always cut outside the branch bark ridge and collar. Do not make a flush cut. 
  
  
 
 
  
  
CUTTING BRANCHES 
When removing heavy limbs, first make an undercut several inches outside of the collar. Then remove limb by a second cut an inch or so outside of the first cut. Remove stub with a third cut just outside of the collar. (Feucht, 1985) 
  
CUTTING BRANCHES 
Branches that do not have a distinct collar should be cut at a right angle to the branch outside the branch bark ridge. 
  
  
 
Exhibit H - Preferred Survey Nomenclature and legend
 
Exhibit I - Replacement Tree List 
	Understory Trees 	
	 Common Name 	 Botanical Name 
* 	 Birds of Paradise 	  Caesalpinia gilliesii 
* 	 Carolina Buckthorn 	  Rhamnus caroliniana 
* 	 Crepe Myrtle (tree form) 	  Lagerstroemia indica 
* 	 Desert Willow 	  Chilopsis linearis 
* 	 Eastern Red Cedar 	  Juniperus virginiana 
* 	 Eves Necklace 	  Sophora affinis 
* 	 Hollywood Juniper 	  Juniperus chinensis 'Torulosa' 
* 	 Japanese Black Pine 	  Pinus thunbergiana 
* 	 Juniper, Blue Point 	  Juniperus chinensis 'Blue Point' 
* 	 Juniper Wichita Blue 	  Juniperus scopulorum 'Wichita' 
* 	 Little Gem Magnolia 	  Magnolia grandiflora 'Little Gem' 
* 	 Mexican Buckeye 	  Ungnadia speciosa 
* 	 Mexican Plum 	  Prunis mexicana 
* 	 Possumhaw Holly 	  Ilex decidur 
* 	 Red Buckeye 	  Aesculus pavia 
* 	 Redbud 	  Cercis canadensis 
* 	 Rose of Sharon 	  Hibiscus syriacus 
* 	 Rusty Blackhaw Viburnum 	  Viburnum rufidulum 
* 	 Texas Buckeye 	  Aesculus arguta 
* 	 Texas Persimmon 	  Diospyros texana 
* 	 Vitex 	  Vitex agnus-castus 
* 	 Winter/Bush Honeysuckle 	  Lonicera fragrantissima 
* 	 Wax Myrtle 	  Myrica cerifera 
* 	 Yaupon Holly 	  Ilex vomitoria 
	Large Trees (above 35 feet) 	
	 Common Name 	 Botanical Name 
* 	 Afghan (Eldarica) Pine 	  Pinus eldarica 
* 	 American Elm 	  Ulmus americana 
* 	 Arizona Cypress 	  Cupressus arizonica 
	 Bald Cypress 	  Taxodium distichum 
	 Black Walnut 	  Juglans nigra 
* 	 Buckeye, Texas 	  Aesculus arguta 
* 	 Oak (Bigelow, Bur, Chinquapin, Durrand, Lacey, Live, Shumard, Southern Live, Texas Red) 	  Quercus spp. 
* 	 Caddo Maple 	  Acer saccharum var. caddo 
* 	 Cedar Elm 	  Ulmus crassifolla 
* 	 Chinese Pistache 	  Pistachia chinensis 
	 Deodar Cedar 	  Cedrus deodora 
* 	 Eastern Red Cedar 	  Juniperus virginiana 
* 	 Lacebark Elm 	  Ulmus Parvifolia 
* 	 Pecan 	  Carya illinoiensis 
	 Red Cedar 	  Juniperus virginiana 
	 Southern Magnolia 	  Magnolia grandiflora 
* 	 Texas Ash 	  Fraxinus texensis 
* 	 Texas Hickory 	  Carya texana 
* 	 Thornless Honey Locust 	  Gleditsia triacanthos 
* 	 Western Soapberry 	  Sapindus drummondii 
	*Low or low-med water demand (Taken from Texas A&M drought tolerant Smartscape (TM) list) 
  
Article Nine - APPENDICES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The appendices to this Code may be changed from time to time without amending this Code. 
 
Section 9.01 - Development Review Committee Members (DRC) 
Name, Title 	Phone (area 817) 	Fax 
Planning Manager 	743-4130 	743-4195 
Senior Planner 	743-4130 	743-4195 
Planner I 	743-4130 	743-4195 
Director of Public Works 	743-4080 	743-4195 
City Engineer 	743-4082 	743-4195 
Senior Project Engineer 	743-4080 	743-4195 
Storm Water Engineer 	743-4080 	743-4195 
Fire Marshal 	743-4472 	743-4409 
Fire Inspector 	743-4470 	743-4195 
Director of Economic Development 	743-4020 	743-4195 
Building Official 	743-4110 	743-4195 
Police Officer 	891-3470 	
Park Maintenance and Development Manager 	743-4057 	743-4193 
  
Section 9.02 - Application Forms 
 
ZONING CHANGE APPLICATION 
SECTION 3. CHECKLIST 
(Please provide each of the items below & initial next to each item or write N/A) 
? The application fee 
? Seven (7) 22" x 34" or 24" x 36" copies are needed, collated and folded to 9" x 12" paper size; electronic copy is recommended upon submittal date. 
? A narrative statement that includes: 
• Current and proposed zoning or use 
• A statement of the need for the proposed zoning change 
• Compatibility of proposed zoning with surrounding zoning and land uses. 
• Descriptions that show in what ways the proposal is consistent with the City's Master Plan. 
• You may also choose to address the decision criteria on with the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council will base their decision. 
1)  Whether the uses permitted by the proposed change will be appropriate in the immediate area concerned and their relationship to the general area and the City as a whole, and in compliance with the Future Land Use Plan. 
2)  Whether the proposed change is in accord with any existing or proposed plans for providing streets, water supply, sanitary sewers, and other utilities to the area, and shall note the findings. 
3)  The amount of vacant land currently classified for similar development in the vicinity and elsewhere in the City, and any special circumstances which may make a substantial part of such vacant land unavailable for development. 
4)  The recent rate at which land is being developed in the same zoning classification as the request, particularly in the vicinity of the proposed change. 
5)  How other areas designated for similar development will be, or are unlikely to be, affected if the proposed amendment is approved. 
6)  Any other factors which will substantially affect the health, safety, morals, or general welfare. 
? A metes and bounds description of the property to be rezoned sealed by a surveyor. 
? A 24" by 36" scaled exhibit showing the subject property with metes and bounds labels and important physical features such as existing structures, topography, roadways, or creeks. 
? A 24" by 36" aerial exhibit of the subject property showing the locations of trees in accordance with Section 8.19 
? Any drawings the applicant considers necessary to demonstrate the case for rezoning. Drawings of the site should to scale. 
? Evidence of communicating the proposal with the adjacent neighborhood 
? Additional information or drawings, operations data, or expert evaluation when considering the application, including traffic studies and drainage studies as required by the Development Review Committee 
 
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT CHANGE APPLICATION 
SECTION 3. CHECKLIST
(Please provide each of the items below & initial next to each item) 
? The application fee 
? Seven (7) 22" x 34" or 24" x 36" copies are needed, collated and folded to 9" x 12" paper size; electronic copy is recommended upon submittal date. 
? A narrative statement that includes: 
• Current and proposed base zoning district 
• Description of concept plan 
• A statement of the need for the proposed zoning change 
• Compatibility of proposed zoning with surrounding zoning and land uses. 
• Descriptions that show in what ways the proposal is consistent with the City's Master Plan. 
• You may also choose to address the decision criteria on with the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council will base their decision. 
1)  Whether the uses permitted by the proposed change will be appropriate in the immediate area concerned and their relationship to the general area and the City as a whole, and in compliance with the Future Land Use Plan. 
2)  Whether the proposed change is in accord with any existing or proposed plans for providing streets, water supply, sanitary sewers, and other utilities to the area, and shall note the findings. 
3)  The amount of vacant land currently classified for similar development in the vicinity and elsewhere in the City, and any special circumstances which may make a substantial part of such vacant land unavailable for development. 
4)  The recent rate at which land is being developed in the same zoning classification as the request, particularly in the vicinity of the proposed change. 
5)  How other areas designated for similar development will be, or are unlikely to be, affected if the proposed amendment is approved. 
6)  Any other factors which will substantially affect the health, safety, morals, or general welfare 
? List of proposed development standards including, but not be limited to: 
• Permitted uses, 
• density, lot area, lot width, lot depth, yard depths and widths, 
• building elevations, building material coverage, and building height, 
• floor area ratio, 
• parking ratios and parking locations, 
• access points, 
• screening and landscaping, 
• accessory buildings, 
• signs, 
• lighting, 
• hours of operation, 
• project phasing or scheduling, 
• management associations, and 
• any other requirements. 
? A metes and bounds description of the property to be rezoned sealed by a surveyor. 
? An 24" by 36" aerial exhibit of the subject property showing the locations of trees in accordance with Section 8.19 
? Existing Conditions Exhibit. This 24" by 36" exhibit shall show the boundary of PD area with metes and bounds labels and important physical features such as existing structures, topography, existing streets, alleys and easements general use, thoroughfares. 
? Concept Plan. The plan shall be to scale, 24" by 36" in size, and show the following: 
• the boundary of PD area with metes and bounds labels 
• preliminary lot arrangements, 
• access, proposed streets and thoroughfares, 
• size, type and location of buildings with building density, building height, 
• fire lanes, 
• screening, landscaped areas/plans, 
• other pertinent development data. 
? Evidence of communicating the proposal with the adjacent neighborhood 
? Trip Generation Form and, if required per Section 5.03, a Traffic Impact Analysis 
? Additional information or drawings, operations data, or expert evaluation when considering the application, including traffic studies and drainage studies as required by the Development Review Committee 
 
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (PD) AMENDMENT APPLICATION 
SECTION 3. CHECKLIST 
(Please provide each of the items below & initial next to each item) 
? The application fee 
? Seven (7) 22" x 34" or 24" x 36" copies are needed, collated and folded to 9" x 12" paper size; electronic copy is recommended upon submittal date. 
? A narrative statement that includes: 
• Current and proposed base zoning district 
• Description of concept plan 
• A statement of the need for the proposed zoning change 
• Compatibility of proposed zoning with surrounding zoning and land uses. 
• Descriptions that show in what ways the proposal is consistent with the City's Master Plan. 
• You may also choose to address the decision criteria on with the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council will base their decision. 
1)  Whether the uses permitted by the proposed change will be appropriate in the immediate area concerned and their relationship to the general area and the City as a whole, and in compliance with the Future Land Use Plan. 
2)  Whether the proposed change is in accord with any existing or proposed plans for providing streets, water supply, sanitary sewers, and other utilities to the area, and shall note the findings. 
3)  The amount of vacant land currently classified for similar development in the vicinity and elsewhere in the City, and any special circumstances which may make a substantial part of such vacant land unavailable for development. 
4)  The recent rate at which land is being developed in the same zoning classification as the request, particularly in the vicinity of the proposed change. 
5)  How other areas designated for similar development will be, or are unlikely to be, affected if the proposed amendment is approved. 
6)  Any other factors which will substantially affect the health, safety, morals, or general welfare 
? List of proposed development standards including, but not be limited to: 
• Permitted uses, 
• density, lot area, lot width, lot depth, yard depths and widths, 
• building elevations, building material coverage, and building height, 
• floor area ratio, 
• parking ratios and parking locations, 
• access points, 
• screening and landscaping, 
• accessory buildings, 
• signs, 
• lighting, 
• hours of operation, 
• project phasing or scheduling, 
• management associations, and 
• any other requirements. 
? A metes and bounds description of the property to be rezoned sealed by a surveyor. 
? An 24" by 36" aerial exhibit of the subject property showing the locations of trees in accordance with Section 8.19 
? Existing Conditions Exhibit. This 24" by 36" exhibit shall show the boundary of PD area with metes and bounds labels and important physical features such as existing structures, topography, existing streets, alleys and easements general use, thoroughfares. 
? Concept Plan. The plan shall be to scale, 24" by 36" in size, and show the following: 
• the boundary of PD area with metes and bounds labels 
• preliminary lot arrangements, 
• access, proposed streets and thoroughfares, 
• size, type and location of buildings with building density, building height, 
• fire lanes, 
• screening, landscaped areas/plans, 
• other pertinent development data. 
? Evidence of communicating the proposal with the adjacent neighborhood 
? Trip Generation Form and, if required per Section 5.03, a Traffic Impact Analysis 
? Additional information or drawings, operations data, or expert evaluation when considering the application, including traffic studies and drainage studies as required by the Development Review Committee 
 
SPECIFIC USE PERMIT (SUP) APPLICATION 
SECTION 3. CHECKLIST 
(Please provide each of the items below & initial next to each item) 
? The application fee 
? Seven (7) 22" x 34" or 24" x 36" copies are needed, collated and folded to 9" x 12" paper size; electronic copy is recommended upon submittal date. 
? A written proposal outlining all special conditions and additional requirements for the property controlled by the SUP, including but not limited to: 
• the paving of streets, alleys and sidewalks, 
• means of ingress and egress to public streets, 
• provisions for drainage, 
• adequate off-street parking, 
• screening and open space, 
• heights of structures, 
• compatibility of buildings, 
• hours of operation, and 
• time limits. 
• A letter justifying the request and addressing the decision criteria on with the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council will base their decision. 
1)  The use is harmonious and compatible with surrounding existing uses or proposed uses; 
2)  The activities requested by the applicant are normally associated with the permitted uses in the base district; 
3)  The nature of the use is reasonable and appropriate in the immediate area; 
4)  Any negative impact on the surrounding area has been mitigated; and 
5)  That any additional conditions specified ensure that the intent of the district purposes are being upheld. 
? A legal description or meets and bounds description of the property. 
? Concept Plan. The plan shall be to scale and show the following: 
• topography, 
• and boundary of SUP area; 
• physical features of the site; 
• existing streets, alleys and easements; 
• location of future public facilities; 
• parking ratios, the final Detailed Site Plan; 
• building height and location, elevations; 
• site landscaping; 
• off-street parking facilities; 
• size, height, construction materials, and locations of buildings and the uses to be permitted; 
• location and instruction of signs; 
• means of ingress and egress to public streets; 
• the type of visual screening such as walls, plantings and fences; 
• the relationship of the intended use to all existing properties and land uses in all directions to a minimum distance of two hundred feet (200') and; 
• other information to adequately describe the proposed development and to provide data for approval. 
? Evidence of communicating the proposal with the adjacent neighborhood 
? Trip Generation Form and, if required per Section 5.03, Traffic Impact Analysis 
? Additional information or drawings, operations data, or expert evaluation when considering the application, including traffic studies and drainage studies as required by the Development Review Committee. 
 
SPECIFIC USE PERMIT (SUP) AMENDMENT APPLICATION 
SECTION 3. CHECKLIST 
(Please provide each of the items below & initial next to each item) 
? The application fee 
? Seven (7) 22" x 34" or 24" x 36" copies are needed, collated and folded to 9" x 12" paper size; electronic copy is recommended upon submittal date. 
? A written proposal outlining all special conditions and additional requirements for the property controlled by the SUP, including but not limited to: 
• the paving of streets, alleys and sidewalks, 
• means of ingress and egress to public streets, 
• provisions for drainage, 
• adequate off-street parking, 
• screening and open space, 
• heights of structures, 
• compatibility of buildings, 
• hours of operation, and 
• time limits. 
• A letter justifying the request and addressing the decision criteria on with the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council will base their decision. 
1)  The use is harmonious and compatible with surrounding existing uses or proposed uses; 
2)  The activities requested by the applicant are normally associated with the permitted uses in the base district; 
3)  The nature of the use is reasonable and appropriate in the immediate area; 
4)  Any negative impact on the surrounding area has been mitigated; and 
5)  That any additional conditions specified ensure that the intent of the district purposes are being upheld. 
? A legal description or meets and bounds description of the property. 
? Concept Plan. The plan shall be to scale and show the following: 
• topography, 
• and boundary of SUP area; 
• physical features of the site; 
• existing streets, alleys and easements; 
• location of future public facilities; 
• parking ratios, the final Detailed Site Plan; 
• building height and location, elevations; 
• site landscaping; 
• off-street parking facilities; 
• size, height, construction materials, and locations of buildings and the uses to be permitted; 
• location and instruction of signs; 
• means of ingress and egress to public streets; 
• the type of visual screening such as walls, plantings and fences; 
• the relationship of the intended use to all existing properties and land uses in all directions to a minimum distance of two hundred feet (200') and; 
• other information to adequately describe the proposed development and to provide data for approval. 
? Evidence of communicating the proposal with the adjacent neighborhood 
? Trip Generation Form and, if required per Section 5.03, Traffic Impact Analysis 
? Additional information or drawings, operations data, or expert evaluation when considering the application, including traffic studies and drainage studies as required by the Development Review Committee. 
 
FUTURE LAND USE PLAN AMENDMENT APPLICATION 
SECTION 3. CHECKLIST 
(Please provide each of the items below & initial next to each item) 
? The application fee 
? Seven (7) 22" x 34" or 24" x 36" copies are needed, collated and folded to 9" x 12" paper size; electronic copy is recommended upon submittal date. 
? A letter justifying the request and why the chosen category better suites the needs of the area. Include information on: 
• Compatibility with adjacent developments or Future Land Use Plan designations 
• Availability of city services including water, sewer, and roads, 
• Anticipated impacts on city services. 
? A legal description or meets and bounds description of the property. 
? Exhibit showing to scale the area proposed to be amended on the suture land use plan with adjacent Future Land Use Plan and Zoning Designations labeled. 
? Evidence of communicating the proposal with the adjacent neighborhood or property owners. 
? Additional information or drawings, operations data, or expert evaluation when considering the application, including traffic studies and drainage studies as required by the Development Review Committee. 
 
 
 
 
 
TREE PRESERVATION APPEAL APPLICATION 
SECTION 3. CHECKLIST 
(Please provide each of the items below & initial next to each item) 
? The application fee 
? Seven (7) 22" x 34" or 24" x 36" copies are needed, collated and folded to 9" x 12" paper size; electronic copy is recommended upon submittal date. 
? Grading plan showing current topography and proposed final grading. 
? Erosion control plan. In addition to other measures an erosion control seeded mat shall be placed over all graded areas to remain unimproved for more than five (5) calendar days post grading 
? Tree Removal Plan Exhibit 
• Show property, lots, building pad sites, and easements 
• Show all existing protected trees color coded to show: 
• trees being removed and exempt due to locations in a building pad, utility easement or Right-of-Way; 
• trees being removed and not exempt; and 
• trees preserved. 
• Contains charts showing every tree by lot with 
• Tree ID Number 
• Caliper of tree(s) 
• Tree Species (both the common and Latin name) 
• Health of Tree (ie, healthy, diseased, dead) 
• Location (Building pad, easement, lot, landscape buffer, etc.) 
• List tree to be 'Preserved' or 'Removed' 
• List if mitigation is required. Once exempt trees are counted 20% percent of remaining trees may be removed and are exempt from mitigation 
• Summary table 
• Total number of trees and caliper inches on site 
• Total number of trees and caliper inches to be removed 
• Total number of trees and caliper inches that must be mitigated 
• Explanation on how mitigation will be provided. 
Example Tree Preservation Plan Table (missing Latin name): 
 
 
PRELIMINARY SITE EVALUATION APPLICATION 
SECTION 3. CHECKLIST
(Please provide each of the items below & initial next to each item) 
? The application fee 
? Five (5) 24" x 36" copies of the Preliminary Site Evaluation and five (5) 22" x 34" copies Proposed Utility and Drainage Plans, collated and folded to 9" x 12" paper size; electronic copy is recommended upon submittal date. 
? For all single-family residential subdivisions, a plan summary table to include: 
• Total number of lots. 
• Number of lots per zoning category. 
• Total acreage per phase. 
• Number of lots per phase. 
• Minimum lot size. 
• Minimum dwelling unit size. 
• Density per acre. 
? Title block (see Article Nine - Title Blocks Formats) in lower right hand corner of plat to include: 
• Project's name. 
• Address and/or legal description of the project, total number of lots and/or phases, total acreage, and zoning. 
• Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. 
• Name, address, and telephone number of contact person of the developer. 
• Name, address and telephone number of the preparer (Engineer). 
• Date of preparation and dates of revisions, if any (As plats are revised, add dates of revision to each submittal). 
? Graphic Scale labeled with scale used. 
? North arrow oriented to the top or right of the sheet. 
? Vicinity map of the City Base Map with scale of 1" = 1000' with site location shaded. 
? Length and bearing of all straight lines; radii, arc length, tangent length, and central angles of all curves, indicated along the lines of each lot or in tables. 
? Diagram of a typical corner clip and visibility easement. 
? Cross-section of proposed streets and alleys, showing the width and type of pavement and the location and width of sidewalks. 
? Park Dedication requirements. 
? A list of requested variances from development requirements, if applicable. 
? Signature block labeled: "Preliminary Site Evaluation Approved by the City of Keller Planning and Zoning Commission for the Preparation of a Final Plat" or, if variances are requested, "Preliminary Site Evaluation Approved by the City of Keller City Council for the Preparation of a Final Plat" (see Article Nine - Signature Blocks for Plats) 
? Names and boundary lines of abstracts and surveys of the land being platted. 
? Description and location of all survey monuments placed or found. 
? Lines delineating the proposed phases of development, if applicable. 
? Property lines, including lot and block numbers and date recorded if applicable, of land within the area being platted. 
? The layout and approximate dimensions of proposed lots and blocks, with: 
• Front building setback lines and a note that reads, "All setbacks shall be in accordance with the zoning district, as described in the Keller Unified Development Code." 
• Lot number and block letter designations. 
• Acreage or square footage of each lot. 
• Proposed use. 
? Existing and/or proposed streets and alleys, showing proposed street names and the widths of right-of-way and pavement. Where a development abuts a street shown on the City's Thoroughfare Plan, the Preliminary Plat shall include a proposed dedication of right-of-way in accordance with the requirements of the Thoroughfare Plan. 
? Median openings, turning lanes, acceleration lanes, deceleration lanes, and proposed driveway locations with dimensions. 
? Traffic control signals, devices, and striping, if applicable. 
? Other features that impact the land being platted - including, but not limited to, buildings, cemeteries, parks, landfills, and monuments. 
? Easements, deed restrictions, or other encumbrances that impact development of the property. 
? Names and recording information of adjoining subdivisions, municipalities, counties, special districts, and parcels of unsubdivided land, including: 
• Names of owners of record. 
• Boundary lines. 
• Zoning designations. 
• Names and accurate location of all adjacent streets. 
• Dimensions of all abutting lots. 
• Reference ties to courses and distances of at least one recognized land corner. 
• Easements on all abutting lots. 
? Land proposed for dedication to public use, or for reservation for the common use of property owners, including parks and linear trails, labeled with a separate lot and block designation. Also include a list of the conditions of or limitations on the use of this land. 
? Drainage Plan sheet showing existing and proposed systems, including: 
• Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development. 
• Location of lines and inlets. 
• Location of all existing and proposed utility and/or drainage easements, or right-of-way and detention/retention structures. 
• Proposed drainage rights-of-way. 
• Delineation of the 100-year floodplain, if applicable. 
• Easements, deed restrictions, or other encumbrances that impact development of the property. 
• Contours at intervals of two feet (2') or less, referred to the latest USC or GS sea level datum, including benchmark. 
? Utility Plan sheet showing existing and proposed systems, including: 
• Location and size of all existing and proposed water systems and sanitary sewer lines shown for the distance which impacts the land being platted. 
• Location and size of other existing and/or proposed utility lines which may impact the land development. 
• Identification of proposed lots that will be served by septic tanks, if applicable. 
• Easements, deed restrictions, or other encumbrances that impact development of the property. 
? Arial photo with overlay of plan in accordance with Article Eight - Tree Preservation, as applicable. 
? UDC Variance Request as described in Section 2.08 - Procedures for Variances from the Regulations of the Code, if applicable. 
 
MINOR SUBDIVISION PLAT APPLICATION 
SECTION 3. CHECKLIST
(Please provide each of the items below & initial next to each item) 
? The application fee 
? Seven (7) 24" x 36" copies are needed, collated and folded to 9" x 12" paper size; electronic copy is recommended upon submittal date. 
Plat sheet at 24" by 36" and containing the following information: 
? Title Block (see Article Nine - Title Blocks Formats) in lower right hand corner of plat to include: 
• Project's name. 
• Address and/or legal description of the project, total number of lots and/or phases, total acreage and zoning. 
• Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. 
• Name, address, and telephone number of contact person of the developer. 
• Name, address, and telephone number of the preparer (Surveyor). 
• Date of preparation and dates of revisions, if any (As plats are revised, add dates of revision to each submittal). 
? For all single-family residential subdivisions, a plan summary table to include: 
• Total number of lots. 
• Number of lots per zoning category. 
• Total acreage per phase. 
• Number of lots per phase. 
• Minimum lot size. 
• Minimum dwelling unit size. 
• Density per acre. 
? Graphic Scale labeled with scale used. 
? North arrow oriented to the top or right of the sheet. 
? Map of the City Base Map with scale of 1"=1000' with site location shaded 
? Length and bearing of all straight lines; radii, arc length, tangent length, and central angles of all curves, indicated along the lines of each lot or in tables. 
? Diagram of a typical corner clip and visibility easement. 
? Park Dedication requirements. 
? A list of variances from development requirements, if applicable. 
? Signature block labeled: "Approved by the City of Keller Community Development Department" or if variance is requested "Approved by the City of Keller City Council" (see Article Nine - Signature Blocks for Plats). 
? The following statement when City sewer will not be utilized: "This subdivision is subject to all of the terms and conditions of Tarrant County Commissioner Court Order Number 42703 (Sewage Regulations). Prior to the issuance of a building permit, a license must be obtained by the owner for any private sewage facility (septic tank or aerobic system) to be constructed in the subdivision. A sewage disposal plan will be filed with Tarrant County and areas suitable for septic tanks or aerobic systems will be defined." 
? An Owner's Certificate, see section 4.07 of the UDC for language. 
? Notary Public's Certificate with a signature line, see section 4.07 of the UDC for language. 
? Surveyor's Certificate with a signature line, see section 4.07 of the UDC for language. 
? Names and boundary lines of abstracts and surveys of the land being platted. 
? Lines delineating the proposed phases of development, if applicable. 
? The layout and exact dimensions of proposed lots and blocks, with: 
• Front building setback lines and a note that reads, "All setbacks shall be in accordance with the zoning district, as described in the Keller Unified Development Code." 
• Lot number and block letter designations. 
• Acreage or square footage of each lot and minimum finished floor elevation (minimum finished floor elevation is required only if lot is located within 100-year floodplain or near natural drainage feature). 
? Land proposed for dedication to public use or for reservation for the common use of property owners, labeled with a separate lot and block designation. Also include a list of the conditions of or limitations on the use of this land. 
? Deed restrictions or other encumbrances that impact development of the property. 
? Rights-of-way and public property to be abandoned should be identified on the plat, but information is to be provided separately for the creation of an abandonment certificate (see Section 4.11). 
? Existing and/or proposed streets and alleys, showing street names and the widths of rights-of-way and pavement. Where a development abuts a street shown on the City's Thoroughfare Plan, the Final Plat must include the dedication of rights-of-way in accordance with the requirements of the Thoroughfare Plan. 
? Location and size of all existing and proposed utility, access, and/or drainage easements for electric, telephone, gas, cable, and solid waste disposal, with a note regarding responsibility for maintenance. 
? Delineation of the 100-year floodplain, if applicable. 
? Names and recording information of adjoining subdivisions, municipalities, counties, special districts, and parcels of unsubdivided land, including: 
• Names of owners of record. 
• Boundary lines. 
• Zoning designations. 
• Names and accurate location of all adjacent streets. 
• Dimensions of all abutting lots. 
• Reference ties to courses and distances of at least one recognized land corner. 
Other Documents 
? Exhibit of Existing Conditions sheet showing existing and proposed systems, including: 
• Location of all existing above-ground structures, driveways, sheds, fences, etc., if applicable. 
• Location and size of all existing and proposed utility, access, and/or drainage easements, with a note regarding responsibility for maintenance. 
• Location and size of all other utilities existing and/or proposed, underground or overhead, including private transmission lines. 
• Location and size of all public and private service lines and meters for water and sanitary sewer or septic tanks, if applicable. 
• Location and distance of nearest existing fire hydrant. 
• Proposed grading, and a description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development. 
• Delineation of the 100-year floodplain, if applicable. 
? A drainage study shall be provided for each development in accordance with Article Five - Design and Technical Construction Standards (DTCS). The study shall be provided to ensure that all upstream and downstream watershed components are accounted for and will not be adversely impacted. The study shall include a pre-development versus post development runoff analysis and a storm water runoff routing analysis designed to predict the post development runoff rate and the downstream drainage system ability to accommodate post development runoff. 
? Tree survey and aerial photo with overlay of plan in accordance with Article Eight - Tree Preservation, as applicable. 
? UDC Variance Request as described in Section 2.08 - Procedures for Variances from the Regulations of the Code, if applicable 
? The Planning Manager, Planning and Zoning Commission, or City Council may require additional information or drawings, operations data, or expert evaluation when considering the application, including traffic studies and drainage studies. 
 
MAJOR SUBDIVISION PLAT APPLICATION 
SECTION 3. CHECKLIST
(Please provide each of the items below & initial next to each item) 
? The application fee 
? Seven (7) 24" x 36" copies are needed, collated and folded to 9" x 12" paper size; electronic copy is recommended upon submittal date. 
Plat sheet at 24" by 36" and containing the following information: 
? Title Block (see Article Nine - Title Blocks Formats) in lower right hand corner of plat to include: 
• Project's name. 
• Address and/or legal description of the project, total number of lots and/or phases, total acreage and zoning. 
• Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. 
• Name, address, and telephone number of contact person of the developer. 
• Name, address, and telephone number of the preparer (Surveyor). 
• Date of preparation and dates of revisions, if any (As plats are revised, add dates of revision to each submittal). 
? For all single-family residential subdivisions, a plan summary table to include: 
• Total number of lots. 
• Number of lots per zoning category. 
• Total acreage per phase. 
• Number of lots per phase. 
• Minimum lot size. 
• Minimum dwelling unit size. 
• Density per acre. 
? Graphic Scale labeled with scale used. 
? North arrow oriented to the top or right of the sheet. 
? Vicinity map of the City Base Map with scale of 1"=1000' with site location shaded. 
? Length and bearing of all straight lines; radii, arc length, tangent length, and central angles of all curves, indicated along the lines of each lot or in tables. 
? Diagram of a typical corner clip and visibility easement. 
? A note that a Park Dedication Agreement exists, if applicable. 
? A list of variances from development requirements, if applicable. 
? Signature block labeled: "Approved by the City of Keller Planning and Zoning Commission" or "Approved by the City of Keller City Council" if variance is requested (see Article Nine - Signature Blocks for Plats). 
? The following statement when City sewer will not be utilized: "This subdivision is subject to all of the terms and conditions of Tarrant County Commissioner Court Order Number 42703 (Sewage Regulations). Prior to the issuance of a building permit, a license must be obtained by the owner for any private sewage facility (septic tank or aerobic system) to be constructed in the subdivision. A sewage disposal plan will be filed with Tarrant County and areas suitable for septic tanks or aerobic systems will be defined." 
? An Owner's Certificate, see section 4.08 of the UDC for language. 
? Notary Public's Certificate with a signature line, see section 4.08 of the UDC for language. 
? Surveyor's Certificate with a signature line, see section 4.08 of the UDC for language. 
? Names and boundary lines of abstracts and surveys of the land being platted. 
? Lines delineating the proposed phases of development, if applicable. 
? The layout and exact dimensions of proposed lots and blocks, with: 
• Front building setback lines and a note that reads, "All setbacks shall be in accordance with the zoning district, as described in the Keller Unified Development Code." 
• Lot number and block letter designations. 
• Acreage or square footage of each lot and minimum finished floor elevation (minimum finished floor elevation is required only if lot is located within 100-year floodplain or near natural drainage feature). 
? Land proposed for dedication to public use or for reservation for the common use of property owners, labeled with a separate lot and block designation. Also include a list of the conditions of or limitations on the use of this land. 
? Deed restrictions or other encumbrances that impact development of the property. 
? Rights-of-way and public property to be abandoned should be identified on the plat, but information is to be provided separately for the creation of an abandonment certificate (see Section 4.11 - Abandonment of Easements or Rights-of-Way for procedures). 
? Existing and/or proposed streets and alleys, showing street names and the widths of rights-of-way and pavement. Where a development abuts a street shown on the City's Thoroughfare Plan or a proposed Thoroughfare is within the development, the Final Plat shall include the dedication of rights-of-way in accordance with the requirements of the Thoroughfare Plan. 
? Location of all existing and proposed utility, access, and/or drainage easements, with a note regarding responsibility for maintenance. 
? Delineation of the 100-year floodplain, if applicable. 
? Names and recording information of adjoining subdivisions, municipalities, counties, special districts, and parcels of unsubdivided land, including: 
• Names of owners of record. 
• Boundary lines. 
• Zoning designations. 
• Names and accurate location of all adjacent streets. 
• Dimensions of all abutting lots. 
• Reference ties to courses and distances of at least one recognized and corner. 
Other Documents 
? Exhibit of Existing Conditions (if Construction Plans are not required) showing the following: 
• Location of all existing and proposed utility, access, and/or drainage easements, with a note regarding responsibility for maintenance. 
• Proposed grading, and a description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development. 
• Delineation of the 100-year floodplain, if applicable. 
• Location of all public and private service lines for natural gas, water, sanitary sewer or septic tanks, and other buried utilities, if applicable. 
? Tree survey and aerial photo with overlay of plan in accordance with Article Eight - Tree Preservation, as applicable. 
? UDC Variance Request as described in Section 2.08 - Procedures for Variances from the Regulations of the Code, if applicable. 
? The Planning Manager, Planning and Zoning Commission, or City Council may require additional information or drawings, operations data, or expert evaluation when considering the application, including traffic studies and drainage studies. 
 
LANDSCAPING/SCREENING WALL PLAN APPLICATION 
SECTION 3. CHECKLIST 
(Please provide each of the items below & initial next to each item) 
? The application fee 
? Seven (3) 24" x 36" copies are needed, collated and folded to 9" x 12" paper size; electronic copy is recommended upon submittal date. 
? Title Block to include: 
• Project's name. 
• Address and/or legal description of the project. 
• Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. 
• Name, address, and telephone number of contact person of the developer. 
• Name, address, and telephone number of the preparer (Landscape Architect and/or Engineer). 
• Date of preparation and dates of revisions, if any (As plans are revised, add dates of revision to each submittal). 
? North arrow oriented to the top or right of the sheet. 
? A typical section showing the lot, street, parkway, sidewalk, screening wall easement, landscaping, and screening wall (include dimensions). 
? Paving and design detail (sidewalks, streets, parking, etc.). 
? A typical elevation of the screening wall including signage and landscaping (show dimensions, materials, colors, plant types, etc.) 
? Structural design for the wall, including column, drainage, and footing design, and stamped by a Structural Engineer. Wall design shall accommodate drainage. 
? A note placed on all sheets stating that upon completion of the screening wall construction, a letter will be submitted to the City signed and sealed by a Licensed Engineer or contractor responsible for the construction of the wall stating that the screening wall was built in accordance with the approved Landscaping and Screening Wall Plans and specifications. 
? Location of the required sidewalks and trails to be constructed with the subdivision. Sidewalks are required along all thoroughfares and are to be located at the property line or one-foot (1') from the property line. Trails are required in accordance with the City Parks and Trails Master Plan. Other sidewalk and trail locations must be approved by the Development Review Committee. 
? Location, size, and species of all trees to be preserved in accordance with this code (see Section 8 for Tree Preservation Requirements). "Tree stamps" are not to be used unless they indicate the true size and location of trees. 
? Location, size, species, and spacing of all required trees and plant material to be used. (see Section 5.10 - Residential Subdivisions Thoroughfare Screening and Landscaping for requirements). Existing trees credited toward the requirements must also be shown. Proposed trees must be located within the landscaping and screening wall easement. 
? Location of all other landscaping material to be used, including paving, benches, screens, fountains, statues, earthen berms, and ponds (marked with water depth). 
? Additional landscaping amenities provided by the developer or required as part of a Planned Development zoning. 
? Topography of the site. 
? Irrigation Plans should contain the following information: 
a.  Description of maintenance provisions and specific models/materials used. 
b.  Layout and description of irrigation, sprinkler, or water systems and the placement of water sources. 
c.  Location and size of all water and irrigation meters. 
d.  Location and type of backflow prevention device. 
e.  Location and type of rain and freeze sensor. 
f.  Irrigation plans shall be designed by a licensed irrigator. Irrigator shall sign and seal the plans submitted. 
? UDC Variance Request as described in Section 2.08 - Procedures for Variances from the Regulations of the Code, if applicable. 
 
SITE PLAN APPLICATION 
SECTION 3. CHECKLIST 
(Please provide each of the items below & initial next to each item) 
Site Plan Sheet 
? The application fee 
? Seven (7) 22" x 34" or 24" x 36" copies are needed, collated and folded to 9" x 12" paper size; electronic copy is recommended upon submittal date. 
? Site Plan Sheet 
• Title Block in lower right hand corner of site plan to include: 
• Project's name. 
• Name, address, telephone number, fax number, and contact person of the Applicant. 
• Name, address, telephone number, fax number, and contact person of the Owner. 
• Name, address, telephone number, fax number, and contact person of the preparer (Architect or Engineer). 
• Address and/or legal description of the project (addition's name, lots, and blocks). 
• Total acreage and zoning. 
• Date of preparation and dates of revisions, if any (as the site plan is revised, add dates of revision to each submittal) 
? A summary table showing: 
• Total building square footage. 
• Number of required parking spaces (show calculations based on building usage). 
• Number of provided parking spaces (number of handicapped parking spaces shall not be included as part of required parking spaces). 
? Graphic Scale labeled with scale used. 
? North arrow oriented to the top or right of sheet. 
? Vicinity map of the City Base Map with scale of 1"=1,000' with site location shaded. 
? Distances and bearings of all lots. 
? Cross section of proposed streets, alleys, and parking lots, showing the width and type of pavement and the location and width of sidewalks. 
? The footprints of all proposed buildings or structures. 
? Setback lines as required by the respective zoning district. 
? The names and widths of rights-of-way and pavement of existing and proposed streets and alleys. 
? All curbs or pavement edge and lane striping on adjacent streets with dimensions. 
? Driveway and sidewalk locations with dimensions and curve radii labeled. 
? Parking layout, including maneuvering, loading, and unloading areas. 
? Easements, deed restrictions, or other encumbrances that impact development of the lot. 
? Location, type, material, and height of: 
• Required screening walls or fences, including elevations. 
• Site lighting showing the height and location of exterior light fixtures. 
• Signs locations (All signs shall be permitted separately and meet the sign requirements of this Code at the time of permit). 
? Location and screening of trash receptacles with materials clearly identified (Trash receptacles/dumpsters are required for all non-single family-residential developments unless other acceptable alternative is proposed). 
? Zoning, legal description, and owner of record for all adjacent lots or tracts. 
? Park/Trail location and improvements, if applicable. 
? Location of all utility boxes, cabinets, or meters, which shall be located at rear or side of building, if practical. 
Preliminary Utility Plan 
? All property lines and easements. 
? The footprints of all proposed buildings or structures 
? Driveway and sidewalk locations with dimensions and curve radii labeled. 
? Parking layout, including maneuvering, loading, and unloading areas. 
? Location and size of all existing and proposed water and sewer lines. 
? Location and size of all other utilities existing and proposed, underground or overhead. 
? Fire protection, including locations of existing and proposed fire hydrants, fire lanes, and fire lines, with all dimensions clearly designated. 
? Distances to closest existing fire hydrants, on-site or off-site, which would provide water access for this property in the event of a fire. 
Preliminary Grading and Drainage Plan 
? All property lines and easements. 
? The footprints of all proposed buildings or structures. 
? Driveway and sidewalk locations with dimensions and curve radii labeled. 
? Parking layout, including maneuvering, loading, and unloading areas. 
? Existing and proposed contours. 
? Location of existing and proposed drainage structures with sizes and dimensions clearly labeled. 
? Location of 100-year floodplain and floodway. 
? Location of proposed improvements in relation to Areas of Special Flood Hazard. 
? Elevation from mean sea level of new or substantially improved structures. 
? A certificate from a Texas-registered Professional Engineer or Architect that states non-residential flood proofed structures meet the criteria contained in the Flood Plain Ordinance. 
? Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development. 
Landscape Plan - prepared by a Texas Registered Landscape Architect 
? A minimum scale of 1" = 50' 
? Name of preparer. 
? Date of preparation. 
? North arrow oriented to the top or right of the sheet. 
? Location and spacing of all plants and landscaping materials and features to be used, including paving, benches, and fountains. 
? Species, quantity, and size of all plant materials to be used. 
? Location, size, and species of all trees to be preserved ("tree stamps" may not be used unless they indicate the true size and location of trees). 
? Depth of pond, if applicable. 
? Topography. 
? Description of provisions for maintenance. 
? A note that states that all landscaped areas will be irrigated and that detailed irrigation plans will be submitted with construction plans. 
? A note that all landscaped areas are to be maintained in accordance with City regulations. 
? Location and size of all other utilities existing and/or proposed, underground or overhead, including private transmission lines. 
? Any required mitigation trees are marked with an "M" and are in addition to required landscaping trees. 
? Landscape table listing landscaping requirements per Section 8.08 and showing how these requirements are met. Basic criteria listed below, see Section 8.08 for detailed landscaping requirements. 
• Foundation planting a minimum of five feet (5') in width shall be provided at the fronts and sides of buildings. 
• Parking lots shall be 100% screened with shrubs or berms adjacent to all public streets. 
• No more than twelve (12) consecutive parking spaces shall be allowed without the interruption of a nine foot by twelve foot landscaped island and all parking rows ending with a landscape island. 
• Required 15% of parking area landscaped. 
• For large parking lots with several rows of parking spaces, a minimum ten-foot (10') wide continuous landscaped island shall be provided at various locations. 
• Parking lots shall be 100% screened with shrubs or berms adjacent to all public streets. 
• Minimum thirty-foot (30') landscape buffer adjacent to all thoroughfares with four (4) or more lanes as classified on the current Comprehensive Thoroughfare Plan Buffers along other Rights-of-Way with Minimum four inch (4") caliper canopy trees spaced twenty-five feet (25') and two (2) ornamental trees per fifty linear feet (50') of frontage planted in clusters or linear arrangement. 
• Minimum fifteen-foot (15') landscape buffer adjacent to all other public streets with minimum three inch (3") caliper canopy trees spaced thirty feet (30') on center in a straight line. 
• Minimum thirty-foot (30') landscape buffer adjacent to all properties with residential uses or zoning or when residential zoning or uses are across the street from the side or rear yard of a non-residential or multi-family development with minimum three inch (3") caliper canopy trees spaced thirty feet (30') on center in a straight line. 
• Minimum ten-foot (10') landscape buffer adjacent to side and rear property lines when adjacent to non-residential uses or zoning with minimum three inch (3") caliper canopy trees spaced thirty feet (30') on center in a straight line. 
Some additional or varied standards apply in Special Zoning Districts including Old Town and Town Center. 
Elevations 
? Architectural elevations showing all sides of the proposed building and labeled north, south, east and west. 
? The height of the proposed building clearly dimensioned. 
? All exterior finishes and roofing materials clearly identified. 
? A table showing the percent of each building material per elevation and for the entire building, exclusive of windows and doors. 
? One 11" x 17" sheet with all elevations in color with labels and dimensions removed to serve as a color sample of exterior finishes. 
Photometric Plans 
? All property lines and easements. 
? The footprints of all proposed buildings or structures. 
? Parking layout, including maneuvering, loading, and unloading areas. 
? Type, location, and height of all proposed light poles and fixtures. 
Aerial Overlay 
? A recent aerial photograph must be submitted (if applicable) in either 11" x 17" or 8.5" x 11" format with an attached transparent overlay. 
? All property lines and easements. 
The footprints of all proposed buildings or structures. 
? Driveway and sidewalk locations. 
Tree Survey/Preservation Plan 
? Show location of trees on property with individual tree identification number 
? Footprint of proposed structures, fire lanes, future and existing grading contours, all rights-of-way, utility and drainage easements. 
? Add corresponding table with tree identification number, species common name, species Latin name, status of tree "protect" or not-protected", status of tree "remove" or "preserve" 
? Summary table including: total number of trees, total number of trees removed, total number of trees exempt from mitigation requirements due to location, 20% of remaining trees (once those exempt are factored out), mitigation required based on removing more than the 20% allowance. 
? All tree surveys and preservation plans shall be in accordance with Article 8.11. 
Additional Information 
? UDC Variance Request as described in Section 2.08 - Procedures for Variances from the Regulations of the Code, if applicable. 
? The Planning Manager, Planning and Zoning Commission, or City Council may require additional information or drawings, operations data, or expert evaluation when considering the application, including traffic studies and drainage studies. 
 
SITE PLAN AMENDMENT APPLICATION 
SECTION 3. CHECKLIST 
(Please provide each of the items below & initial next to each item) 
Site Plan Sheet 
? The application fee 
? Seven (7) 22" x 34" or 24" x 36" copies are needed, collated and folded to 9" x 12" paper size; electronic copy is recommended upon submittal date. 
? Site Plan Sheet 
• Title Block in lower right hand corner of site plan to include: 
• Project's name. 
• Name, address, telephone number, fax number, and contact person of the Applicant. 
• Name, address, telephone number, fax number, and contact person of the Owner. 
• Name, address, telephone number, fax number, and contact person of the preparer (Architect or Engineer). 
• Address and/or legal description of the project (addition's name, lots, and blocks). 
• Total acreage and zoning. 
• Date of preparation and dates of revisions, if any (as the site plan is revised, add dates of revision to each submittal) 
? A summary table showing: 
• Total building square footage. 
• Number of required parking spaces (show calculations based on building usage). 
• Number of provided parking spaces (number of handicapped parking spaces shall not be included as part of required parking spaces). 
? Graphic Scale labeled with scale used. 
? North arrow oriented to the top or right of sheet. 
? Vicinity map of the City Base Map with scale of 1"=1,000' with site location shaded. 
? Distances and bearings of all lots. 
? Cross section of proposed streets, alleys, and parking lots, showing the width and type of pavement and the location and width of sidewalks. 
? The footprints of all proposed buildings or structures. 
? Setback lines as required by the respective zoning district. 
? The names and widths of rights-of-way and pavement of existing and proposed streets and alleys. 
? All curbs or pavement edge and lane striping on adjacent streets with dimensions. 
? Driveway and sidewalk locations with dimensions and curve radii labeled. 
? Parking layout, including maneuvering, loading, and unloading areas. 
? Easements, deed restrictions, or other encumbrances that impact development of the lot. 
? Location, type, material, and height of: 
• Required screening walls or fences, including elevations. 
• Site lighting showing the height and location of exterior light fixtures. 
• Signs locations (All signs shall be permitted separately and meet the sign requirements of this Code at the time of permit). 
? Location and screening of trash receptacles with materials clearly identified (Trash receptacles/dumpsters are required for all non-single family-residential developments unless other acceptable alternative is proposed). 
? Zoning, legal description, and owner of record for all adjacent lots or tracts. 
? Park/Trail location and improvements, if applicable. 
? Location of all utility boxes, cabinets, or meters, which shall be located at rear or side of building, if practical. 
Preliminary Utility Plan 
? All property lines and easements. 
? The footprints of all proposed buildings or structures 
? Driveway and sidewalk locations with dimensions and curve radii labeled. 
? Parking layout, including maneuvering, loading, and unloading areas. 
? Location and size of all existing and proposed water and sewer lines. 
? Location and size of all other utilities existing and proposed, underground or overhead. 
? Fire protection, including locations of existing and proposed fire hydrants, fire lanes, and fire lines, with all dimensions clearly designated. 
? Distances to closest existing fire hydrants, on-site or off-site, which would provide water access for this property in the event of a fire. 
Preliminary Grading and Drainage Plan 
? All property lines and easements. 
? The footprints of all proposed buildings or structures. 
? Driveway and sidewalk locations with dimensions and curve radii labeled. 
? Parking layout, including maneuvering, loading, and unloading areas. 
? Existing and proposed contours. 
? Location of existing and proposed drainage structures with sizes and dimensions clearly labeled. 
? Location of 100-year floodplain and floodway. 
? Location of proposed improvements in relation to Areas of Special Flood Hazard. 
? Elevation from mean sea level of new or substantially improved structures. 
? A certificate from a Texas-registered Professional Engineer or Architect that states non-residential flood proofed structures meet the criteria contained in the Flood Plain Ordinance. 
? Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development. 
Landscape Plan - prepared by a Texas Registered Landscape Architect 
? A minimum scale of 1" = 50' 
? Name of preparer. 
? Date of preparation. 
? North arrow oriented to the top or right of the sheet. 
? Location and spacing of all plants and landscaping materials and features to be used, including paving, benches, and fountains. 
? Species, quantity, and size of all plant materials to be used. 
? Location, size, and species of all trees to be preserved ("tree stamps" may not be used unless they indicate the true size and location of trees). 
? Depth of pond, if applicable. 
? Topography. 
? Description of provisions for maintenance. 
? A note that states that all landscaped areas will be irrigated and that detailed irrigation plans will be submitted with construction plans. 
? A note that all landscaped areas are to be maintained in accordance with City regulations. 
? Location and size of all other utilities existing and/or proposed, underground or overhead, including private transmission lines. 
? Any required mitigation trees are marked with an "M" and are in addition to required landscaping trees. 
? Landscape table listing landscaping requirements per Section 8.08 and showing how these requirements are met. Basic criteria listed below, see Section 8.08 for detailed landscaping requirements. 
• Foundation planting a minimum of five feet (5') in width shall be provided at the fronts and sides of buildings. 
• Parking lots shall be 100% screened with shrubs or berms adjacent to all public streets. 
• No more than twelve (12) consecutive parking spaces shall be allowed without the interruption of a nine foot by twelve foot landscaped island and all parking rows ending with a landscape island. 
• Required 15% of parking area landscaped. 
• For large parking lots with several rows of parking spaces, a minimum ten-foot (10') wide continuous landscaped island shall be provided at various locations. 
• Parking lots shall be 100% screened with shrubs or berms adjacent to all public streets. 
• Minimum thirty-foot (30') landscape buffer adjacent to all thoroughfares with four (4) or more lanes as classified on the current Comprehensive Thoroughfare Plan Buffers along other Rights-of-Way with Minimum four inch (4") caliper canopy trees spaced twenty-five feet (25') and two (2) ornamental trees per fifty linear feet (50') of frontage planted in clusters or linear arrangement. 
• Minimum fifteen-foot (15') landscape buffer adjacent to all other public streets with minimum three inch (3") caliper canopy trees spaced thirty feet (30') on center in a straight line. 
• Minimum thirty-foot (30') landscape buffer adjacent to all properties with residential uses or zoning or when residential zoning or uses are across the street from the side or rear yard of a non-residential or multi-family development with minimum three inch (3") caliper canopy trees spaced thirty feet (30') on center in a straight line. 
• Minimum ten-foot (10') landscape buffer adjacent to side and rear property lines when adjacent to non-residential uses or zoning with minimum three inch (3") caliper canopy trees spaced thirty feet (30') on center in a straight line. 
Some additional or varied standards apply in Special Zoning Districts including Old Town and Town Center. 
Elevations 
? Architectural elevations showing all sides of the proposed building and labeled north, south, east and west. 
? The height of the proposed building clearly dimensioned. 
? All exterior finishes and roofing materials clearly identified. 
? A table showing the percent of each building material per elevation and for the entire building, exclusive of windows and doors. 
? One 11" x 17" sheet with all elevations in color with labels and dimensions removed to serve as a color sample of exterior finishes. 
Photometric Plans 
? All property lines and easements. 
? The footprints of all proposed buildings or structures. 
? Parking layout, including maneuvering, loading, and unloading areas. 
? Type, location, and height of all proposed light poles and fixtures. 
Aerial Overlay 
? A recent aerial photograph must be submitted (if applicable) in either 11" x 17" or 8.5" x 11" format with an attached transparent overlay. 
? All property lines and easements. 
The footprints of all proposed buildings or structures. 
? Driveway and sidewalk locations. 
Tree Survey/Preservation Plan 
? Show location of trees on property with individual tree identification number 
? Footprint of proposed structures, fire lanes, future and existing grading contours, all rights-of-way, utility and drainage easements. 
? Add corresponding table with tree identification number, species common name, species Latin name, status of tree "protect" or not-protected", status of tree "remove" or "preserve" 
? Summary table including: total number of trees, total number of trees removed, total number of trees exempt from mitigation requirements due to location, 20% of remaining trees (once those exempt are factored out), mitigation required based on removing more than the 20% allowance. 
? All tree surveys and preservation plans shall be in accordance with Article 8.11. 
Additional Information 
? UDC Variance Request as described in Section 2.08 - Procedures for Variances from the Regulations of the Code, if applicable. 
? The Planning Manager, Planning and Zoning Commission, or City Council may require additional information or drawings, operations data, or expert evaluation when considering the application, including traffic studies and drainage studies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION 2. Model Home Checklist 
A Model Home Permit may be issued upon completion of the information listed below: 
• Water System shall be completely installed, tested and tied into City of Keller's Water System. 
• All fire hydrants need to be installed, accepted and fully operational. 
• Sanitary Sewer system needs to be completely installed, tested and tied into City of Keller's Sanitary Sewer. 
• Paving shall be complete to ensure proper fire protection. Streets must be capable of sustaining 85,000 lb., vehicle weight. Site plan must show the limits of paving for emergency services access if all streets are not paved at time of application. Concrete shall have adequate cure time, per City of Keller's City Engineer's determination. 
• Storm Drainage System shall be complete in the area of the model home. This includes inlets and the downstream system. 
• All street signs shall be installed. 
• No certificate of Occupancy (CO) to be issued until the subdivision has been fully accepted by the City of Keller. 
• A permanent address shall be assigned to the lot to be used for the model home prior to approval of a model home permit. * 
• The following documents shall be completed and approved by the City of Keller: 
º Site plan 
º Final plat 
º Landscaping plan 
º Screening wall plan 
• A Developer Agreement shall be completed and executed prior to approval of a model home permit. 
• For single builder subdivisions, only one model home permit may be issued. 
• For multiple builder subdivisions, only one model home permit may be issued per builder. 
* The City of Keller may require additional time for the street name and address range to be entered into the 911 system and emergency services dispatch database. 1 
 
GAS WELL APPLICATION CHECKLIST 
Application Submission Requirements 
A complete Gas Well Planned Development (PD) application consists of the application form, fee, and ten (10) collated and folded copies of the Planned Development (PD) Detailed Site Plan that includes all information listed below. When a complete application is submitted, the Planned Development (PD) Detailed Site Plan and accompanying documents are distributed to the Development Review Committee (DRC) members. The Development Review Committee has five (5) working days to review the application. Following review, comments and requested revisions are forwarded to the applicant. The applicant must then return revised copies along with all markups made by staff to the Community Development Department. The Development Review Committee will review the revised documents and provide comments again within five (5) working days. This review-and-comment process will repeat until the Planned Development (PD) Detailed Site Plan is in a form that could be approved. 
Information To Be Submitted With a Gas Well Planned Development Application 
The review process will not begin until a Planned Development (PD) Detailed Site Plan that includes at least the information on the following list is submitted with a completed application form and filing fee. Planned Development (PD) Detailed Site Plans shall be prepared by a Texas-Registered Professional Civil Engineer. The applicant shall submit to the Community Development Department ten (10) 22" x 34" or 24" x 36" copies of the Planned Development (PD) Detailed Site Plan, collated and folded to 9" x 9" paper size (see Article Nine - Plan Folding Procedures, no later than Friday at noon. Rolled documents will not be accepted. Scale used should be 1" = 50' or larger. The overall Planned Development (PD) Detailed Site Plan package must contain the following sheets with the corresponding information listed below: 
Sheet 1 - Site Plan: 
? Title Block in lower right hand corner of site plan to include: 
1.  Project's name; 
2.  Name, address, telephone number, fax number, and contact person of the Applicant/Operator; 
3.  Name, address, telephone number, fax number, and contact person of the Owner; 
4.  Name, address, telephone number, fax number, and contact person of the preparer (Engineer); 
5.  Address and/or legal description of the project (addition's name, lots, and blocks). 
6.  Total acreage and zoning; and 
7.  Date of preparation and dates of revisions, if any (as the site plan is revised, add dates of revision to each submittal). 
? Graphic Scale labeled with scale used. 
? North arrow oriented to the top or right of sheet. 
? Vicinity map of the City Base Map with scale of 1"=1,000' with site location shaded. 
? Distances and bearings of the subject property. 
? A site plan of the proposed drill site and operation site showing the location of all improvements and equipment, including the location of the proposed well(s) and other facilities, including, but not limited to, fire hydrants proposed to supply water to the site, tanks, pipelines, lights, floodways, compressors, separators and storage sheds. 
? A site inventory analysis including a scale drawing showing major existing vegetation, natural water courses, creeks or bodies of water and an analysis of planned changes in such natural features as a result of the development. This should include a delineation of any flood prone areas. 
? A scale drawing showing any proposed public or private streets and alleys; building sites or lots; and areas reserved as parks, parkways, playgrounds, utility easements, school sites, street widening and street changes; the points of ingress and egress from existing streets; general location and description of existing and proposed utility services, including size of water and sewer mains; the location and width for all curb cuts and the land area of all abutting sites and the zoning classification thereof on an accurate survey of the tract with a topographical contour interval of not more than five feet (5'). 
? Illustrate setback distances from all surrounding objects as listed and in accordance with the Gas Well Ordinance (Ordinance No. 1465). 
? List all waiver requests to any setback restrictions and provide proper documentation in accordance with the Gas Well Ordinance, if applicable. 
? Locations and elevation views of all fencing, gates, and screening walls including details of heights, materials, and colors. 
Sheet 2 - Landscape Plan: 
? The landscape plan must be prepared by a Landscape Architect, Contractor, or Designer. It must include the following at a minimum scale of 1" = 50'. The landscape plan shall conform to the requirements set forth in the Gas Well Ordinance. 
? Title Block in lower right hand corner of landscape plan to include: 
1.  Project's name; 
2.  Name, address, telephone number, fax number, and contact person of the Applicant; 
3.  Name, address, telephone number, fax number, and contact person of the Owner; 
4.  Name, address, telephone number, fax number, and contact person of the preparer (Landscape Architect, Contractor, or Designer); 
5.  Address and/or legal description of the project (addition's name, lots, and blocks); 
6.  Total acreage and zoning; and 
7.  Date of preparation and dates of revisions, if any (as the landscape plan is revised, add dates of revision to each submittal). 
? North arrow oriented to the top or right of the sheet. 
? A conceptual landscape plan showing turf areas, ornamental planting, wooded areas, and trees to be planted. 
? Location and spacing of all plants and landscaping materials and features to be used. 
? Species, quantity, and size of all plant materials to be used. 
? Location, size, and species of all trees to be preserved ("tree stamps" may not be used unless they indicate the true size and location of trees). 
? Depth of pond, if applicable. 
? Topography. 
? A note that states that all landscaped areas will be irrigated and that detailed irrigation plans will be submitted at time of Gas Well Permit application. 
? A note that all landscaped areas are to be maintained in accordance with City regulations. 
? Description of provisions for maintenance. 
? Location and size of all other utilities existing and/or proposed, underground or overhead, including private transmission lines. 
Sheet 3 - Noise Management Plan: 
? Identify operation sources and noise impacts. 
? Provide documentation establishing the Ambient Noise Level prior to construction of any Wellhead, compressor or compression facility in accordance with the requirements of the Gas Well Ordinance. 
? Detail how the impacts will be mitigated. In determining noise mitigation, specific site characteristics shall be considered, including but not limited to the following: 
1.  Nature and proximity of adjacent development, location, and type; 
2.  Seasonal and prevailing weather patterns, including wind directions; 
3.  Vegetative cover on or adjacent to the site; 
4.  Topography; and 
5.  Description and explanation of the performance effectiveness of noise control devices. 
Sheet 4 - Utility Plan: 
? Title Block in lower right hand corner of utility plan to include: 
1.  Project's name; 
2.  Name, address, telephone number, fax number, and contact person of the Applicant; 
3.  Name, address, telephone number, fax number, and contact person of the Owner; 
4.  Name, address, telephone number, fax number, and contact person of the preparer (Engineer); 
5.  Address and/or legal description of the project (addition's name, lots, and blocks); 
6.  Total acreage and zoning; and 
7.  Date of preparation and dates of revisions, if any (as the landscape plan is revised, add dates of revision to each submittal). 
? A description of public utilities required during drilling and operation. 
? All property lines and easements. 
? The footprints of all proposed buildings or structures. 
? Driveway and sidewalk locations with dimensions and curve radii labeled. 
? Parking layout, including maneuvering, loading, and unloading areas. 
? Location and size of all existing and proposed water and sewer lines. 
? Location and size of all other utilities existing and proposed, underground or overhead. 
? Fire protection, including locations of existing and proposed fire hydrants, fire lanes, and fire lines, with all dimensions clearly designated and/or proposed alternate means of fire protection. 
? Distances to closest existing fire hydrants, on-site or off-site, which would provide water access for this property in the event of a fire. 
? Locations of the proposed water supply for the site, a description of the water source to be used during drilling, an estimate of the total volume of water needed, and the approximate dates the water supply will be needed at the site. If the water source will be the City of Keller municipal water supply, provide the maximum withdrawal rate in gallons per minute from each point of withdrawal. 
Sheet 5 - Grading and Drainage Plan: 
? Title Block in lower right hand corner of utility plan to include: 
1.  Project's name; 
2.  Name, address, telephone number, fax number, and contact person of the Applicant; 
3.  Name, address, telephone number, fax number, and contact person of the Owner; 
4.  Name, address, telephone number, fax number, and contact person of the preparer (Engineer); 
5.  Address and/or legal description of the project (addition's name, lots, and blocks); 
6.  Total acreage and zoning; and 
7.  Date of preparation and dates of revisions, if any (as the landscape plan is revised, add dates of revision to each submittal). 
? All property lines and easements. 
? The footprints of all proposed gas well facilities. 
? Driveway locations with dimensions and curve radii labeled. 
? Layout of parking including maneuvering, loading, and unloading areas. 
? Existing and proposed contours. 
? Location of existing and proposed drainage structures with sizes and dimensions clearly labeled. 
? Location of 100-year floodplain and floodway. 
? Location of proposed improvements in relation to Areas of Special Flood Hazard. 
? Elevation from mean sea level of new or substantially improved structures. 
? A certificate from a Texas-registered Professional Engineer or Architect that states non-residential flood proofed structures meet the criteria contained in the Flood Plain Ordinance. 
? Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development. 
Sheet 6 - Photometric Plan: 
? The Photometric Plan must be submitted with all site plans that are adjacent to residential zoning or uses, showing the light intensity within and around the perimeter of the site. The Photometric Plan shall conform to the requirements set forth in Section 8.16 - Lighting and Glare Standards of the Unified Development Code. 
? Illustrate all property lines and easements; 
? The footprints of all proposed gas well facilities, buildings or structures; 
? Parking layout, including maneuvering, loading, and unloading area; and 
? Type, location, and height of all proposed light poles and fixtures. 
Sheet 7 - Aerial Overlay: 
? A recent color aerial photograph must be submitted in either 22" x 34" or 24" x 36" format with a transparent overlay that shows the following items: 
1.  All property lines and easements. 
2.  The footprints of all proposed gas well production facilities, buildings or structures. 
3.  Driveway locations. 
4.  Parking layout, including maneuvering, loading, and unloading areas. 
5.  Tree survey showing the location, type, and size of existing trees (see Article Ten - Tree Preservation of the Unified Development Code). 
Sheet 8 - Truck/Pipeline Route Exhibit: 
? Truck routes for all gas well drilling and production operations from the proposed gas well site. 
Public Hearing Information: 
? Mailing List of all property owners to be contacted by mail in accordance with the Gas Well Ordinance. 
? Location Map of all affected property owners to be contacted by mail. 
? Electronic file of pipeline route and truck route in AutoCAD or Microstation format. 
? Contact information of Gas Well Operator. 
Street address for the gas well location. 
Wireless Facility Siting Permit Application Form 
Carefully read the proposed application form which also functions as a checklist. Complete the application and attached supporting materials as required. On questionnaire and checklist, place an "x" in the box to indicate that item has been provided or to select an answer to the question. If an item is not applicable please write "N/A" near the box. 
Five (5) copies to be submitted as paper copies, and one (1) .pdf on an electronic storage device. 
Completed Permit Application to be submitted to: 
City of Keller 
Attn: Community Development Department 
1100 Bear Creek Parkway 
Keller, TX 76244 
For more information Contact: 
Community Development 
(817) 743-4130 or communitydevelopment@cityofkeller.com 
Terms used in this Application: 
"Applicant" - This is the person or entity that will actually utilize the Project, with the permit in the Applicant's name. 
"Applicant's Agent" — Applicant's Agent is the agent for the Applicant in connection with this application and is authorized to sign and submit the application on the Applicant's behalf. 
"FCC 2009 Declaratory Ruling" —- Federal Communication Commission Order, In the Matter of Petition for Declaratory Ruling to Clarify Provisions of Section 332(c) (7) (B),24 FCC Rcd 13994 (2009) 
"FCC 2014 Wireless Infrastructure Order" — Federal Communication Commission Order, In the Matter of Acceleration of Broadband Deployment by Improving Wireless Facilities Siting Policies, WT Docket No. 13-238, __ FCC Rcd ___(Adopted Oct. 17, 2014, Released Oct. 27, 2014) [For Effective dates see end note, but for Section 6409 (a) rules, no earlier than April 8, 2015]. Interpretation of Section § 6409(a) (47 U.S.C. § 1455(a) 
"FCC Rules" - FCC Rules, 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001 Wireless Facility Modifications, et al. 
"Property Owner" — Is the underlying owner of the property on which the Project is located. 
"Project" — For purposes of this application, the new site or modification/addition to an existing wireless facilities site will be termed the "Project". 
"Section 322 (c) (7)" - Federal law, 47 U.S.C. § 332 (c) (7). 
"Section 6409 (a)" - Federal law, 47 U.S.C. § 1455(a) (Section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief Act of 2013). 
 
WIRELESS FACILITY SITING PERMIT APPLICATION FORM/CHECKLIST 
SECTION 1. APPLICANT/OWNER INFORMATION 
1.02: Underlying Property Owner Information. 
?  1.02.1: If the underlying owner of the property on which the Project is located ("Property Owner") is not the same as the Applicant, please include information on the Property Owner's name, company or firm, title, address, email and telephone number. 
?  1.02.2: If the underlying Property Owner is not the same as the Applicant and does not sign the application acknowledging its consent to file the Application for the Project, please attach a letter of agency appointing the Applicant, or the Applicant's representative or Applicant's Agent, as applicable, as the agent for the Property Owner in connection with this Application and as being fully authorized to sign the Application on the Property Owner's behalf acknowledging the Property Owner's consent to file the Application for the Project. 
Designate this as "Exhibit 1.02.2, Property Owner's Letter of Agency". 
?  1.02.3: If the Project is located in the public right-of-way, describe in detail the governmental authority and/or statutory authority, or other legal authority that granted the Applicant the privilege to use the rights-of-way for a wireless facility. 
Designate this as "Exhibit 1.02.3, Permission to use ROW for wireless facility". 
?  1.02.4: If the Project is located in the public right-of-way, and will be placed in infrastructure not owned or controlled by the Applicant, such as an existing wireless antenna support tower or utility pole, street light pole, or traffic signal pole, describe in detail the legal basis for the use of that infrastructure, providing copies of pole attachment or other agreements with the owner of the infrastructure. 
Designate this as "Exhibit 1.02.4, Permission to use ROW infrastructure". 
1.03: Representations on submitting the Application (Choose one from the options below): 
?  1.03.1: If the Applicant is an individual, they must sign their full name on the cover page to the Application, representing that: 1.) they have read and understand the Application and; 2.) to the best of their knowledge the answers and information submitted with the Application are true and correct. 
?  1.03.2: If the Applicant is not an individual, an Applicant's in-house representative must sign their full name on the cover page to the Application, representing that: 1.) they have the authority to act for the business entity of the Applicant; 2.) they have read and understand the Application; and 3.) to the best of their knowledge the answers and information submitted with the Application are true and correct. 
?  1.03.3: If neither the Applicant nor the Applicant's in-house representative signs the application form, please attach a letter of agency appointing the above named Applicant's Agent as the agent for the Applicant in connection with this application and as being fully authorized to sign and submit the application on the Applicant's behalf. The Applicant's Agent must sign their full name on the cover page to the Application, representing that: 1.) they have the authority to act for the business entity of the Applicant; 2.) they have read and understand the Application; and 3.) to the best of their knowledge the answers and information submitted with the Application are true and correct. 
Designate this as "Exhibit 1.03.3: Applicant's Letter of Agency." 
SECTION 2.00: TYPE OF WIRELESS FACILITIES APPLICATION FOR PURPOSES OF FEDERAL LAW: SECTION 332(C)(7) OR SECTION 6409(A). 
The type of wireless facility Project determines the review time under federal law for the City to act in deciding to grant or deny a permit. The three possible City review periods, depending on type of project, are: 
•  150 days is the default, but rebuttable presumptive time for the City to review and act on all new wireless facility sites and projects that do not qualify as either a Section 322 (c) (7) "collocation" on an existing tower or a Section 6409 (a) modification to an "eligible" existing tower or existing base station. 
•  90 days is the default, but rebuttable presumptive time for the City to review and act on a Section 322 (c) (7) "collocation" on an existing tower, when supported by complete documentation submitted with the application. 
•  60 days is the time allowed for the City to review and act on a Section 6409 (a) "eligible facilities request" for modification of an existing tower or existing base station, when supported by complete documentation submitted with the application. 
Both a Section 322 (c) (7) "collocation" on an existing tower and a Section 6409 (a) modification to eligible an existing tower or existing base station have detailed restrictions to qualify. If the Applicant is asserting that the Project qualifies for either of those two types of projects, complete the below questions, and provide the requested information in full to avoid a delay in you application's review for incompleteness. 
The City review times start when the application is filed, but can be tolled (not counted) if the application is incomplete. Section 332 (c) (7) presumptive times are rebuttal by the City, and the City does not waive, but reserves its right to rebut those times as not reasonable under the circumstances. 
All of the City review times may be extended by the Applicant, with mutual, written agreement 30 day review for completeness of the application for purposes of the City review period: 
If the City determines the application is incomplete it will provide written notice to the Applicant within 30 days of filing of the application that the application is incomplete, detailing the missing information and citing where that information was required. The remaining time for the City to review the application does not start again until the supplemental information has been provided to the City in full. 
For the maps and drawings required, the following standards apply in the City's determination of completeness. The size of each submitted map, drawing, Project elevation renderings and/or photographs and photo simulations must be no smaller than 11" by 8.5." Each must use the same streets names and legends. 
Please provide following information in complete detail: 
2.01: Presumption that the Application is for a project that does not qualify as either a Section 322 (c) (7) "collocation" on an existing tower or a Section 6409 (a) "eligible facility" modification to an existing tower or base station: The City will conclusively presume that the Application's Project is neither a collocation project qualified under Section 322 (c) (7) nor is it an "eligible facility" request for modification under Section 6409 (a), unless the Applicant clearly asserts that it is, providing the below requested information in Section 2.02 or Section 2.03, as applicable, in full and in complete detail. If the above presumption is not correct, complete Section 2.02 or Section 2.03, as applicable. 
2.02: 47 U.S.C. § Section 332 (c) (7) collocation project: If the Applicant asserts that this Project is eligible and fully qualifies as a 47 U.S.C. § 332 (c) (7) collocation project request as defined in FCC 2009 Declaratory Ruling attach: 
?  A detailed written statement describing the reasons upon which the applicant believes that that the Project is eligible for 47 U.S.C. § 332 (c) (7) collocation treatment, to include at a minimum complete answers to the below questions in 2.02.1 below: 
?  2.02.1: Detailed engineer sealed drawings of the measurements described below: 
?  Detailed information on the existing tower where the collocation is to be placed, to include but not be limited to copies of the initial application and permit, and any subsequent modification applications and permits, even if denied. 
?  Detailed information on the existing tower where the collocation is to be placed as to whether the mounting of the proposed antenna on the tower increases the existing height of the tower by more than 10%, or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed twenty feet, whichever is greater? Explain in detail. Please provide detailed engineer sealed drawings of these measurements. 
?  Detailed information on the existing tower where the collocation is to be placed as to whether the mounting of the proposed antenna involve adding an appurtenance to the body of the tower that would protrude from the edge of the tower more than twenty feet, or more than the width of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater? Explain in detail. Please provide detailed engineer sealed drawings of these measurements. 
?  If the mounting of the proposed antenna exceeds the size limits set forth in (2) (height) and/or (3) (width/protrusions), is it asserted it was necessary to either avoid interference with existing antennas or to shelter the antenna from inclement weather or to connect the antenna to the tower via cable? Explain in detail. Please provide detailed engineer sealed drawings of supporting these asserted claims. 
?  Detailed information on the existing tower where the collocation is to be placed as to whether the mounting of the proposed antenna involve the installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, not to exceed four, or more than one new equipment shelter? Explain in detail. Please provide detailed engineer sealed drawings of these measurements. 
?  Detailed information on the existing tower where the collocation is to be placed as to whether the mounting of the proposed antenna involve excavation outside the current tower site, defined as the current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the tower and any access or utility easements currently related to the site, including any physical, wireline, interconnections to other locations, noting existing wireline connections and new ones? Explain in detail. Please provide detailed engineer sealed drawings of these measurements. 
?  Please include a detailed map depicting the sites' boundary of the property owned or leased for purposes of the tower Project, and the location of the tower Project within that boundary, and depicting the tower Project as it is at the time of the application, and after the requested collocation, in both an overhead format, and in elevations from each side. Please provide detailed engineer sealed drawings of this depiction. 
?  Designate this attachment as "Exhibit 2.02.1, Section 332 (c) (7), Eligible Collocation Project". Go to Section 3. 
2.03: Section 6409 (a) eligible facilities request for modification: If the Applicant asserts that this Project is an eligible facility request for modification under Section 6409 (a) as it does not "substantially change the physical dimensions" of an existing tower or base station, as those terms are defined in FCC 2014 Wireless Infrastructure Order and FCC Rules, please attach: 
?  A detailed written statement describing the basis of the assertion that Section 6409 (a) applies to this Project and why it meets the applicable requirements as set for in FCC Rules, 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001 Wireless Facility Modifications, et al, to include complete answers to the questions in 2.03.1 below. 
?  2.03.1. Provide detailed information and detailed engineer sealed drawings of the measurements described to answer the questions below, at a minimum providing documentation or information to the extent reasonably related to the request for modification to allow the City to determine whether the request for modification meets the detailed requirements set for in FCC Rules, 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001 Wireless Facility Modifications, et al: 
?  Is the Project an "eligible facility" as a either a "tower" or a "base station" as defined in FCC Rules, 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001 (b) (1) and (9)? Explain in detail. 
?  Provide detailed information on how the tower or base station to be modified as the Project meets the definition of "existing" in FCC Rules, 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001 (b) (5). Include with this explanation copies of the initial application and permit of the tower or base station, and any subsequent modification applications and permits, even if denied, and of any City required conditions placed on the initial or subsequent permits, such as, but not limited to, safety, setbacks, fencing, landscaping, and concealment or stealth requirements. 
?  Provide detailed information and documents on the "site" of the tower or base station to be modified by the Project as "site" is defined in FCC Rules, 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001 (b) (6), to allow the City to determine the "site" for purposes of compliance with Section 6409 (a) eligibility. Please include a detailed map depicting the sites' boundary of the property owned or leased for purposes of the Project, and the location of the Project within that boundary, and depicting the tower or base station as it is at the time of the application, and after the requested modifications, in both an overhead format, and in elevations from each side. 
?  If the Project is located in the public right-of-way, describe by providing maps and drawings to fully depict the area asserted to be in proximity to the structure and to other transmission equipment already deployed on the ground, to include the location of the tower or base station and transmission equipment already deployed on the ground within that proximity area, depicting the tower or base station as it is at the time of the application, and after the requested modification, in both an overhead format, and in elevations from each side. Include the basis of the assertion as to the area in proximity to the eligible structure. Explain in full detail to include maps and drawings to allow the City to determine the "site" for purposes of compliance with Section 6409 (a) eligibility. 
?  Is the request to modify a "collocation", as defined in FCC Rules, 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001 (b) (2), or a removal or replacement of "transmission equipment", as defined in FCC Rules, 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001 (b) (8)? Explain in detail. 
?  To the extent the modification Project includes replacement in the form of "hardening" of the tower or base station, please provide analysis by a licensed engineer as to why this hardening is necessary for an eligible Section 6409 (a) collocation, replacement, or removal of transmission equipment, and percentage of the structure that is being replaced. 
?  Provide detailed information on how the requested modification of the tower or base station to be modified by the Project does not "substantially change the physical dimensions" of the existing tower or base station, as those terms are defined in FCC Rules, 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001 (b). Explain in detail, specifically, including detailed licensed engineer sealed drawings, on how the requested modification of the tower or base station Project is to be modified, to include: 
?  Increases in the height of the tower or base station to be modified; 
?  Increases in the width and/or protrusions of appurtenances and/or transmission equipment from the tower or base station to be modified; 
?  Increases in the transmission equipment/cabinets on the ground of the site of the tower or base station to be modified; 
? Detail on any excavations and deployment outside the current site including any physical, wireline, interconnections to other locations, noting existing wireline connections and new ones. 
?  How the requested modification of the tower or base station does not defeat any previously required concealment (stealth) conditions from prior permits; 
?  How the requested modification of the tower or base station complies with any other previously required City conditions from prior permits, other than those allowed by the "substantial change" thresholds identified in FCC Rules, 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001(b)(7)(i)-(iv). 
What constitutes a "substantial change" are detailed in the definition in FCC Rules, 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001 (b) (8), including how each item listed above is measured (i.e., height, width, protrusions of appurtenances, number of cabinets). Please provide all documents and information to the extent reasonably related to the request for modification to allow the City to determine whether the request for modification meets the detailed requirements set for in FCC Rules, 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001 Wireless Facility Modifications, et al. 
?  Designate this attachment as "Exhibit 2.03.1, Section 6409(a) Eligible facility request for modification that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of an existing tower or base station" Go to Section 3. 
SECTION 3.00: GENERAL PROJECT INFORMATION 
3.01.1: Project Description: 
To the extent not answered in detail in Section 2 above, please provide answers to either 3.01.1 and 3.01.2 or 3.01.3 and 3.01.4, as applicable: 
?  3.01.1 Detailed map depicting the boundary of the property owned or leased for purposes of the Project, and the location of the proposed Project within that boundary including street names, addresses of buildings or residences in at least 300 yards of proximity to that area including any physical, wireline, interconnections to other locations, noting existing wireline connections and new ones. 
?  3.01.2 Detailed to scale drawings depicting the existing wireless facilities structure as it is at the time of the application, as applicable, and as the Project will be after the requested modification, in both an overhead format, and in elevations from each side including any physical, wireline, interconnections to other locations, noting existing wireline connections and new ones. 
?  3.01.3 If the Project is located in the public right-of-way, describe the location by providing maps to depict the area with 200 feet of the Project, including street names, addresses of buildings or residences and the area asserted to be in proximity to the Project, to include the location of the Project structure within that area, including any physical, wireline, interconnections to other locations, noting existing wireline connections and new ones. 
?  3.01.4 Detailed to scale drawings depicting the existing wireless facilities structure as it is at the time of the application, as applicable, and as the Project will be after completion, in both an overhead format, and in elevations from each side including any physical, wireline, interconnections to other locations, noting existing wireline connections and new ones. 
?  Maps and drawings are to be prepared and sealed by a licensed Texas professions Engineer. 
?  Designate the maps and drawings as "Exhibit 3.01.1, Project description, maps and drawings." 
3.02: Requested photo/elevation renderings to be submitted with the Application: (Not applicable for a fully qualified Section 6409 (a) eligible facility's request to modify.) 
3.02.1:  Project Elevation Renderings and/or Photographs and Photo Simulations. 
?  To the extent not provided in other responses, where the Project as proposed by the Applicant can be seen at ground level from the street, or from the 1st floor within or on buildings within 500 feet of the Project provide four elevation renderings and/or photographs and/or photo simulations of the Project, including its tower, base station, antennas, antenna concealment/stealth coverings, equipment cabinets, back-up generations, and lights, as applicable. 
?  A map detail showing each location where that elevation renderings and/or photographs and/or photo simulations were taken, together with the Project site, and the direction to the site from each elevation renderings and/or photographs and/or photo simulations must be included. 
?  The Applicant should submit elevation renderings and/or photographs and/or photo simulations as set out above, and may be requested by the City to provide additional elevation renderings and/or photographs and/or photo simulations to allow the City to visualize the Project as completed. 
?  By their submittal with the application, Applicant represents that the elevation renderings and/or photographs and/or photo simulations are accurate and reliable representations of the current project site and the proposed Project to be constructed or modified, and that the Applicant is fully aware that the City will rely on all of the elevation renderings and/or photographs and/or photo simulations provided when it considers granting or denying the Application for this Project. 
?  Designate as "Exhibit 3.02.1, Project elevation renderings and/or photographs and photo simulations." 
SECTION 4.00: EXISTING ZONING REQUIREMENTS AND ANY VARIANCES/WAIVERS REQUESTED. 
4.01.1: Provide information on the existing zoning regulations or other City land use and/or safety code requirements at the Project site that may be applicable to the Project. 
?  4.01.1: If the Project is not in full compliance with the existing zoning regulations or other City requirements or conditions of prior permits at the Project site provide detail as to how it is non-compliant, and if a variance and/or waiver is requested by the Applicant for each instance of non-compliance, and why the variance/waiver is requested, except for qualified Section 6409 (a) Applicants. 
?  4.01.2: For qualified Section 6409 (a) Applicants, to the extent not answered above in Section 2.03.1 (7) f. above, provide details if the Project complies with any other previously required City conditions from prior permits, and/or existing zoning regulations or other City requirements at the Project site other than those allowed by the "substantial change" thresholds identified in FCC Rules, 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001(b)(7)(i)-(iv), and if not, and if a variance and/or waiver is requested by the Applicant for each instance on non-compliance, and why the variance/waiver is requested. 
?  Designate this as "Exhibit 4.01, Existing zoning regulations or other City requirements at the Project site and requested variances/waivers." 
SECTION 5.00: PROJECT USE AND PURPOSE 
(Not applicable for a fully qualified Section 6409 (a) eligible facility's request to modify.) 
5.01: Principal Use of the Project: (Check one or more, as applicable) 
?  If for private use, such as an amateur radio, describe generally in a written statement. 
?  If for broadcast radio, broadcast TV, or satellite connectivity for data or cable television, describe generally in a written statement. 
?  If for commercial public cellular telephone, to include, but not limited to a network for "personal wireless services" as defined in Section 322 (c) (7) (C), or a network for "commercial mobile service" , as defined in 47 U. S.C. § 332 (d), Enhanced Specialized Mobile Radio, Specialized Mobile Radio, Microwave, PCS telephone, Small Cell, or a Distributed Antenna System (DAS), describe generally in a written statement. 
?  If for other uses, (e.g., Wi-Max or Wi-Fi), describe generally in a written statement. 
5.02: If applicable, indicate whether the purpose of the Project is: (Check one or more, as applicable) 
?  Adding commercial cellular network without adding significant new radio frequency coverage area to a network for "personal wireless services", as defined in Section 322 (c) (7) (C) and/or to a network for "commercial mobile service", as defined in 47 U. S.C. § 332 (d). 
?  Providing significant new radio frequency coverage in an area not already served by radio frequency coverage to a network for "personal wireless services", as defined in Section 322 (c) (7) (C) and/or to a network for "commercial mobile service", as defined in 47 U. S.C. § 332 (d). 
?  Increasing the existing radio frequency signal level in an area with existing radio frequency coverage to a network for "personal wireless services", as defined in Section 322 (c) (7) (C) and/or to a network for "commercial mobile service", as defined in 47 U. S.C. § 332 (d). 
?  Intended to close or reduce an asserted "significant gap" in a wireless telecommunications cellular network, including to a network for "personal wireless services", as defined in Section 322 (c) (7) (C) and/or to a network for "commercial mobile service", as defined in 47 U. S.C. § 332 (d). 
?  Other. Attach a written statement fully describing all portions or elements of the "Other" dominant purpose of this Project. 
?  Designate this exhibit as "Exhibit 5.02, Other purpose of this Project." 
SECTION 6.00 "SIGNIFICANT GAP" QUESTIONS, IF APPLICABLE: 
(Not applicable for a fully qualified Section 6409 (a) eligible facility's request to modify.) 
6.01: Is this Project intended to close or reduce an asserted "significant gap" in a wireless telecommunications network, to include a network for "personal wireless services", as defined in Section 322 (c) (7) (C) and/or for "commercial mobile service", as defined in 47 U. S.C. § 332 (d) (sometimes referred to collectively as "cellular network")? ?Yes ?No 
If the answer is Yes, attach a: 
?  Written statement, signed and sealed by an engineer licensed in Texas, including his or her designated primary area of engineering practice, and if it is not electrical engineering, then include a copy of his or her Supplementary Experience Record (SER) as filed with the Texas Board of Professional Engineers, Rule 133.97 (j), and explaining why he or she is competent without a designated primary area in the engineering branch area of electrical engineering concerning Radio Frequency (RF) engineering analysis. In such written statement provide full details describing the following: 
?  Geographic boundary of the claimed significant gap area, attaching a street-level map showing that geographic boundary of the claimed significant gap. 
?  Describe the size of the claimed significant gap area in square miles; and 
?  Set out and explain the definition of and/or what constitutes a "significant gap" as used by applicant in this Project. 
?  If the term or of what constitutes a significant gap as set out above is different than the term significant gap is used or applied by the wireless industry generally, if known, and/or the FCC, if known, explain the differences and the reasons for the differences. 
Where the Applicant has relied on external data sources to factually support the claimed significant gap area, identifying those sources and: 
?  Whether the claimed significant gap affects a significant number of commuters on particular roadways, and if so, name each roadway, and include addresses by blocks, and how affected; and 
?  Describe the number of potential cellular network users in the claimed significant gap area; and 
?  Describe the number of potential cellular network users in the claimed significant gap area who may be affected by the claimed significant gap; and 
?  Describe whether the proposed Project is needed to improve weak signals in a cellular network or to fill a complete void in coverage in a cellular network, and provide Radio Frequency (RF) engineering analysis proof of either; and 
?  If the claimed significant gap covers roads on which the cellular network users lack roaming capabilities, identify such roads by name and block address within the claimed significant gap area and provide road use information about each such road; and 
?  If one or more "drive tests" was conducted within the claimed significant gap area, discuss in detail the methodology of how the test(s) were conducted, including details about the test equipment by manufacture, model numbers and years in service, if more than 2 years, and calibration maintenance records, if applicable, and location of the test equipment, including any antennas in or on the test vehicle. Provide the objective data collected during the drive test in standard portable spreadsheet format; and 
?  If the claimed significant gap affects a retail commercial district, show the boundaries of the district on the map; and 
?  If the claimed significant gap poses a public safety risk, describe in detail the claimed risk, and the basis for this claim, including any correspondence (email or in writing) from or to the public, if any; and to or from any public safety officials (fire, police, others), if any, concerning or relating to this claimed public safety risk; and 
If the claimed significant gap is based in whole or in part on factors related to switching center capacity; dropped calls; failed hand-offs; interference from or to other cell sites; site hopping; degraded cellular radio frequency signals; and/or any failure to meet any carrier transmission goal or percentage goal, 
?  Attach at least the most recent twelve (12) months of historical data by month documenting at least: 
?  The results or numerical data of each claimed metric and range of each parameter; 
?  The wireless carrier's numerical and percentage requirements for each such claimed perimeter; 
?  The total number of calls attempted for each month both successfully and unsuccessfully completed; 
?  the total number of calls that were not completed including failed originations; failed hand-offs; and non-normal call terminations; and (5) for every such claimed parameter that is not categorized by way of number or percentage, provide the data in the way kept by the carrier. 
?  Designate this exhibit as "Exhibit 6.01, Basis of "significant gap" closing as a purpose of this Project." 
6.02: Alternative Candidate sites to close the significant gap, if applicable (Not applicable for a fully qualified Section 6409 (a) eligible facility's request to modify.) 
6.02.1: Did the Applicant, or anyone working on behalf of the Applicant, secured or attempted to secure any leases or lease-options or similar formal or informal agreements in connection with this Project for any sites other than the proposed Project site? ?Yes ?No 
If Yes, please provide 
?  the physical address of each such other location(s), and 
?  provide a narrative with technical explanation, to include a Radio Frequency (RF) engineering analysis, as to why each such other site was not used as the project site, including identifying and discussing all alternative sites considered to close the significant gap. 
6.02.2: Are there any sites in lieu of the site proposed by Applicant that could either close the significant gap claimed or reduce the significant gap to be less than significant, with less impact on the community as compared with a single site? ?Yes ?No 
If Yes, please provide: 
?  the physical address of each such other location(s), and 
?  provide a narrative with technical explanation to include a Radio Frequency (RF) engineering analysis, as to why each such other site was not used as the project site, including identifying and discussing all alternative sites considered to close the significant gap. 
If No, please: 
?  explain in narrative format the basis for that answer. 
?  6.02.3: If there were no alternative sites were reviewed by the Applicant, or anyone working on behalf of the Applicant, please answer why in technical detail to include a Radio Frequency (RF) engineering analysis. 
?  Designate these Responses to 6.02.1 to 6.02.3 as "Exhibit 6.02, Alternative Candidate site to close the significant gap information". 
6.02.4: If the City required the Applicant to designate one or more sites as alternative sites to the proposed site for the Project, would that requirement "unreasonably" discriminate against the Applicant from among providers of functionally equivalent services, or prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of "personal wireless services", as defined in Section 322 (c) (7) (C) and/or "commercial mobile service", as defined in 47 U. S.C. § 332 (d)? ?Yes ?No 
If the Applicant's response asserts that either unreasonable discrimination or a prohibition or effective prohibition would occur, 
?  Explain in detail in narrative form the technical, to include a Radio Frequency (RF) engineering analysis, why it would do so. 
?  Designate this Response as "Exhibit 6.02.4, City requirement of the Applicant to designate alternative sites to the proposed site for the Project will prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the Applicant from providing any interstate or intrastate telecommunications service". 
6.03: Proposed site, as the one and only one location to close the significant gap, if applicable (Not applicable for a fully qualified Section 6409 (a) eligible facility's request to modify.) 
6.03.1: Does the Applicant considered the proposed site as the one and only one location within or outside of the City that can close the significant gap? ?Yes ?No 
If Yes, 
?  Provide a technically detailed explanation supported by comprehensive radio frequency data and other necessary information fully describing why the proposed site is the one and only one location within or outside of the City that can possibly close the significant gap to include a Radio Frequency (RF) engineering analysis. 
?  Designate this Response as "Exhibit 6.03.1, Proposed site as the one and only one location to close the significant gap information". 
6.03.2.: If the City denied the application at the site proposed for the Project, would that denial "unreasonably" discriminate against the Applicant from among providers of functionally equivalent services, or prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of "personal wireless services", as defined in Section 322 (c) (7) (C) and/or "commercial mobile service", as defined in 47 U. S.C. § 332 (d)? ?Yes ?No 
If the Applicant's response asserts that either unreasonable discrimination or a prohibition or effective prohibition would occur, 
?  Explain in detail in narrative form the technical, and other reasons why it would do so to include a Radio Frequency (RF) engineering analysis. 
?  Designate this Response as "Exhibit 6.03.2, City denial of this Project at this site will prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the Applicant from providing any interstate or intrastate telecommunications service". 
6.04: Least intrusive means to close the significant gap, if applicable (Not applicable for a fully qualified Section 6409 (a) eligible facility's request to modify.) 
6.04.1: Is the proposed Project the least intrusive means to close the significant gap claimed and described above? ?Yes ?No 
If Yes, 
?  Attach a written statement describing at a minimum, why this project is the least intrusive means to close the significant gap claimed, to include a Radio Frequency (RF) engineering analysis and other information you relied on in reaching your affirmative determination in above. 
?  Designate this Response as "Exhibit 6.04, Proposed Project as the least intrusive means to close the significant gap information". 
6.04.2: If the City required the Applicant to have a less intrusive Project, to include a reduction in height and/or width, or to have concealment or stealth requirements, would those requirements would any of those requirements "unreasonably" discriminate against the Applicant from among providers of functionally equivalent services, or prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of "personal wireless services", as defined in Section 322 (c) (7) (C) and/or "commercial mobile service", as defined in 47 U. S.C. § 332 (d)? ?Yes ?No 
If the Applicant's response asserts that either unreasonable discrimination or a prohibition or effective prohibition would occur, 
?  Explain in detail in narrative form the technical, and other reasons why it would do so to include a Radio Frequency (RF) engineering analysis. 
?  Designate this Response as "Exhibit 6.04.2, City requirement of the Applicant to have a less intrusive Project, to include a reduction in height and/or width, or to have concealment or stealth requirement, will prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the Applicant from providing any interstate or intrastate telecommunications service". 
SECTION 7.00: WIRELINE PHYSICAL INTERCONNECTIONS BETWEEN THE PROPOSED SITE AND OTHER SITES THAT USE THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY: 
7.01: If the Project is to be physically interconnected by new wireline "back haul" on, over or under public rights-of-way, please proved the following, as applicable: 
?  Identify by physical street address of the public rights-of-way, and the managing jurisdiction of the public-rights-of-way (City, County, or State). 
?  Technical detail of the proposed method of the physical wireline interconnection, including, but not limited to: overhead, underground, conduits, leased capacity of others, noting existing wireline connections and new ones. 
?  Detailed maps and drawings depicting the connections between the proposed Project site and the other sites where they are to be on, over or under public rights-of-way, noting existing wireline connections and new ones. 
?  Detailed information as to the Applicant's governmental grant of authority to use such public-rights-of-way for this purpose of physically interconnecting the Project to any other site or sites by the name of the approving governmental authority, including related documents (e.g., ordinances, franchise, agreements, license or permits), and/or applicable statutes by citation or other means of granting the Applicant (or others) the privilege to place private facilities in the public rights-of-way for private use to connect wireless facilities' sites. 
?  Designate this as "Exhibit 7.01, Wireline/backhaul interconnections in the Public Rights-of-Way Information." 
SECTION 8.00: LEASE ALLOWANCE OF ADDITIONAL WIRELESS FACILITIES AND/OR PROVIDERS: 
(Optional response, at Applicant's sole discretion.) 
8.01: To the extent not confidential, will the Proposed Site be available for use by other wireless providers? 
8.02: To the extent not confidential, does the lease agreement require written consent from the landowner/landlord to allow other wireless providers and/or additional wireless facilities? 
8.03: To the extent not confidential, does the lease agreement have any limitations as to: 
(1)  size- length, width, height, weight of facilities on the tower, or limitations as to the exact placement of the wireless antenna array and/or its "footprint"; or 
(2)  any limitations of any other any additional wireless facilities to be placed on the tower by applicant or other wireless providers on the site at ground level or on the tower? 
References 
FCC 2009 Declaratory Ruling is downloadable at: https://apps.fcc.gov/edocs_public/Query.do?mode=advance&rpt=cond 
FCC 2014 Wireless Infrastructure Order is downloadable at: http://www.fcc.gov/document/wireless-infrastructure-report-and-order. 
Effective dates of the FCC 2014 Wireless Infrastructure Order: 
April 8, 2015: Section 6409 (a) rules are effective April 8, 2015 (90 days after the Jan. 8, 2015 publication in the Federal Register (FR).2014 Wireless Infrastructure Order, ¶ 242), except to the extent Office of Management and Budget (OMB) approval is required, 2014 Wireless Infrastructure Order, ¶ 286. 
Sections requiring OMB approval are to be effective sometime after Jan. 20, 2015, but no earlier than April 8, 2015: The FCC determined the following portions of the Section 6409 (a) FCC rules require OMB approval before they are effective: 47 C.F.R. §§ 1.40001 (c) (3) (i) [detailed city document request for supplemental information to toll the 60 days "shot clock" due to 30 day notice of incompleteness]; 1.40001 (c) (3) (iii) [City 10 day review of supplemental information, and subsequent request to submit information to further toll the "shot clock"]; and 1.40001 (c) (4) [60 day failure to act "deemed granted"]. 
The link to the FCC's OMB approval request is: FR Notice. OMB action on this will be some time after Jan. 20, 2015, when comments are due. Until the OMB acts and the FCC publishes a notice of that OMB approval, those parts of the FCC Rules are not effective. 2014 Wireless Infrastructure Order, ¶ 289. See FR also Jan. 8, 2015, at page 1238, http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2015-01-08/pdf/2014-28897.pdf 
Feb. 9, 2015: The balance of the Order on NHPA, NEPA and clarification of FCC 2009 Declaratory Ruling and Section 332 (c) (7) are effective 30 days from FR publication. 2014 Wireless Infrastructure Order, ¶ 289, or Feb. 9, 2015. See FR also Jan. 8, 2015, at page 1238. 
1 See 2009 Declaratory Order ¶ ¶ 32 and 42, and FN 99; FCC 2014 Wireless Infrastructure Order, ¶ 216. 
1 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001(c). 
1 2009 Declaratory Ruling, ¶ 46. A Section 332 (c) (7) "collocation" project is one that does not "substantial increase in the size of a tower". 2009 Declaratory Ruling, footnote 146 states that a "substantial increase in the size of a tower" occurs when:(1) [t]he mounting of the proposed antenna on the tower would increase the existing height of the tower by more than 10%, or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed twenty feet, whichever is greater, except that the mounting of the proposed antenna may exceed the size limits set forth in this paragraph if necessary to avoid interference with existing antennas; or (2) [t]he mounting of the proposed antenna would involve the installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, not to exceed four, or more than one new equipment shelter; or (3) [t]he mounting of the proposed antenna would involve adding an appurtenance to the body of the tower that would protrude from the edge of the tower more than twenty feet, or more than the width of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater, except that the mounting of the proposed antenna may exceed the size limits set forth in this paragraph if necessary to shelter the antenna from inclement weather or to connect the antenna to the tower via cable; or (4) [t]he mounting of the proposed antenna would involve excavation outside the current tower site, defined as the current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the tower and any access or utility easements currently related to the site." 
1 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001 (b) (6). 
1 FCC 2014 Wireless Infrastructure Order, ¶ 180-81. Replacement may be of "transmission equipment", and may include hardening of the structure as a whole "where such hardening is necessary for a covered collocation, replacement, or removal of transmission equipment, but does not include replacement of the underlying structure."  
Section 9.03 - Fees 
A.  Fees and charges for the review and filing of all development applications listed within this section may be amended without separate ordinance of the City Council from time to time. Resubmittal of plans without addressing staff comments may be subject to additional application fees. 
B.  The provisions of the City of Keller Impact Fee Ordinance shall apply to all new development within the corporate boundaries of the City and shall apply uniformly within each service area. For requirements and procedures pertaining to Impact Fees, see the City of Keller Impact Fee Ordinance. 
C.  No building permit(s) shall be issued, or utility connection be made for other types of new development, until the property owner has paid the impact fee imposed by and calculated within the Impact Fee Ordinance, unless a different time and/or method of payment has been authorized by contract between the City and the property owner. 
Basic Development Fees 
Supplemental Plan Review Fee 	$50 per hour (minimum 2 hours residential and 3 hours commercial). Only assessed if after original set of plans had been reviewed and comments made, plans are resubmitted without addressing comments; or after plans are reviewed and approved for construction and changes are made to the plans by the developer/owner/builder/representative 
Inspection Fee - Streets and Drainage 	Four percent (4%) of construction value 
Water and Sewer Inspection 	Four percent (4%) of construction value 
Water Service Tap/Meter 
(Corporate City Limits) 	Short Tap and Meter Installation 
5/8" - $450 
3/4" - $475 
1" - $500 
1½ - $900 
2"*** - $1,025 
2" Compound Meter - $2,325 
  
Long Tap and Meter Installation 
5/8" - $800 
3/4" - $825 
1" - $850 
1½" - $1,275 
2"*** - $1,425 
2" Compound Meter - $2,725 
  
Install meter only 
5/8" - $275 
3/4" - $300 
1" - $325 
1½" - $725 
2"*** - $775 
2" Compound Meter - $2,075 
  
* Water main and service on same side of street 
  
**Water service (meter installation) on opposite side of street from water main may include bore fees 
  
*** Cost includes a 2" turbine or disc-type meter 
  
Outside City - Cost as determined on a case by case basis by Director of Public Works based on actual costs and impact to the system 
  
3" or more—Actual meter cost plus service charge fees. 
Sewer Service Tap 
(Corporate City Limits) 	$350 - 4" tap within the City (if contractor required due to extenuating circumstances, contractor costs are to be borne by the applicant) 
  
Actual cost - larger than 4" tap within the city 
  
Outside City - Cost as determined on a case by case basis by Director of Public Works based on actual costs and impact to the system 
Water/Sewer Connection Bore Costs 	Bore fee to apply as needed based on actual linear foot cost 
Street Lights 	$10.50 per month per pole (maximum of 24 months) 
Sanitary Sewer Camera Fee 	$225 each - per residential building permit 
Old Town Keller Asphalt Parking 	• Existing buildings/facilities - actual cost of materials 
• New buildings/facilities and existing buildings/facilities with privately funded improvements exceeding $50,000 - no cost 
  
Public parking space construction scope and schedule to be at the discretion of the Department of Public Works and dependent upon the availability of funding as determined by the City 
Miscellaneous right-of-way encroachment, dedication or abandonment 	$100 per application 
Miscellaneous easement dedication or abandonment 	$100 per application 
Preliminary Site Evaluation 	$300 per application plus $20 per lot residential (exceeding one lot) 
$250 per application for single residential lot 
$300 per application plus $20 per acre for non-residential 
Plat (Final and Amended) 	$300 per application plus $20 per lot residential (exceeding one lot) 
$250 per application for single residential lot 
$300 per application plus $20 per acre for non-residential 
Future Land Use Plan 	$400, plus $10 per acre 
Planned Development 	$400 plus $10 per acre for planned development, planned development amendment 
$250 thoroughfare plan amendment 
Specific Use Permit 	$350 plus $10 per acre for Specific Use Permit & Specific Use Permit Amendment 
Rezoning Application 	$350 plus $10 per acre 
Site Plan Application 	$300 application plus $10 per acre 
$200 application for minor amendments to previously approved Site Plans 
Variance Adjustment 	$200 application 
Landscape/Screening Wall Plans 	$200 per application 
Park Land Dedication 	One (1) acre per thirty (30) residential dwelling units. Payment in lieu of land dedication shall be the average per acre value of the property(s) to be developed as assigned by the Tarrant Appraisal District's most recent appraised market land value, or $30,000 per acre, whichever is greater, not to exceed $50,000 per acre. 
Appeal to Tree Preservation 	$200 per application 
$100 per caliper inch mitigation 
Gas Well Permit Fee 	$10,000 per well bore (Separate from PD Zoning application fee) 
Public Arts Development Fee 	.25% of Construction Value 
  
Section 9.04 - Summary of Zoning District Regulations 
This is a chart for general comparison purposes only and is incomplete. For complete requirements, see Article Eight of this Code. 
District 	Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.) 	Minimum Dwelling Unit Size (sq. ft.) 	Minimum Lot Width 	Minimum Lot Depth 	Minimum Front Yard 	Minimum Rear Yard 	Minimum Side Yard 	Maximum Height of Building 	Max. Impervious Lot Coverage 	Max. Accessory Bldg. Sq. Ft. w/o SUP 
SF-36 	36,000 	2,400 	140 ft. 	200 ft. 	35 ft. 	15 ft. 	20% of lot width 	2.5 stories or 35 feet 	30% 	1,200 
SF-30 	30,000 	2,400 	140 ft. 	200 ft. 	35 ft. 	15 ft. 	20% of lot width 	2.5 stories or 35 feet 	30% 	1,000 
SF-25 	25,000 	2,400 	90 ft. 	150 ft. 	35 ft. 	15 ft. 	20% of lot width 	2.5 stories or 35 feet 	30% 	1,000 
SF-20 	20,000 	2,200 	90 ft. 	150 ft. 	35 ft. 	15 ft. 	20% of lot width 	2.5 stories or 35 feet 	30% 	1,000 
SF-15 	15,000 	2,000 	105 ft. 	95 ft. 	30 ft. 	15 ft. 	20% of lot width 	2.5 stories or 35 feet 	35% 	800 
SF-9 	9,000 	1,800 	100 ft. 	115 ft. 	30 ft. 	15 ft. 	20% of lot width 	2.5 stories or 35 feet 	35% 	750 
SF-10 	10,000 	1,600 	90 ft. 	110 ft. 	25 ft. 	15 ft. 	20% of lot width 	2.5 stories or 35 feet 	40% 	500 
SF-8.4 	8,400 	1,400 	65 ft. 	110 ft. 	25 ft. 	15 ft. 	20% of lot width 	2.5 stories or 35 feet 	40% 	500 
2-F 	8,400/ 
4,200 	1,100 	70 ft./35 ft. 	100 ft. 	25 ft. 	15 ft. 	20% of lot width 	2.5 stories or 35 feet 	50% 	500 
MF 	20,000 	variable 	70 ft. 	90 ft. 	40 ft. 	30 ft. 	20 ft. 	2.5 stories or 35 feet 	50% 	n/a 
O 	33,000 	n/a 	150 ft. 	n/a 	30 ft. 	20 ft. 	15 ft. 	2 stories 	n/a 	n/a 
NS 	33,000 	n/a 	150 ft. 	n/a 	30 ft. 	20 ft. 	15 ft. 	2 stories 	n/a 	n/a 
R 	33,000 	n/a 	150 ft. 	n/a 	30 ft. 	20 ft. 	15 ft. 	2 stories 	n/a 	n/a 
TC 	variable 	variable 	variable 	variable 	variable 	variable 	variable 	variable 	variable 	n/a 
C 	33,000 	n/a 	150 ft. 	n/a 	30 ft. 	20 ft. 	15 ft. 	2 stories 	n/a 	n/a 
IP 	3 acres 	n/a 	150 ft. 	200 ft. 	50 ft. 	30 ft. 	20 ft. 	6 stories 	n/a 	n/a 
LI 	33,000 	n/a 	150 ft. 	n/a. 	30 ft. 	30 ft. 	20 ft. 	2 stories 	n/a 	n/a 
FP 	40,000 	600+ 	200 ft. 	200 ft. 	5-10 ft. 	n/a 	n/a 	50 feet 	80% 	n/a 
 
* See text of Article Eight of this Code for additional or supplemental requirements.  
Section 9.05 - Title Block Formats 
Title Block for Preliminary Plats: 
  
PRELIMINARY OF 
[NAME OF PROJECT] 
Total Number of Lots, and/or Phases 
Total Number of Acres 
Abstract Survey 
in the City of Keller, Tarrant County, Texas 
Current Zoning 
Name, Address, Telephone Number of the Applicant 
Name, Address, Telephone Number of Contact Person of the Developer 
Name, Address, Telephone Number of the Plat Preparer 
Date of Preparation, Dates of Revisions 
 
Title Block for Minor or Major Subdivision Final Plats: 
FINAL PLAT OF 
[NAME OF PROJECT] 
Total Number of Lots, and/or Phases 
Total Number of Acres 
Abstract Survey 
in the City of Keller, Tarrant County, Texas 
Current Zoning 
Name, Address, Telephone Number of the Applicant 
Name, Address, Telephone Number of Contact Person of the Developer 
Name, Address, Telephone Number of the Plat Preparer 
Date of Preparation, Dates of Revisions 
 
Title Block for Replats: 
FINAL PLAT SHOWING 
[Legal Description of Replatted Lots] 
BEING A REPLAT OF 
[Legal Description of the Subdivision and Phase of Which the Replatted Area is a Part] 
in the City of Keller, Tarrant County, Texas 
Recording Information 
Total Number of Acres 
Current Zoning 
Name, Address, Telephone Number of the Applicant 
Name, Address, Telephone Number of Contact Person of the Developer 
Name, Address, Telephone Number of the Plat Preparer 
Date of Preparation, Dates of Revisions 
 
Title Block for Amended Plats: 
FINAL PLAT SHOWING 
[Legal Description of Replatted Lots] 
BEING AN AMENDED PLAT OF 
[Legal Description of the Subdivision and Phase of Which the Amended Area is a Part] 
in the City of Keller, Tarrant County, Texas 
Recording Information 
Total Number of Acres 
Current Zoning 
Name, Address, Telephone Number of the Applicant 
Name, Address, Telephone Number of Contact Person of the Developer 
Name, Address, Telephone Number of the Plat Preparer 
Date of Preparation, Dates of Revisions 
 
Title Block for Site Plans: 
SITE PLAN OF 
[NAME OF PROJECT] 
Address and/or Legal Description 
in the City of Keller, Tarrant County, Texas 
Total Number of Acres 
Current Zoning 
Name, Address, Telephone Number of the Applicant/Developer 
Name, Address, Telephone Number of the Site Plan Preparer 
Date of Preparation, Dates of Revisions 
  
Section 9.06 - Signature Blocks for Plats 
Preliminary Plats Approved by Planning and Zoning Commission: 
Preliminary Plat Approved by the City of Keller Planning and Zoning Commission for the Preparation of a Final Plat: 

___________ 
Chairman 	___________ 
Date 
___________ 
Secretary 	___________ 
Date 

 
Preliminary Plats Approved by City Council: 
Preliminary Plat Approved by the City of Keller Planning and Zoning Commission for the Preparation of a Final Plat: 

___________ 
Chairman 	___________ 
Date 
Preliminary Plat Approved by the City of Keller City Council for the Preparation of a Final Plat: 

___________ 
Mayor 	___________ 
Date 
___________ 
City Secretary 	___________ 
Date 

 
Minor Subdivision Final Plats Approved by Community Development Department: 
Approved by the City of Keller Community Development Department 

___________ 
Director 	___________ 
Date 
___________ 
Secretary 	___________ 
Date> 


Document # ___________ 	Date___________. 

 
Minor or Major Subdivision Final Plats Approved by Planning and Zoning Commission: 
Approved by the City of Keller Planning and Zoning Commission 

___________ 
Chairman 	___________ 
Date 
___________ 
Secretary 	___________ 
Date 

Document #___________ 	Date___________. 

 
Minor or Major Subdivision Final Plats Approved by City Council: 
Approved by the City of Keller Planning and Zoning Commission 
___________ 
Chairman 	___________ 
Date 

Approved by the City of Keller City Council 
___________ 
Mayor 	___________ 
Date 
___________ 
City Secretary 	___________ 
Date 

Document # ___________ 	Date___________. 

  
Section 9.07 - Recommended List for Required Landscape Areas 
The following is a list of plants and trees recommended for required landscape areas, including but not limited to, the City's public rights-of-way, commercial developments, residential screening walls, parking lot islands, and landscaped buffers. It includes lower water use plants when grouped according to water needs. This will reduce the amount of water utilized by the development. The plants and trees with the asterisks will require the least amount of water to maximize water reduction. 
Grasses (Turf) 
 Common Name 	  Botanical Name 
 Bermuda Grass 	  Cynodon dactylon 
 Blue Gramma 	  Bouteloua gracilis 
 Buffalo Grass* 	  Buchloe dactyloides 
 Zoysia Grass 	  Zoysia sp. 
 St. Augustine 	  Stenotaphrum secundatum 
	
Grasses (Ornamental) 
 Common Name 	  Botanical Name 
 Big Bluestem* 	  Andropogon geradii 
 Muhly Grass* 	  Muehlenbergia lindheimeri 
 Standard Fountain Grass* 	  Pennisetum alopecuroides 
 Hameln's Fountain Grass* 	  Pennisetum alopecuroides 'Hameln 
 Black Fountain Grass* 	  Pennisetum alopecuroides 'Moudry' 
 Pampas Grass* 	  Cortaderia selloana 
 Dwarf Pampas Grass* 	  Cortaderia selloana pumila 
 Sideoats gramma* 	  Boutelowa curtipendula 
 Maiden Grass* 	  Miscanthus sinensis 'Gracillimus' 
 Variegated Japanese Silver Grass* 	  Miscanthus sinensis 'Variegatus' 
 Zebra Grass* 	  Miscanthus sinensis 'Zebrinus' 
	
Groundcovers 
 Common Name 	  Botanical Name 
 Ajuga 	  Ajuga reptans 
 Asiatic Jasmine 	  Trachelospermum asiaticum 
 Avens, White* 	  Geum canadense 
 English Ivy 	  Hedera helix 
 Frog Fruit* 	  Phyla nodiflora 
 Ground Ivy* 	  Glechoma hederacea 
 Hardy Plumbago 	  Ceratostigma plumbaginoides 
 Horesherb* 	  Calyptocarpus vialis 
 Liriope 	  Liriope muscari 
 Monkey Grass* 	  Ophiopogon japonicus 
 Mountain Pea* 	  Leguminosae 
 Pigeonberry* 	  Rivina humilis 
 Purpleleaf Euonymous 	  Euonymous fortune 'Colotara' 
 Santolina* 	  Santolina sp. 
 Snake Herb* 	  Dyschoriste linearis 
 Trailing Juniper* 	  Juniperus sp. 
 Vinca 	  Vinca major 
 Wintercreeper Euonymous 	  Euonymous fortunei 
 Wood Violet* 	  Viola sp. 
	
Vines 
 Common Name 	  Botanical Name 
 Alerian Ivy 	  Hedera canariensis 
 Boston Ivy* 	  Parthenocissus tricuspidata 
 Carolina Jessamine 	  Gelsemium sempervirens 
 Clematis 	  Clematis sp. 
 Confederate Jasmine 	  Trachelospermum jasminoides 
 Coral Honeysuckle* 	  Lonicera sempervirens 
 Coralvine* 	  Antigonon leptopus 
 Crossvine* 	  Bignonia capreolata 
 English Ivy 	  Hedera helix 
 Fig Ivy 	  Ficus pumila (repens) 
 Trumpet Vine* 	  Campsis radicans 
 Lady Banks Rose* 	  Rosa banksia 
 Silverlace Vine 	  Polygonum aubertii 
 Virginia Creeper 	  Parthenocissus 
 Wisteria* 	  Wisteria sp. 
Small Shrubs (1 to 3 feet) 
 Common Name 	  Botanical Name 
 Coral Berry* 	  Symphoricarpos orbiculatus 
 Crimson Pygmy Barberry 	  Berberis thunbergii 'Crimson' 
 Dwarf Burford Holly 	  Ilex cornuta rotunda burfordii 
 Dwarf Chinese Holly* 	  Ilex cornuta rotunda 
 Dwarf Glossy Abelia 	  Abelia grandiflora 
 Dwarf Pittosporum* 	  Pittosporum tobira wheeleri 
 Dwarf Spirea 	  Spiraea spp. 
 Dwarf Yaupon Holly* 	  Ilex vomitoria nana 
 Hypericum 	  Hypericum patulum 
 Nandina: Harbour Dwarf*, Gulf Stream, nana* 	  Nandina sp. 
 Red Yucca* 	  Hesperaloe parvifolia 
 Sacahuista 	  Nolina texana 
	
	
Medium Shrubs (3 to 7 feet) 
 Common Name 	 Botanical Name 
 Agarita* 	  Berberis trifoliata 
 Aromatic Sumac* 	  Rhus aromatica 
 Red Barberry* 	  Berberis thunbergii atropurpurea 
 Bridal Wreath Spirea* 	  Spirea cantoniensis 
 China Rose 	  Rosa chinensis 
 Cleyera 	  Ternstroemia gymnanthera 
 Dwarf Burford Holly* 	  Ilex cornuta rotunda burfordii 
 Dwarf Burning Bush* 	  Euonymous alata 'Compacta' 
 Dwarf Crepe Myrtle* 	  Lagerstroemia indica 
 Dwarf Pomegranate 	  Punica granatum 
 Dwarf Wax Myrtle 	  Myrica pusilla 
 Dwarf Yaupon Holly* 	  Ilex Vomitoria 'Nana' 
 Edward Goucher Abelia 	  Abelia goucher 
 Elaeagnus* 	  Elaeagnus pungens 'Fruitlandii' or 'Ebbingei' 
 Elderberry 	  Sambucus canadensis 
 Flowering Quince* 	  Chaenomeles japonica 
 Forsythia* 	  Forsythia x intermedia 
 Glossy Abelia* 	  Abelia grandiflora 
 Grayleaf Cotoneaster 	  Cotoneaster glaucophylla 
 Indian Hawthorne 	  Rhapiolepsis indica 
 Italian Jasmin*e 	  Jasmine nudiflorum 
 Leatherleaf Mahonia* 	  Mahonia bealeii 
 Miniature Crepe Myrtle* 	  Lagerstroemia indica 
 Japanese Boxwood* 	  Buxus japonica 
 Juniper* 	  Juniperus sp. 
 Knockout Rose 	  Rosa 'Radcon' 
 Nandina compact* 	  Nandina domestica compacta 
 Oakleaf Hydrangea 	  Hydrangea quercifolia 
 Purple Japanese Barberry 	  Berberis thunbergii 'atropurpurea' 
 Rosemary* 	  Rosmarinus officinalis 
 Texas Sage* 	  Leucophyllum frutescens 
 Yucca* 	  Yucca sp. 
	
Large Shrubs (7 feet and taller) 
 Common Name 	 Botanical Name 
 Agarita* 	  Mahonia trifoliata 
 Althea 	  Hibiscus syriacus 
 American Beautyberry* 	  Callicarpa americana 
 Burford Holly 	 Ilex cornuta burfordii 
 Chinese Photinia* 	 Photinia serrulata 
 Chinese Horned Holly 	  Ilex cornuta 
 Dwarf Wax Myrtle* 	  Myrica pusilla 
 Eleagnus 	  Eleagnus fruitlandi 
 Forsythia 	  Forsythia intermedia spectabilis 
 Fraser Photinia 	  Photinia x fraseri 
 Glossy Abelia 	  Abelia grandiflora 
 Green Pittosporum 	  Pittosporum tobira 
 Italian Jasmine 	  Jasminum humile 
 Juniper* 	  Juniperus sp. 
 Nandina* 	  Nandina domestica 
 Nelly R, Stevens Holly 	  Ilex x. 'Nellie R. Stevens' 
 Pomegranate* 	  Punica granatum 
 Rose of Sharon* 	  Hibiscus syriacus 
 Texas Sage* 	  Leucophyllum sp. 
 Varigated Pittosporum* 	  Pittosporum tobira variegata 
 Winter Honeysuckle* 	  Lonicera fragrantissima 
 
* Low water use 
Perennials 
 Common Name 	 Botanical Name 
 Achillea (Common Yarrow) 	Achillea millefolium 
 African Daisy 	  Gazania 
 Aster* 	  Aster oblongifolius 
 Autumn Sage* 	  Salvia greggii 
 Baby Sun/Sunray Coreopsis* 	  Coreopsis grandiflora 
 Bearded Iris* 	  Iris xiphioides 
 Beebalm* 	  Monarda didyma 
 Black-eyed Susan* 	  Rudbekia hirta 
 Bluebonnet* 	  Lupinus texensis 
 Blue Plumbago 	  Plumbago auriculata 
 Butterfly Weed* 	 Asclepias tuberosa 
 Clasping Coneflower* 	 Rudbekia amplexicaulis 
 Daylily* 	 Hemerocallis sp. 
 Evening Primrose* 	 Oenothera triloba 
 Frogfruit* 	 Phyla incisa 
 Garden Canna* 	 Canna x generalis 
 Gayfeather* 	 Liatris sp. 
 Goldsturm Rudbeckia* 	 Rudbeckia x goldsturm 
 Hinkley's Columbine* 	 Aquilegia hinckleyana 
 Hummingbird Bush* 	 Anisachanthus wrightii 
 Indian Blanket* 	 Gaillardia sp. 
 Indian Paintbrush* 	 Costilleja indivisa 
 Lantana* 	 Lantana sp. 
 Mealy Cup Sage* 	 Salvia farinacea 
 Mexican Hat* 	 Ratibida columnarias 
 Mexican Sage* 	 Salvia leucantha 
 Moonbeam Coreopsis* 	 Coreopsis verticillata 
 Obedient Plant* 	 Physostegia virginiana 
 Pavonia* 	 Pavonia lasiopetala 
 Perennial Verbena* 	 Verbena sp. 
 Pink Rain Lilly 	  Rosmarinus officinalis 
 Plains Coreopsis* 	  Coreopsis tinctoria 
 Purple Coneflower* 	  Echinacea angustifolia 
 Rock Penstemon* 	  Penstemon baccharifolius 
 Rosemary* 	  Rosmarinus officinalis 
 Society Garlic* 	  Tulbaghia violacea 
 Sweet Violet* 	  Viola odorata 
 Texas Betony* 	  Stachys coccinea 
 Tickseed* 	  Coreopsis lanceolata 
 Turk's Cap* 	  Malvaviscus drummondi 
 White Rain Lily* 	  Zephyranthes candida 
 
* Low water use 
	Understory Trees 
	 Common Name 	 Botanical Name 
* 	 Birds of Paradise 	  Caesalpinia gilliesii 
* 	 Carolina Buckthorn 	  Rhamnus caroliniana 
* 	 Crepe Myrtle (tree form) 	  Lagerstroemia indica 
* 	 Desert Willow 	  Chilopsis linearis 
* 	 Eastern Red Cedar 	  Juniperus virginiana 
* 	 Eves Necklace 	  Sophora affinis 
* 	 Hollywood Juniper 	  Juniperus chinensis 'Torulosa' 
* 	 Japanese Black Pine 	  Pinus thunbergiana 
* 	 Juniper, Blue Point 	  Juniperus chinensis 'Blue Point' 
* 	 Juniper Wichita Blue 	  Juniperus scopulorum 'Wichita' 
* 	 Little Gem Magnolia 	  Magnolia grandiflora 'Little Gem' 
* 	 Mexican Buckeye 	  Ungnadia speciosa 
* 	 Mexican Plum 	  Prunis mexicana 
* 	 Possumhaw Holly 	  Ilex decidur 
* 	 Red Buckeye 	  Aesculus pavia 
* 	 Redbud 	  Cercis canadensis 
* 	 Rose of Sharon 	  Hibiscus syriacus 
* 	 Rusty Blackhaw Viburnum 	  Viburnum rufidulum 
* 	 Texas Buckeye 	  Aesculus arguta 
* 	 Texas Persimmon 	  Diospyros texana 
* 	 Vitex 	  Vitex agnus-castus 
* 	 Winter/Bush Honeysuckle 	  Lonicera fragrantissima 
* 	 Wax Myrtle 	  Myrica cerifera 
* 	 Yaupon Holly 	  Ilex vomitoria 
	Large Trees (above 35 feet) 
	   Common Name 	   Botanical Name 
* 	 Afghan (Eldarica) Pine 	  Pinus eldarica 
* 	 American Elm 	  Ulmus americana 
* 	 Arizona Cypress 	  Cupressus arizonica 
	 Bald Cypress 	  Taxodium distichum 
	 Black Walnut 	  Juglans nigra 
* 	  Buckeye, Texas 	  Aesculus arguta 
* 	 Oak (Bigelow, Bur, Chinquapin, Durrand, Lacey, Live, Shumard, Southern Live, Texas Red) 	  Quercus spp. 
* 	 Caddo Maple 	  Acer saccharum var. caddo 
* 	 Cedar Elm 	  Ulmus crassifolla 
* 	 Chinese Pistache 	  Pistachia chinensis 
	 Deodar Cedar 	  Cedrus deodora 
* 	  Eastern Red Cedar 	  Juniperus virginiana 
* 	 Lacebark Elm 	  Ulmus Parvifolia 
* 	 Pecan 	  Carya illinoiensis 
	 Red Cedar 	  Juniperus virginiana 
	 Southern Magnolia 	  Magnolia grandiflora 
* 	 Texas Ash 	  Fraxinus texensis 
* 	 Texas Hickory 	  Carya texana 
* 	 Thornless Honey Locust 	  Gleditsia triacanthos 
* 	 Western Soapberry 	  Sapindus drummondii 
	* Low or low-med water demand 
Taken from Texas A&M drought tolerant Smartscape (TM) list 
  
Section 9.08 - Sign Formulas 
USSC Formula for horizontal sign (perpendicular to traffic): 
1.  Speed limit on Main Street is 35 mph * 1.47 = 51.45 travel feet per second. 
2.  Viewer Reaction Time (VRT) is max 8 seconds (industry standard) given the 15' setbacks of this area. 
3.  Viewer Reaction Distance (VRD) is the travel feet per second multiplied by the VRT: 8 * 51.45 = 411.6 
4.  Legibility Index (LI) is based on illumination, font, colors, letter case (all caps vs. mix) and setback from viewer. For illustrative purposes of this case, we used internal, opaque illumination with a white letter color and blue background using Clarendon font. The resulting LI is 29. 
5.  The letter height is a ratio of the VRD to the LI: VRD/LI: 411.6/29 = 14.19 inch letter height. 
6.  Single Letter Area (SLA) is determined by squaring the letter height: 14.19 * 14.19 = 201.36 square inches, or 1.40 sq. ft.). 
7.  CA (Copy Area) is the area needed per SLA multiplied by the total number of letters: 1.40 * 9 = 12.6 sq. ft. 
8.  NSA (Negative Space Area) @ 60% of the sign area is determined by using the CA as 40% of the sign area and looking for the remainder (or multiplying by 1.5): 12.6 * 1.5 = 18.9 sq. ft. 
9.  Total Sign Area is a summation of the CA and the NSP: 12.6 + 18.9 = 31.5 sq. ft.  
Section 9.09 - Utility Companies Serving the City of Keller * 
Charter Communications 
4800 Blue Mound Road 
Fort Worth, TX 76106 
(817) 509-2225 
Southwestern Bell Telephone 
1116 Houston Street 
Fort Worth, TX 76102 
Residential Accts. 1-800-464-7928 
Commercial Accts. 1-800-499-7928 
Developers Contact: 
Linda Caram (817) 338-6520 
Tri-County Electric Cooperative, Inc. 
Northeast District Office 
4740 Keller Hicks Rd. 
Keller, TX 76248 
(817) 431-1541 
Oncor 
115 W. 7 th St. 
Fort Worth, TX 76112 
Area Manager (817) 215-6351 
New Construction 1-888-227-8045 
Verizon 
For Customer Service: 
Residential Accts. 1-800-483-4400 
Business Accts. 1-800-483-5400 
Developers Contact: 
Lynn Pierce (972) 256-0110 
OneSource Communications 
891 Keller Parkway, Suite 124 
Keller, TX 76248 
(817) 745-3000 
*Data listed above is subject to change. 
Utility Contact List for Easement Abandonments * 
Tri-County Electric Cooperative, Inc.: 
Scott D. BaumBach 
Manager, Northeast Division 
4740 Keller Hicks Rd. 
Keller TX 76248 
Ph: 817-431-1541 
FAX: 817-431-9680 
Oncor (Electric Deliver Company and TXU Gas): 
Curt Sharp 
Sr. Right of Way Agent 
Oncor Distribution Division 
115 W. 7 th Street, Suite 211 
P.O. Box 970, Suite 211 
Fort Worth, TX 76101 
Ph: 817-215-6262 
Charter Communications: 
Greg J. Piatt or: Phil Bope, Utility Coordinator, 817-509-6272 ext.3356 
Construction Supervisor 
Charter Communications 
8912 S. I-35 W. Suite C 
Fort Worth, TX 76140 
Ph: 817-509-6272 ext. 5063 
FAX: 817-551-9046 
Verizon: 
Chris Smith 
Supervisor—Network Engineering 
500 East John Carpenter Freeway 
TXG31E01 
Irving, TX 75062 
Ph: 972-413-7241 
FAX: 972-258-0081 
Southwestern Bell: 
Frank Huneycutt or Phillip Brinkley, Manager Engineer Design 
Manager-Engineering Ph: 817-338-6517 or 817-588-7640 
SBC Southwestern Bell 
Telephone Company 
13845 FAA Boulevard 
Fort Worth, TX 76155 
Ph: 972-647-1287 
*Data listed above is subject to change  
Section 9.10 - Plan Folding Procedures 
  
Section 9.11 - Keller CAD Standards Manual 
A.  CAD Plat Requirements. The City of Keller has established various Geodetic Control Points throughout the city. As stated in the CAD Survey Requirements, all survey information will have to commence with the City Benchmarks and/or Monuments. All plats require two (2) coordinate points (to be shown and labeled), one (1) of which has to be the point of beginning and the other at a point for corner. A note stating which two (2) City Benchmarks and/or Monuments were used as the source for the information will be needed (see example in this section). No plat will be accepted without all of the above-mentioned information. 
1.  Legal Descriptions: 
As stated in the plat submittal checklist, all legal descriptions and plat related information will be uppercase letter only. No lettering smaller than 80 leroy template or 8.00' on a 1"=100' will be accepted, unless otherwise noted. 
2.  Layers: 
Refer to the CAD Plat Layers Requirements in this section for a list of descriptions, color, etc. 
3.  Plat Plan View: 
See the example in this section of what a plat needs to look like. 
4.  Scales: 
All plats shall be drawn to a scale of 1"=100' or larger, unless otherwise noted. 
5.  Existing Text (Style and Size): 
The existing text style and size may be the same as the proposed, with the exception of the pen size and be placed in the PL-E-TEXT (Plat Layer Existing Text) Layer (see Plat Layer Requirements). 
6.  Proposed Text (Style and Size): 
a.  The following text style and size shall be used for all of the minimum finish floor elevations, and be placed in the PL-P-MFFE (Plat Layer Proposed Minimum Finished Floor Elevation) Layer. 
Style Name = L60 
Font File = Simplex.shx 
Height = 6.00 (1"=100') 
  =3.00 (1"=50') 
Width = 1.00 
Oblique Angle = 0 Degrees 
b.  The following text style and size shall be used for all of the property lot dimension callouts, and be placed in the PL-P-TEXT (Plat Layer Proposed Text) Layer. 
Text Style Name = L80 
Font File = Simplex.shx 
Height = 8.00 (1"=100') 
  = 4.00 (1"=50') 
Width = 1.00 
Oblique Angle = 0 Degrees 
c.  The following text style and size shall be used for all of the property drainage and utility easements, and be placed in the PL-P-DUE (Plat Layer Proposed Drainage & Utility Easement) Layer. 
Text Style Name = L80 
Font File = Simplex.shx 
Height = 8.00 (1"=100') 
  = 4.00 (1"=50') 
Width = 1.00 
Oblique Angle = 0 Degrees 
d.  The following text style and size shall be used for all of the property lot numbers and/or tract names, and be placed in the PL-P-LOT-T (Plat Layer Proposed Lot Text) Layer. 
Text Style Name = L100 
Font File = Simplex.shx 
Height = 10.00 (1"=100') 
  = 5.00 (1"=50') 
Width = 1.00 
Oblique Angle = 0 Degrees 
e.  The following text style and size shall be used for all of the property block numbers and be placed in the PL-P-Blk-T (Plat Layer Proposed Block Text) Layer. 
Text Style Name = L140 
Font File = Simplex.shx 
Height = 14.00 (1"=100') 
  = 7.00 (1"=50') 
Width = 1.00 
Oblique Angle = 0 Degrees 
f.  The following text style and size shall be used for all of the property street names, and be placed in the PL-P-ST-NAME (Plat Layer Proposed Street Name) Layer. 
Text Style Name = L80 
Font File = Simplex.shx 
Height = 8.00 (1"=100') 
  = 4.00 (1"=50') 
Width = 1.00 
Oblique Angle = 0 Degrees 
CAD PLAT LAYERS REQUIREMENTS 
DESCRIPTION 	NAME 	COLOR 	LINE TYPE 	PLOT PEN (COLOR-WIDTH) 
EXISTING 				
Plat Layer Existing Building Line 	PL-E-BL 	6 	HiddenX2 	7-0.005 
Plat Layer Existing Blocks 	PL-E-BLK 	6 	Cont. 	7-0.005 
Plat Layer Existing Center Line 	PL-E-CTR 	6 	Center2 	7-0.005 
Plat Layer Existing Drainage & Utility Esmt. 	PL-E-DUE 	6 	Hidden 	7-0.005 
Plat Layer Existing Floodplain 	PL-E-FLD-P 	162 	Dashdot 	7-0.014 
Plat Layer Existing Iron Rods 	PL-E-IR 	6 	Cont. 	7-0.005 
Plat Layer Existing Lots &/or Tracts 	PL-E-LOT 	6 	Cont. 	7-0.005 
Plat Layer Existing Text 	PL-E-TEXT 	6 	Cont. 	7-0.005 
Plat Layer Existing Street Names 	PL-E-ST-NAME 	2 	Cont. 	7-0.010 
Plat Layer Existing Survey Abstract 	PL-E-S-ABST 	2 	Phantom 	7-0.010 
PROPOSED 				
Plat Layer Proposed Building Line (Set Back) 	PL-P-BL 	2 	HiddenX2 	7-0.010 
Plat Layer Proposed Block 	PL-P-BLK 	7 	Cont. 	7-0.016 
Plat Layer Proposed Block Text 	PL-P-BLK-T 	7 	Cont. 	7-0.016 
Plat Layer Proposed Center Line 	PL-P-CTR 	2 	Center2 	7-0.010 
Plat Layer Proposed City Limit Line 	PL-P-CITY 	2 	Dash2 	7-0.010 
Plat Layer Proposed Dimension Line 	PL-P-DIM 	2 	Cont. 	7-0.010 
Plat Layer Proposed Drainage & Utility Esmt. 	PL-P-DUE 	2 	Hidden 	7-0.010 
Plat Layer Proposed Flood Plain 	PL-P-FLD-P 	163 	Dashdot 	7-0.020 
Plat Proposed General Text (Legal Description) 	PL-P-GEN-T 	2 	Cont. 	7-0.010 
Plat Layer Proposed Iron Rods 	PL-P-IR 	2 	Cont. 	7-0.010 
Plat Layer Proposed Lots &/or Tracts 	PL-P-LOT 	2 	Cont. 	7-0.010 
Plat Layer Proposed Lot Text 	PL-P-LOT-T 	2 	Cont. 	7-0.010 
Plat Proposed Minimum Finish Floor Elevation 	PL-P-MFFE 	6 	Cont. 	7-0.005 
Plat Layer Proposed Plat Limits 	PL-P-PLAT-L 	94 	Cont. 	7-0.026 
Plat Layer Proposed Street Name 	PL-P-ST-NAME 	7 	Cont. 	7-0.016 
Plat Layer Proposed Text 	PL-P-TEXT 	6 	Cont. 	7-0.005 
 
B.  CAD Construction Plan Requirements. The City of Keller has established various Geodetic Control Points throughout the city. As stated in the CAD Survey Requirements, all survey information will have to commence with the City Benchmarks and/or Monuments. All construction plans require two (2) coordinate points (to be shown and labeled), along with a note stating which two (2) City Benchmarks and/or Monuments were used as the source for the information (see CAD Plat Requirements for an example). 
1.  CAD Construction Plan Layers Requirements: 
See existing, proposed, and profile layer list, for: description, name, color, line type, etc. 
2.  Construction Plan Sample: 
See example of what plans need to look like (water, sewer, storm, etc.). 
3.  Scales: 
All Construction Plans shall be drawn to the scale shown below, unless otherwise noted. 
a.  Plan Views: 1" = 20' or 1" = 40' 
b.  Profiles: 1" = 2' or 1" = 4' 
4.  Existing Text (Style and Size): 
The following text style and size shall be used for all the existing text and be placed in the E-TEXT (Existing Text) Layer. 
Text Style Name = L80 
Font File = Simplex.shx 
Height = 1.60 (1" = 20') 
  = 3.20 (1" = 40') 
Width = 1.00 
Oblique Angle = 0 Degrees 
5.  Proposed Text (Style and Size): 
a.  The following text style and size shall be used for all proposed design call-outs, remove & replace notes, etc., and be placed in the P-TEXT (Proposed Text) Layer. 
Text Style Name = L100 
Font File = Simplex.shx 
Height = 2.00 (1" = 20') 
  = 4.00 (1" = 40') 
Width = 1.00 
Oblique Angle = 0 Degrees 
b.  Use the following text style and size for the proposed main line call-outs (see Plan View utility examples), and be placed in the P-TEXT-L (Proposed Text Large) Layer. 
Text Style Name = L140 
Font File = Simplex.shx 
Height = 2.80 (1" = 20') 
  = 5.60 (1" = 40') 
Width = 1.00 
Oblique Angle = 0 Degrees 
6.  Street Name Text (Style and Size): 
a.  The following text style and size shall be used for all Street Names and be placed in the STREET-N (Street Name) Layer. 
Text Style Name = L200 
Font File = Simplex.shx 
Height = 4.00 (1" = 20') 
  = 8.00 (1" = 40') 
Width = 1.00 
Oblique Angle = 0 Degrees 
7.  Street Address and Property Owners Name Text (Style and Size): 
a.  The following text style and size shall be used for all Street Addresses and Property Owners and be placed in the ADD-PO (Addresses and/or Property Owners) Layer. 
Text Style Name = L100 
Font File = Simplex.shx 
Height = 2.00 (1" = 20') 
  = 4.00 (1" = 40') 
Width = 1.00 
Oblique Angle = 0 Degrees 
8.  Lot Numbers Text (Style and Size): 
a.  The following text style and size shall be used for all Lot and/or Tract numbers and be placed in the LOT-T (Lot Text) Layer. 
Text Style Name = L120 
Font File = Simplex.shx 
Height = 2.40 (1" = 20') 
  = 4.80 (1" = 40') 
Width = 1.00 
Oblique Angle = 0 Degrees 
9.  Block Numbers Text (Style and Size): 
a.  The following text style and size shall be used for all Block Numbers and be placed in the BLK-T (Block Text) Layer. 
Text Style Name = L100 
Font File = Simplex.shx 
Height = 2.00 (1" = 20') 
  = 4.00 (1" = 40') 
Width = 1.00 
Oblique Angle = 0 Degrees 
10.  Subdivision Name Text (Style and Size: 
a.  The following text style and size shall be used for all Subdivision Name and be placed in the SUBD-N (Subdivision Name) Layer. 
Text Style Name = L175 
Font File = Simplex.shx 
Height = 3.50 (1" = 20') 
  = 7.00 (1" = 40') 
Width = 1.00 
Oblique Angle = 0 Degrees 
CAD CONSTRUCTION PLAN REQUIREMENTS
EXISTING LAYERS 
Description 	Name 	Color 	Line Type 	Plot Pen (color-width) 
Addresses and Property Owners 	ADD-PO 	2 	Cont. 	7-0.010 
Block Numbers Text 	BLK-T 	2 	Cont. 	7-0.010 
Lot &/or Tract Numbers Text 	LOT-T 	2 	Cont. 	7-0.010 
Street Name Text 	STREET-N 	1 	Cont. 	7-0.026 
Subdivision Name 	SUBD-N 	1 	Cont. 	7-0.026 
Existing Control Points, Bench Marks & Monuments 	E-CP-BM 	2 	Cont. 	7-0.010 
Existing Back of Curb 	E-B-CURB 	2 	Cont. 	7-0.010 
Existing Face of Curb 	E-F-CURB 	6 	Cont. 	7-0.005 
Existing Building 	E-BLDG 	7 	Cont. 	7-0.016 
Existing Channels 	E-CHAN 	2 	Cont 	7-0.010 
Existing Drainage & Utility Easement 	E-DUE 	6 	Hidden 	7-0.005 
Existing Electric: OH,UG,PP,Cable TV,MH's,Pull-Boxes 	E-ELEC 	2 	Hidden2 	7-0.010 
Existing Easement 	E-ESMT 	6 	Hidden 	7-0.005 
Existing Features 	E-FEAT 	2 	Cont 	7-0.010 
Existing Fence 	E-FENCE 	2 	Cont 	7-0.010 
Existing Floodplain 	E-FLD-P 	162 	Dashdot 	7-0.035 
Existing Flow Line 	E-FL 	2 	Flowline 	7-0.010 
Existing Gas Lines, Valves, Meters 	E-GAS 	2 	Gas_Line 	7-0.010 
Existing Hatch 	E-HATCH 	6 	Cont. 	7-0.005 
Existing IR's & BM's Found 	E-IR-F 	2 	Cont. 	7-0.010 
Existing Lot and/or Tract 	E-LOT 	2 	Cont. 	7-0.010 
Existing Miscellaneous Features 	E-MISC 	2 	Cont. 	7-0.010 
Existing Asphalt, Concrete, Pavement Driveways 	E-PVMT 	2 	Cont. 	7-0.010 
Existing Right-of-Way 	E-ROW 	7 	Phantom2 	7-0.016 
Existing Storm Drainage System 	E-SD 	2 	Dashed2 * 	7-0.010 
Existing Sanitary Sewer System 	E-SS 	2 	Dashed 	7-0.010 
Existing Survey Abstract Line 	E-S-ABST 	1 	Phantom 	7-0.026 
Existing Telephone: OH,UG,MH, Risers 	E-TEL 	2 	Dashdot 	7-0.010 
Existing Text 	E-TEXT 	2 	Cont. 	7-0.010 
Existing Trees 	E-TREE 	2 	Cont. 	7-0.010 
Existing Water Lines, FH,Valves,Meters,Vaults,MH 	E-W 	2 	Cont. 	7-0.010 
 
* Storm Drain Lines shall be shown to width of pipe. 
CAD CONSTRUCTION PLAN REQUIREMENTS PROPOSED LAYERS 
Description 	Name 	Color 	Line Type 	Plot Pen (color-width) 
Addresses and Property Owners 	ADD-PO 	2 	Cont. 	7-0.010 
Lot &/or Tract Numbers Text 	LOT-T 	2 	Cont. 	7-0.010 
Station Labeling 	STA-LBL 	2 	Cont. 	7-0.010 
Street Name Text 	STREET-N 	1 	Cont. 	7-0.026 
Subdivision Name 	SUBD-N 	1 	Cont. 	7-0.026 
Proposed Building Line (Set Back) 	P-BL 	2 	HiddenX2 	7-0.010 
Proposed Block 	P-BLK 	2 	Cont. 	7-0.010 
Proposed Block Text 	P-BLK-T 	2 	Cont. 	7-0.010 
Proposed Control Point, Bench Marks & Monuments 	P-CP-BM 	2 	Cont. 	7-0.010 
Proposed Channels 	P-CHAN 	7 	Cont 	7-0.016 
Proposed Channel Easement 	P-CHAN-E 	7 	Dashdot2 	7-0.016 
Proposed Center Line 	P-CTR 	2 	Center 2 	7-0.010 
Proposed Curb 	P-CURB 	3 	Cont. 	7-0.035 
Proposed Dimension Line 	P-DIM 	2 	Cont 	7-0.010 
Proposed Drainage & Utility Easement 	P-DUE 	2 	Hidden 	7-0.010 
Proposed Easement 	P-ESMT 	2 	Hidden 	7-0.010 
Proposed Minimum Finish Floor Elevations 	P-FFE 	6 	Cont. 	7-0.005 
Proposed Face of Curb 	P-F-CURB 	2 	Cont. 	7-0.010 
Proposed Flood Plain 	P-FLD-P 	163 	Dashdot 	7-0.020 
Proposed Hatch Patterns 	P-HATCH 	6 or 2 	Cont. 	7-0.005 or 7-0.010 
Proposed Iron Rods 	P-IR 	2 	Cont. 	7-0.010 
Proposed Lot &/or Tract 	P-LOT 	2 	Cont. 	7-0.010 
Proposed Plat Limits 	P-PLAT-L 	94 	Cont. 	7-0.026 
Proposed Asphalt, Concrete, Pavement Driveways, C&G, Walks, etc. 	P-PVMT 	2 	Cont. 	7-0.010 
Proposed Right-of-Way 	P-ROW 	1 	Phantom2 	7-0.026 
Proposed Storm Drain Pipe 	P-SD 	1 	Cont. * 	7-0.026 
Proposed Storm Drain Center Line 	P-SD-CTR 	2 	Center2 	7-0.010 
Proposed Storm Drain Lat. 	P-SD-L 	7 	Cont. * 	7-0.016 
Proposed Sanitary Sewer Line & MH's 	P-SS 	3 	Dashed 	7-0.035 
Proposed Sanitary Sewer C.O.'s & Plugs 	P-SS-F 	7 	Dashed 	7-0.016 
Proposed Text for all Design Call Outs 	P-TEXT 	2 	Cont. 	7-0.010 
Proposed Large Text for Main Line Call Out 	P-TEXT-L 	7 	Cont. 	7-0.016 
Proposed Text Box for Sanitary Sewer Callous 	P-TEXT-B-SS 	2 	Dashed2 	7-0.010 
Proposed Text Box for Storm Drain Callous 	P-TEXT-B-SD 	2 	Border 	7-0.010 
Proposed Text Box for Water Callous 	P-TEXT-B-W 	2 	Cont. 	7-0.010 
Proposed Water Line 	P-W 	3 	Cont. 	7-0.035 
Proposed Water Fittings 	P-W-F 	7 	Cont. 	7-0.016 
 
* Storm Drain Lines shall be shown to width of pipe. 
CAD CONSTRUCTION PLAN REQUIREMENTS PROFILE LAYERS 
Description 	Name 	Color 	Line Type 	Plot Pen (color-width) 
Profile Existing Ground Right 	PF-EG-R 	2 	Divide2 	7-0.010 
Profile Existing Ground Left 	PF-EG-L 	2 	Hidden 	7-0.010 
Profile Existing Ground @ C/L 	PF-EG-CL 	2 	Cent 	7-0.010 
Profile Proposed Top of Curb Left & Right or Right 	PF-P-TC-LRR 	1 	Cont. 	7-0.026 
Profile Proposed Top of Curb Left 	PF-P-TC-L 	1 	Dashed 	7-0.026 
Profile Proposed Water 	PF-P-W 	5 	Cont 	7-0.021 
Profile Proposed Sanitary Sewer 	PF-P-SS 	5 	Cont. 	7-0.021 
Profile Proposed Storm Drain 	PF-P-SD 	3 	Cont. 	7-0.035 
  
Section 9.12 - City of Keller Organization Chart 
  
Section 9.13 - Development Process Schedule 
DEVELOPMENT SCHEDULE FOR SITE PLAN, REZONING, SUP, AND UDC VARIANCE APPLICATIONS 
A 	B 	C 	D 	E 	F 	G 
Submit
Complete
Application
by Noon 	1st Submittal Staff Comments Provided 	Resubmittal Date 	2nd Submittal Staff Comments Provided 	Project is Scheduled for Planning and Zoning Commission Meeting 	Planning and Zoning Commission Meeting Dates 	City Council Meeting Dates 
9/29/2017 	10/13/2017 	10/20/2017 	10/27/2017 	11/03/2017 	11/13/2017 	12/05/2017 
10/13/2017 	10/27/2017 	11/03/2017 	11/10/2017 	11/17/2017 	**11/27/2017 	12/19/2017 
10/27/2017 	11/10/2017 	11/17/2017 	11/22/2017 	12/01/2017 	12/11/2017 	1/02/2018 
11/10/2017 	11/24/2017 	12/01/2017 	12/08/2017 	12/15/2017 	1/08/2018 	2/06/2018 
11/24/2017 	12/08/2017 	12/15/2017 	12/22/2017 	12/29/2017 	1/08/2018 	2/06/2018 
12/08/2017 	12/22/2017 	12/29/2017 	1/05/2018 	1/12/2018 	1/22/2018 	2/20/2018 
12/22/2017 	1/05/2018 	1/12/2018 	1/19/2018 	2/02/2018 	2/12/2018 	3/06/2018 
1/05/2018 	1/19/2018 	1/26/2018 	2/02/2018 	2/16/2018 	2/26/2018 	3/20/2018 
1/19/2018 	2/02/2018 	2/09/2018 	2/16/2018 	3/02/2018 	3/12/2018 	4/03/2018 
2/02/2018 	2/16/2018 	2/23/2018 	3/02/2018 	3/16/2018 	3/26/2018 	4/17/2018 
2/16/2018 	3/02/2018 	3/09/2018 	3/16/2018 	3/30/2018 	4/09/2018 	5/01/2018 
3/02/2018 	3/16/2018 	3/23/2018 	3/30/2018 	4/13/2018 	4/23/2018 	5/15/2018 
3/16/2018 	3/30/2018 	4/06/2018 	4/13/2018 	5/04/2018 	5/14/2018 	6/05/2018 
3/30/2018 	4/13/2018 	4/20/2018 	4/27/2018 	5/18/2018 	5/28/2018 	6/19/2018 
4/13/2018 	4/27/2018 	5/04/2018 	5/11/2018 	6/01/2018 	6/11/2018 	7/03/2018 
4/27/2018 	5/11/2018 	5/18/2018 	5/25/2018 	6/15/2018 	6/25/2018 	7/17/2018 
5/11/2018 	5/25/2018 	6/01/2018 	6/08/2018 	6/29/2018 	7/09/2018 	8/07/2018 
5/25/2018 	6/08/2018 	6/15/2018 	6/22/2018 	7/13/2018 	7/23/2018 	8/21/2018 
6/08/2018 	6/22/2018 	6/29/2018 	7/06/2018 	8/03/2018 	8/13/2018 	9/04/2018 
6/22/2018 	7/06/2018 	7/13/2018 	7/20/2018 	8/17/2018 	8/27/2018 	9/18/2018 
7/06/2018 	7/20/2018 	7/27/2018 	8/03/2018 	8/31/2018 	9/10/2018 	10/02/2018 
7/20/2018 	8/03/2018 	8/10/2018 	8/17/2018 	9/14/2018 	9/24/2018 	10/16/2018 
8/03/2018 	8/17/2018 	8/24/2018 	8/31/2018 	9/28/2018 	10/08/2018 	11/06/2018 
8/17/2018 	8/31/2018 	9/07/2018 	9/14/2018 	10/12/2018 	10/22/2018 	11/20/2018 
8/31/2018 	9/14/2018 	9/21/2018 	9/28/2018 	11/02/2018 	11/12/2018 	12/04/2018 
9/14/2018 	9/28/2018 	10/05/2018 	10/12/2018 	11/16/2018 	11/26/2018 	12/18/2018 
9/28/2018 	10/12/2018 	10/19/2018 	10/26/2018 	11/30/2018 	12/10/2018 	1/07/2019 
10/12/2018 	10/26/2018 	11/02/2018 	11/09/2018 	12/14/2018 	1/14/2019 	2/04/2019 
10/26/2018 	11/09/2018 	11/16/2018 	11/23/2018 	1/04/2019 	1/14/2019 	2/04/2019 
11/09/2018 	11/23/2018 	11/30/2018 	12/07/2018 	1/18/2019 	1/28/2019 	2/18/2019 
11/23/2018 	12/07/2018 	12/14/2018 	12/21/2018 	2/01/2019 	2/11/2019 	3/04/2019 
 
DEVELOPMENT PROCESS DEADLINES AND MEETINGS FOR PLATS 
A 	B 	C 	D 	E 
Submit Complete Application by Noon 	Submit Revisions Based on Staff Comment by Noon 	Project is Scheduled for Planning and Zoning Commission Meeting 	Planning and Zoning Commission Meeting Dates 	City Council Meeting Dates (If Applicable) 
*9/25/2017 	10/09/2017 	10/13/2017 	10/23/2017 	11/21/2017 
10/13/2017 	10/27/2017 	11/03/2017 	11/13/2017 	12/05/2017 
10/27/2017 	11/10/2017 	11/17/2017 	**11/27/2017 	12/19/2017 
*11/13/2017 	11/27/2017 	12/01/2017 	12/11/2017 	1/02/2018 
12/08/2017 	12/22/2017 	12/29/2017 	1/08/2018 	2/06/2018 
12/22/2017 	1/05/2018 	1/12/2018 	1/22/2018 	2/20/2018 
1/12/2018 	1/26/2018 	2/02/2018 	2/12/2018 	3/06/2018 
1/26/2018 	2/09/2018 	2/16/2018 	2/26/2018 	3/20/2018 
*2/12/2018 	2/23/2018 	3/02/2018 	3/12/2018 	4/03/2018 
*2/26/2018 	3/09/2018 	3/16/2018 	3/26/2018 	4/17/2018 
3/09/2018 	3/23/2018 	3/30/2018 	4/09/2018 	5/01/2018 
3/23/2018 	4/06/2018 	4/13/2018 	4/23/2018 	5/15/2018 
*4/16/2018 	4/27/2018 	5/04/2018 	5/14/2018 	6/05/2018 
*4/30/2018 	5/11/2018 	5/18/2018 	5/28/2018 	6/19/2018 
5/11/2018 	5/25/2018 	6/01/2018 	6/11/2018 	7/03/2018 
5/25/2018 	6/08/2018 	6/15/2018 	6/25/2018 	7/17/2018 
*6/11/2018 	6/22/2018 	6/29/2018 	7/09/2018 	8/07/2018 
*6/25/2018 	7/06/2018 	7/13/2018 	7/23/2018 	8/21/2018 
7/13/2018 	7/27/2018 	8/03/2018 	8/13/2018 	9/04/2018 
7/27/2018 	8/07/2018 	8/17/2018 	8/27/2018 	9/18/2018 
8/10/2018 	8/24/2018 	8/31/2018 	9/10/2018 	10/02/2018 
8/24/2018 	9/07/2018 	9/14/2018 	9/24/2018 	10/16/2018 
*9/10/2018 	9/21/2018 	9/28/2018 	10/08/2018 	11/06/2018 
*9/24/2018 	10/05/2018 	10/12/2018 	10/22/2018 	11/20/2018 
10/12/2018 	10/26/2018 	11/02/2018 	11/12/2018 	12/04/2018 
10/26/2018 	11/09/2018 	11/16/2018 	11/26/2018 	12/18/2018 
*11/12/2018 	11/23/2018 	11/30/2018 	12/10/2018 	1/07/2019 
12/14/2018 	12/28/2018 	1/04/2019 	1/14/2018 	2/04/2019 
12/28/2018 	1/11/2019 	1/18/2019 	1/28/2018 	2/18/2019 
1/11/2019 	1/25/2019 	2/01/2019 	2/11/2019 	3/04/2019 
 
Plat applications will only be accepted on dates listed in column A. The deadline for accepting all other applications (Zoning Change, SUP, Site Plan, Appeal to Tree Board, etc.) will be on any Friday by noon. All applications will be scheduled for P&Z once all staff comments have been addressed within 90 days. 
*Monday Submittal 
**Meeting Date subject to change  
APPENDIX B - FRANCHISE REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Taxation, § 17-1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - CABLE TELEVISION REGULATIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Nonamendatory Ord. No. 717, §§ 1—19, adopted Nov. 2, 1994, has been included herein as a new App. B, Art. I at the discretion of the editor. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 1. - Title. 
The following regulations are hereby adopted and shall be known as the Cable TV Regulations for the City of Keller, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 717, § 1, 11-2-93)  
Sec. 2. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise apparent, the following definitions shall apply in this ordinance: 
(a)  Affiliated programmer. An affiliated programmer is a programmer with an ownership interest of five (5) percent or more including general partnership interests, direct ownership interest, and stock interests in a corporation where such stockholders are officers or directors or who directly or indirectly own five (5) percent or more of the outstanding stock, whether voting or nonvoting. Such interests include limited partnership interests of five (5) percent or greater. 
(b)  Basic service tier. The basic service tier shall, at a minimum, include all signals of domestic television broadcast stations provided to any subscriber (except a signal secondarily transmitted by satellite carrier beyond the local service area of such station, regardless of how such signal is ultimately received by the cable system), any public, educational, and governmental programming required by the franchise to be carried on the basic tier, and any additional video programming signals or service added to the basic tier by the cable operator. 
(c)  Cable operator. Cable operator means any person or group of persons (A) who provides cable service over a cable system within the city under a franchise issued by the city, and who directly or through one (1) or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system, or (B) who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system. 
(d)  Cable programming service. Cable programming service includes any video programming provided over a cable system, regardless of service tier, including installation or rental of equipment used for the receipt of such video programming, other than: 
(1)  Video programming carried on the basic service tier as defined in this section; 
(2)  Video programming offered on a pay-per-channel or pay-per-program basis; or 
(3)  A combination of multiple channels of pay-per-channel or pay-per-program video programming offered on a multiplexed or time-shifted basis so long as the combined service: 
(i)  Consists of commonly-identified video programming; and 
(ii)  Is not bundled with any regulated tier of service. 
(e)  City. The City of Keller, Texas. 
(f)  Commission. The Federal Communications Commission. 
(g)  Small system. A small system is a cable television system that serves fewer than one thousand (1,000) subscribers. The service area of a small system is determined by the number of subscribers that are served by a system's principal headend, including any other headends or microwave receive sites that are technically integrated to the system's principal headend. 
(Ord. No. 717, § 2, 11-2-93)  
Sec. 3. - Information to be provided by cable operator on monthly subscriber bills. 
A cable operator must provide the following information to subscribers on monthly bills: 
(a)  A statement substantially the same as the following: "The basic service tier rates and related equipment and installation charges are regulated by the city. If you have any questions or comments regarding these rates, you may call or write the City at P.O. Box 770, Keller, Texas 76244; phone (817) 431-1517"; and 
(b)  The FCC community unit identifier for the cable system. 
(Ord. No. 717, § 3, 11-2-93)  
Sec. 4. - Negative option billing. 
A cable operator shall not charge a subscriber for any service or equipment that the subscriber has not affirmatively requested by name. This provision, however, shall not preclude the addition or deletion of a specific program from a service offering, the addition or deletion of specific channels from an existing tier of service, or the restructuring or division of existing tiers of service that do not result in a fundamental change in the nature of an existing service or tier of service, provided that such change is otherwise consistent with applicable regulations. A subscriber's failure to refuse a cable operator's proposal to provide such service or equipment is not an affirmative request for service or equipment. A subscriber's affirmative request for service or equipment may be made orally or in writing. 
(Ord. No. 717, § 4, 11-2-93)  
Sec. 5. - Subscriber bill itemization. 
(a)  Cable operators may identify as a separate line item of each regular subscriber bill the following: 
(1)  The amount of the total bill assessed as a franchise fee. 
(2)  The amount of the total bill assessed to satisfy any requirements imposed on the cable operator by the franchise agreement to support public, education, or governmental channels or the use of such channels. 
(3)  The amount of any other fee, tax, assessment, or charge of any kind imposed by any governmental authority on the transaction between the operator and the subscriber. In order for a governmental fee or assessment to be separately identified under this section, it must be directly imposed by a governmental body on a transaction between a subscriber and an operator. 
(b)  The charge identified on the subscriber bill as the total charge for cable service should include all fees and costs itemized pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 717, § 5, 11-2-93)  
Sec. 6. - Rates for the basic service tier. 
(a)  Basic service tier rates. Basic service tier rates are subject to regulation by the city in order to assure that they are in compliance with the requirements of 47 U.S.C. § 543. Rates that are demonstrated, in accordance with this ordinance, not to exceed the "Initial Permitted Per Channel Charge" or the "Subsequent Permitted Per Channel Charge" as described below, or the equipment charges as specified in section 7, will be accepted as in compliance. The maximum monthly charge per subscriber for the basic service tier offered by a cable operator shall consist of a permitted per channel charge multiplied by the number of channels on the tier, plus a charge for franchise fees. The maximum monthly charges for the basic service tier shall not include any charges for equipment or installations. Charges for equipment and installations are to be calculated separately pursuant to section 7 of this ordinance. 
(b)  Initial permitted per channel charge. 
(1)  For the purposes of this section, the initial date of regulation for the basic service tier shall be the date on which the city gives written notice to the cable operator that (A) the city has been certified by the commission to regulate rates for the basic service tier and (B) this ordinance has been adopted by the city. 
(2)  For purposes of this section, rates "in effect on the initial date of regulation" or "in effect on September 30, 1992", shall be the rates charged to subscribers for service received on that respective date. 
(3)  The permitted per channel charge on the initial date of regulation shall be, at the election of the cable operator, either: 
(i)  The charge determined pursuant to a cost-of-service proceeding; or 
(ii)  The charge specified in subparagraphs (A), (B), or (C) of this paragraph, as applicable; 
(A)  If the operator's per channel charge for the basic service tier and equipment in effect on the date of initial regulation is equal to or below the benchmark per channel charge, as adjusted forward for inflation from September 30, 1992, to the date of initial regulation, then the permitted per channel charge shall be the per channel charge in effect on the date of initial regulation, adjusted for equipment. 
(B)  If: (1) The operators per channel charge for the basic service tier and equipment in effect on the date of initial regulation is above the benchmark per channel charge, as adjusted forward for inflation from September 30, 1992, until the initial date of regulation, and: 
(2) The operator's per channel charge for the basic service tier and equipment in effect on September 30, 1992, was above the benchmark per channel charge, then the permitted per channel charge is nine-tenths (0.9) of the per channel charge in effect on September 30, 1992, but no lower than the benchmark per channel charge, additionally adjusted for inflation from September 30, 1992, to the initial date of regulation, for equipment, and for any changes in the number of channels offered on the basic service tiers. 
(C)  If: (1) The operator's per channel charge for the basic service tier and equipment in effect on the date of initial regulation is above the benchmark per channel charge, as adjusted forward for inflation from September 30, 1992, until the initial date of regulation, and: 
(2) The operator's per channel charge for the basic service tier and equipment in effect on September 30, 1992, was below the benchmark per channel charge, then the permitted per channel charge is the benchmark rate per channel adjusted for inflation from September 30, 1992, to the initial date of regulation, for equipment, and for any changes in the number of channels offered on the basic service tier. 
(c)  Subsequent permitted per channel charge. After the initial date of regulation, the permitted channel charge for the basic service tier shall be, at the election of the cable operator, either: 
(1)  A per channel rate determined pursuant to a cost-of-service showing, or: 
(2)  The prior permitted per channel charge previously approved by the city, adjusted for inflation and external costs in accordance with the price cap requirements set forth in paragraph (d) of this section. 
(d)  Price cap requirements 
(1)  Inflation adjustments. Permitted per channel charges for the basic service tier may be adjusted periodically on account of inflation. Adjustments to permitted per channel charges on account of inflation shall be based on changes in the Gross National Product Price Index ("GNP-PI") published by the Bureau of Economic Analysis of the United States Department of Commerce. 
(2)  External costs. Permitted per channel charges for the basic service tier may also be adjusted for changes in external costs measured on a per channel per subscriber basis. To the extent external cost increases are greater or less than the GNP-PI for the relevant period, the per channel charge will be adjusted accordingly. Per channel charges may not be increased if external costs other than franchise fees increase at a rate less than inflation. Permitted per channel charges also shall be decreased on account of external costs to the extent such costs decrease from previous levels. 
(i)  Categories. External costs shall consist of costs in the following categories: 
(A)  State and local taxes applicable to provision of cable television service; 
(B)  Franchise fees; 
(C)  Costs of complying with franchise requirements, including costs of providing public, educational, and governmental access channels as required by the city; 
(D)  Retransmission consent fees; and 
(E)  Programming costs. 
(ii)  The permitted per channel charge for the basic service tier shall be adjusted on account of programming costs and retransmission consent fees only for programming or broadcast signals offered on that tier. 
(iii)  The permitted per channel charge shall not be adjusted for costs of retransmission consent fees or charges in those fees incurred prior to October 6, 1994. 
(iv)  The starting date for adjustments on account of external costs for the basic service tier shall be the initial date of regulation or one hundred eighty (180) days from September 1, 1993, if the initial date of regulation occurs on or after 180 days from September 1, 1993. 
(v)  Changes in franchise fees shall not result in an adjustment to permitted per channel charges, but rather shall be calculated separately as part of the maximum monthly charge per subscriber for the basic service tier. 
(vi)  Adjustments to permitted per channel charges on account of increases in costs of programming obtained from affiliated programmers shall be the lesser of actual increases or the previous permitted rate level increased by the amount of inflation. 
(vii)  Adjustments to permitted per channel charges on account of increases in costs of programming shall be further adjusted to reflect any revenues received by the operator from the programmer. 
(Ord. No. 717, § 6, 11-2-93)  
Sec. 7. - Rates for equipment and installation used to receive the basic service tier. 
(a)  Scope. The equipment regulated under this section consists of all equipment in a subscriber's location that is used to receive the basic service tier, regardless of whether such equipment is additionally used to receive other tiers of regulated programming service and/or unregulated service. Such equipment shall include, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Converter boxes; 
(2)  Remote control units; 
(3)  Reconnections for additional television receivers; and 
(4)  Other cable home wiring. 
Subscriber charges for such equipment shall not exceed charges based on actual costs in accordance with the requirements set forth below. 
(b)  Unbundling. A cable operator shall establish rates for remote control units, converter boxes, other customer equipment, installation, and additional connections separate from rates for basic service tier. In addition, the rates for such equipment and installations shall be unbundled one from the other. 
(c)  Equipment basket. A cable operator shall establish an equipment basket, which will include all costs associated with providing customer equipment and installation under this section. Equipment basket costs shall be limited to the direct and indirect material and labor costs or providing, leasing, installing, repairing, and servicing customer equipment, as determined in accordance with the cost accounting and cost allocation requirements of section 8. The equipment basket shall not include general administrative overhead including general marketing expenses. The equipment basket may include a reasonable profit. 
(d)  Hourly service charge. A cable operator shall establish charges for equipment and installation using the hourly service charge ("HSC") methodology. The HSC shall equal the operator's annual equipment basket costs, excluding the purchase cost of customer equipment, divided by the total person hours involved in installing, repairing, and servicing customer equipment during the same period. The purchase cost of customer equipment shall include the cable operator's invoice price plus all other costs incurred with respect to the equipment until the time it is provided to the customer. The HSC is calculated according to the following formula: 
HSC =  EB — CE / H 
Where, 
 EB 
= ;hg;annual equipment basket cost; 
 CI 
= ;hg;annual purchase cost of all customer equipment; and 
 H 
= ;hg;person hours involved in installing and repairing equipment per year. 
(e)  Installation charges. Installation charges shall be either: 
(1)  The HSC multiplied by the actual time spent on each individual installation; or 
(2)  The HSC multiplied by the average time spent on a specific type of installation. 
(f)  Remote charges. Monthly charges for rental of a remote control unit shall consist of the average annual unit purchase cost of the type of remote leased, including acquisition price and incidental costs such as sales tax, financing and storage up to the time it is provided to the customer, added to the product of the HSC times the average number of hours annually repairing or servicing a remote, divided by 12 to determine the monthly lease rate for a remote according to the following formula: 
Monthly Charge =  UCE+(HSC X HR) / 12 
Where, 
 HR 
= ;hg;average hours repair per year; and 
 UCE 
= ;hg;average annual unit cost of remote 
Separate charges shall be established for each significantly different type of remote control unit. 
(g)  Other equipment charges. The monthly charges for rental of converter boxes and other customer equipment shall be calculated in the same manner as for remote control units. Separate charges shall be established for each significantly different type of converter box and each significantly different type of other customer equipment. 
(h)  Additional connection charges. The costs of installation and monthly use of additional connections shall be recovered as charges associated with the installation and equipment cost categories, and at rate levels determined by the actual cost methodology presented in the foregoing paragraphs (e), (f), and (g) of this section. An operator may recover additional programming costs and the costs of signal boosters on the customers premises, if any, associated with the additional connection as a separate monthly unbundled charge for additional connections. 
(i)  Charges for equipment sold. A cable operator may sell customer premises equipment to a subscriber. The equipment price shall recover the operator's cost of the equipment, including costs associated with storing and preparing the equipment for sale up to the time it is sold to the customer, plus a reasonable profit. An operator may sell service contracts for the maintenance and repair of equipment sold to subscribers. The charge for a service contract shall be the HSC times the estimated average number of hours for maintenance and repair over the life of the equipment. 
(j)  Promotions. A cable operator may offer equipment or installation at charges below those determined under paragraphs (e) through (g) of this section, as long as those offerings are reasonable in scope in relation to the operator's overall offerings in the equipment basket and not unreasonably discriminatory. Operators may not recover the cost of a promotional offering by increasing charges for other equipment basket elements, or by increasing programming service rates above the maximum monthly charge per subscriber prescribed by this ordinance. As part of a general cost-of-service showing, an operator may include the cost of promotions in its general system overhead costs. 
(k)  Franchise fees. Equipment charges may include a properly allocated portion of franchise fees paid to the city. 
(Ord. No. 717, § 7, 11-2-93)  
Sec. 8. - Cost accounting and cost allocation requirements. 
(a)  Applicability. The requirements of this section are applicable for purposes of rate adjustments on account of external costs and for cost-of-service showings. 
(b)  Generally accepted accounting principles. Cable operators shall maintain their accounts in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, except as otherwise directed by the city. 
(c)  Accounts required. Cable operators shall maintain accounts in a manner that will enable identification of appropriate costs and application of the city's cost assignment and allocation procedures, to cost categories necessary for rate adjustments due to changes in external costs and for cost-of-service showings. Such categories shall be sufficiently detailed and supported to permit verification and audit against the company's accounting records. 
(d)  Accounting level. Except to the extent indicated below, cable operators shall aggregate expenses and revenues at either the franchise, system, regional, or company level in a manner consistent with practices of the operator as of April 3, 1992. However, in all events, cable operators shall identify at the franchise level their costs of franchise requirements, franchise fees, local taxes, and local programming. 
(e)  Cost allocation requirements. 
(1)  For purposes of establishing expenses at the franchise level, cable operators shall allocate expenses and revenues aggregated at higher levels to the franchise level based on the ratio of the total number of subscribers served at the franchise level to the total number of subscribers served at the higher level. 
(2)  Except to the extent indicated below, all categories of costs allocated to, or identified at, the franchise level shall be allocated to the basic service tier based on the ratio of channels in the basic tier to the total number of channels offered in the franchise area, including nonregulated and leased commercial access channels. These costs shall be allocated to each tier of cable programming services based on the ratio of channels in that tier to the total number of channels offered in the franchise area. 
(3)  Costs of programming and retransmission consent fees, however, shall be allocated only to the tier on which the programming or broadcast signal at issue is offered. 
(4)  Costs of franchise fees shall be allocated amount equipment and installations, program service tiers and subscribers in a manner that is most consistent with the methodology of assessment of franchise fees by the city. 
(5)  Costs of public, educational, and governmental access channels carried on the basic tier shall be directly assigned to the basic tier where possible. 
(f)  Common costs. Expenses which cannot be assigned to any single expense or service category shall be described as common costs. Common costs shall be allocated to expense categories as follows: 
(1)  Wherever possible, common costs are to be allocated to service cost categories based on direct analysis of the origin of the costs themselves. 
(2)  When direct analysis is not possible, common costs shall, if possible, be allocated to service cost categories based on an indirect, cost-causative linkage to other costs directly assigned or allocated to the service cost category. 
(3)  When neither direct nor indirect measures of cost allocation can be found, common costs shall be allocated to each service cost category based on the ratio of all costs directly assigned and attributed to a service cost category over total costs directly assignable and attributable. 
(g)  Unrelated expenses and revenues. Cable operators shall exclude from cost categories used to develop rates for the provision of basic service tier and equipment, any direct or indirect expenses and revenues not related to the provision of such services. Common costs of providing basic service tier and equipment, and unrelated activities shall be allocated between them in accordance with paragraph (f) of this section. 
(h)  Part-time channels. In situations where a single channel is divided on a part-time basis and is used to deliver service associated with different tiers or with pay per channel or pay per view service, a reasonable and documented allocation of that channel between services shall be required along with the associated revenues and costs. 
(Ord. No. 717, § 8, 11-2-93)  
Sec. 9. - Costs of franchise requirements. 
(a)  The costs of satisfying franchise requirements to support public, educational, and governmental channels shall consist of the sum of: 
(1)  All per channel costs for the number of channels used to meet franchise requirements for public, educational, and governmental channels; 
(2)  Any direct costs of meeting such franchise requirements; and 
(3)  A reasonable allocation of general and administrative overhead. 
(b)  The costs of satisfying any other requirement under the franchise shall consist of the direct and indirect costs, including a reasonable allocation of general and administrative overhead. 
(Ord. No. 717, § 9, 11-2-93)  
Sec. 10. - Charges for customer changes. 
(a)  This section shall govern charges for any changes in service tiers or equipment provided to the subscriber that are initiated at the request of a subscriber after initial service installation. 
(b)  The charge for customer changes in service tiers effected solely by coded entry on a computer terminal or by other similarly simple methods shall be a nominal amount, not exceeding actual costs, as defined in paragraph (c) of this section. 
(c)  The charge for customer changes in service tiers or equipment that involve more than coded entry on a computer or other similarly simple method shall be based on actual cost. The actual cost charge shall be either the HSC, as defined in section 6 of this ordinance, multiplied by the number of person hours needed to implement the change, or the HSC multiplied by the average number of person hours involved in implementing customer changes. 
(d)  A cable operator may establish a higher charge for changes effected solely by coded entry on a computer terminal or by other similarly simple methods, subject to approval by the city, for a subscriber changing service tiers more than two times in a twelve-month period, except for such changes ordered in response to a change in price or channel line-up. If a cable system adopts such an increased charge, the cable system must notify all subscribers in writing that they may be subject to such a charge for changing service tiers more than the specified number of times in any twelve-month period. 
(e)  Downgrade changes that are the same as, or lower than, upgrade charges are evidence of the reasonableness of such downgrade charges. 
(f)  For thirty (30) days after notice of retiering or rate increases, a customer may obtain changes in service tiers at no additional charge. 
(Ord. No. 717, § 10, 11-2-93)  
DIVISION 2. - REGULATORY PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 11. - Notification of proposed rate increase. 
(a)  A cable operator shall provide written notice to a subscriber of any increase in the price to be charged for the basic service tier or associated equipment at least thirty (30) days before any proposed increase is effective. The notice shall include a provision stating that protests to such prices may be filed with the City of Keller, P.O. Box 770, Keller, Texas 76244. The notice shall also include a statement that such protests must be filed with the city no later than thirty (30) days after the notice is received by the subscriber. 
(b)  In addition to the notice required in paragraph (a), the cable operator shall give the city a minimum of thirty (30) days advance written notification of any changes in rates for cable programming service or associated equipment. 
(Ord. No. 717, § 11, 11-2-93)  
Sec. 12. - Initiation of review of basic cable service and equipment rates. 
A cable operator shall file its schedule of rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment with the city within thirty (30) days of receiving written notification from the city that the city has been certified by the commission to regulate rates for the basic service tier, or by November 15, 1993, whichever is later. 
(Ord. No. 717, § 12, 11-2-93)  
Sec. 13. - City review of basic cable rates and equipment costs. 
(a)  After a cable operator has submitted to the city for review its existing rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment costs, or a proposed increase in these rates (including increases in the baseline channel charge that results from reductions in the number of channels in a tier), the existing rates will remain in effect or the proposed rates will become effective after thirty (30) days from the date of submission to the city. Provided, however, that the city may toll this thirty-day deadline for an additional time by issuing a brief written order as described in paragraph (d) within thirty (30) days of the rate submission explaining that it needs additional time to review the rates. The city may, at any time, require the cable operator to produce additional information, including proprietary information, that the city deems necessary in order to make a rate determination. If proprietary information is provided, the provisions of section 14 hereof will apply to such information. 
(b)  Upon receipt by the city, the cable operator's submittal shall be available for public inspection and copying. Comments on the submittal by interested persons may be submitted in writing or orally at a city council meeting held at any time during the initial thirty-day review period. Written comments shall be addressed to the city manager and must be received prior to the end of the thirty-day review period. 
(c)  If a cable operator submits a proposed rate increase for review that appears to exceed the presumptively reasonable level and does not include a cost-of-service showing to justify the rate, the city will permit the cable operator to cure this deficiency and submit a cost-of-service showing. 
(d)  If the city is unable to determine, based upon the material submitted by the cable operator, that the existing or proposed rates are within the permitted basic service tier charge or actual cost of equipment as defined in sections 6 and 7 hereof, or if a cable operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing pursuant to sections 8 and 15 hereof, seeking to justify a rate above the basic service tier charge as defined in sections 6 and 7 hereof, the city may toll the thirty-day deadline in paragraph (a) of this section to request and/or consider additional information or to consider the comments from interested parties as follows: 
(1)  For an additional ninety (90) days in cases not involving cost-of-service showings; or 
(2)  For an additional one hundred fifty (150) days in cases involving cost-of-service showings. 
The order tolling the effective date of the proposed rate shall explain why the city could not make the necessary determination, and it shall also provide the cable operator an opportunity to cure any deficiencies in its original filing. During the additional time periods provided in this paragraph, comments from interested persons may be submitted in writing, as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, or orally during at least one (1) city council meeting during the period of abatement. 
(e)  If the city has availed itself of the additional ninety (90) or one hundred fifty (150) days permitted in paragraph (c) of this section, and has taken no action within these additional time periods, then the proposed rates will go into effect at the end of the ninety (90) or one hundred fifty (150) days periods, or existing rates will remain in effect at such times, subject to refunds if the city subsequently issues a written decision disapproving any portion of such rates. Provided, however, that in order to order refunds, the city must have issued a brief written order to the cable operator by the end of the ninety- or one hundred fifty-day period permitted in paragraph (c) of this section directing the operator to keep an accurate account of all amounts received by reason of the rate in issue and on whose behalf such amounts were paid. 
(Ord. No. 717, § 13, 11-2-93)  
Sec. 14. - Proprietary information. 
(a)  If the city has required the cable operator to produce proprietary information under the provisions of this ordinance, the cable operator may submit therewith a request that such information not be made routinely available for public inspection. A copy of the request shall be attached to and shall cover all of the materials to which it applies and all copies of those materials. If feasible, the materials to which the request applies shall be physically separated from any materials to which the request does not apply. If this is not feasible, the portion of the materials to which the request applies shall be identified. 
(b)  Each such request shall contain a statement of the reasons for withholding the materials from inspection and of the facts upon which those reasons are based. If the request is that the materials be withheld from inspection for a limited period of time that period shall be specified. 
(c)  Casual requests which do not comply with the requirements of paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section will not be considered. 
(d)  Upon receipt of a request in compliance with paragraphs (a) and (b), the city will not grant routine public access to the materials. A letter to that effect will be placed in a public file in lieu of the materials withheld from public inspection. 
(e)  Provided, however, if a written request for the materials is received by the city pursuant to the Open Records Act, Chapter 552, Texas Government Code, the city will notify the person providing the materials of the request for the materials. If the person providing the materials requests the city to do so, the city will request an opinion from the Attorney General, pursuant to the Open Records Act, regarding the public availability of the materials. If the person providing the materials does not request the city to request an opinion from the Attorney General, the city may, at its option, either request such an opinion or provide the materials to the public. 
(f)  If the Attorney General issues an opinion or letter ruling requiring the city to make the materials available to the public, the materials will be made available for public inspection. 
(g)  If no request for confidentiality is submitted, the city assumes no obligation to consider the need for nondisclosure. 
(Ord. No. 717, § 14, 11-2-93)  
Sec. 15. - Burden of proof. 
(a)  A cable operator has the burden of proving that its existing or proposed rates for basic service and associated equipment comply with 47 U.S.C. § 543, and sections 6 and 7 hereof. 
(b)  For an existing or a proposed rate for basic service tier or associated equipment that is within the permitted tier charge and actual cost of equipment as set forth in sections 6 and 7, the cable operator must submit the appropriate FCC form to the city. 
(c)  For an existing or a proposed rate for basic service tier that exceeds the permitted tier charge as set forth in sections 6 and 7 hereof, the cable operator must submit to the city a cost-of-service showing to justify the proposed rates. The cost-of-service showing must be in conformance with Accounting and Cost Allocation Requirements as adopted and amended by the Commission for cable system operators. 
(Ord. No. 717, § 15, 11-2-93)  
Sec. 16. - Small systems. 
Option 1 
(a)  A small system, as defined in Section 2, may certify that the small system's initial rates for basic service and associated equipment comply with section 6 hereof. A certification by a small system under this section shall be filed with the city within thirty (30) days of receiving written notification from the city that the city has been certified by the commission to regulate rates for the basic service tier. The certification shall be in writing, shall be signed by the general manager of the system, and shall be verified. 
(b)  Such certification shall be subject to verification by the city on its own motion or upon complaint by a subscriber. The city may request additional information from the operator in order to verify the certification. In the event proprietary information is requested by the city, the provisions of section 14 hereof shall control the availability of such information to the public. 
(c)  As used in this section, "initial rates" shall mean those rates charged by the small system operator on the date on which the city gives written notice to the cable operator that (A) the city has been certified by the commission to regulate rates for the basic service tier and (B) this ordinance has been adopted by the city. 
(d)  If the city determines that the small system's certification is in error, it shall so notify the small system operator and shall require the small system to comply with all filing requirements for non-small systems in this ordinance. 
(e)  Subsequent rate filings by a small system operator shall comply in all respects with the provisions of this ordinance. 
Option 2 
(a)  A small system, as defined in section 2, may certify that the small system's rates for basic service and associated equipment, and subsequent rate increases, comply with section 6 hereof. A certification by a small system under this section for its initial rates shall be filed with the city within thirty (30) days of receiving written notification from the city that the city has been certified by the commission to regulate rates for the basic service tier. Certifications for subsequent rate increases shall be filed with the city at the same time that notice is given to the small system's subscribers of the proposed rate increase, in conformance with section 11 hereof. All certifications shall be in writing, shall be signed by the general manager of the system, and shall be verified. 
(b)  Such certification shall be subject to verification by the city on its own motion or upon complaint by a subscriber. The city may request additional information from the operator in order to verify the certification. In the event proprietary information is requested by the city, the provisions of section 14 hereof shall control the availability of such information to the public. 
(c)  If the city determines that the small system's certification is in error, it shall so notify the small system operator and shall require the small system to comply with all filing requirements for non-small systems in this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 717, § 16, 11-2-93)  
Sec. 17. - Written decision. 
(a)  The city shall issue a written decision in a ratemaking proceeding whenever it disapproves an initial rate for the basic service tier or associated equipment in whole or in part, disapproves a request for a rate increase in whole or in part, or approves a request for an increase in whole or in part over the objections of interested parties. The city is not required to issue a written decision that approves an unopposed existing or proposed rate for the basic service tier or associated equipment. 
(b)  Public notice shall be given of any written decision required in paragraph (a) of this section, by making the text of any written decision available to the public, and by publication of the decision one (1) time in the official newspaper of the city. 
(Ord. No. 717, § 17, 11-2-93)  
Sec. 18. - Reduction of rates; prescription of rates. 
(a)  The city may order a cable operator to implement a prospective reduction in basic service tier or associated equipment rates where necessary to bring rates into compliance with the standards set forth in sections 6 and 7 hereof. 
(b)  The city may prescribe a reasonable rate for the basic service tier or associated equipment after it determines that a proposed rate is unreasonable. 
(Ord. No. 717, § 18, 11-2-93)  
Sec. 19. - Refunds. 
(a)  The city may order a cable operator to refund to subscribers that portion of previously paid rates determined by the city to be in excess of the permitted tier charge or above the actual cost of equipment, unless the operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing which justifies the rate charged as reasonable. Before ordering a cable operator to refund previously paid rates to subscribers, the city shall give the operator notice and opportunity to comment. The operator's opportunity to comment upon the proposed refunds may be at any meeting of the city council during the city's period of review of the operator's rates. If the city has extended its review period under section 13, and has issued an accounting order under section 13(e), then the operator, prior to refunds being ordered, may request an opportunity to appear before the city council to comment upon the proposed refunds. 
(b)  An operator's liability for refunds is limited to a one-year period, except that an operator that fails to comply with a valid rate order issued by the city shall be liable for refunds commencing from the effective date of such order until such time as it complies with such order. 
(c)  The refund period shall run as follows: 
(1)  From the date the operator implements a prospective rate reduction back in time to September 1, 1993, or one (1) year, whichever is shorter. 
(2)  From the date the city issues an accounting order pursuant to section 13(d) hereof, and ending on the date the operator implements a prospective rate reduction ordered by the city or one (1) year, whichever is shorter. 
(d)  The cable operator, in its discretion, may implement a refund in the following manner: 
(1)  By returning overcharges to those subscribers who actually paid the overcharges, either through direct payment or as a specifically identified credit to those subscribers bills; or 
(2)  By means of a prospective percentage reduction in the rates for the basic service tier or associated equipment to cover the cumulative overcharge. This shall be reflected as a specifically identified, one-time credit on prospective bills to the class of subscribers that currently subscribe to the cable system. 
(e)  Refunds shall include interest computed at applicable rates published by the Internal Revenue Service for tax refunds and additional tax payments. 
(Ord. No. 717, § 19, 11-2-93)  
APPENDIX C - FEE SCHEDULE 
FY 2019-20 KELLER FEE SCHEDULE 
 
Sec. 1. - Building services. 
Residential Building 	$0.84 per Square Foot 
	Example: Square Feet: 2,500 = $0.84 x 2,500 = $2,100 
Residential Additions 	Same as Proposed Residential Building 
Residential Alterations 	Same as Proposed Residential Building 
Accessory Buildings 	Same as Proposed Residential Building 
Building Permit Fees - Commercial 	$23.50 $1-$500 construction value (cv) 
	$23.50 $501-$2,000 cv - First $500, plus $3.05 for each additional $100 or fraction thereof to and including $2,000; 65% of building permit fee (BPF) for plan review; plus $50/year contractor registration; 
	$69.25 $2,001-$25,000 cv - First $2,000, plus $14 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof to and including $25,000; 65% of BPF for plan review; plus $50/year contractor registration; 
	$391.25 $25,001-$50,000 cv - First $25,000, plus $10.10 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof to and including $50k; 65% of BPF for plan review; plus $50/year contractor registration; 
	$643.75 $50,001-$100,000 cv - First $50,000, plus $7 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof, to and including $100,000; plus 65% of BPF for plan review; plus $50/year contractor registration; 
	$993.75 $100,001-$500,000 cv - First $100,000, plus $5.60 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof to and including $500,000; plus 65% of BPF for plan review; plus $50/year contractor registration; 
	$3,233.75 $500,001-$1,000,000 cv - First $500,000, plus $4.75 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof to and including $1,000,000; plus 65% of BPF for plan review; plus $50/year contractor registration; 
	$5,608.75 Over $1,000,000 cv - First $1,000,000, plus $3.65 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof; plus 65% of BPF for plan review; plus $50/year contractor registration; 
	Commercial (new construction, additions and alterations) - 
	Based on current building valuation table created by the International Code Council (ICC) which utilizes regional building valuation data upon which commercial building permit fees will be determined (see Attachment A). 
Certificate of Occupancy 	$50 
	*Only charged when no building permit is issued for construction. 
Electrical Fee - Commercial 	$35/Permit - sq. feet up to 500 
	$50/Permit - sq. feet up to 1,499 
	$75/Permit - sq. feet up to 1,999 
	$100/Permit - sq. feet up to 2,499 
	$125/Permit - sq. feet up to 2,999 
	$125/Permit - sq. feet over 3,000, plus $20 for each additional 1,000 sq. feet 
Misc. Electrical Permit 	$50/permit*Only charged when no building permit is issued for construction 
	
Grading Permit/Tree Removal - Non Building Permit Related 	$25 per lot - residential 
	$100 per lot - commercial 
	$25 per acre - agricultural/undeveloped 
	
Property Maintenance Fee 	Actual cost for property maintenance, plus $250 administration fee 
	
Lien Fee 	Actual cost for filing lien, plus $250 administration fee and annual interest penalty of 10% to be applied monthly 
	
Fence Permit 	$50 
	$0 (Replacement) 
Mechanical (HVAC) Fee - Commercial 	$35/Permit - sq. feet up to 500 
	$50/Permit - sq. feet up to 1,499 
	$75/Permit - sq. feet up to 1,999 
	$100/Permit - sq. feet up to 2,499 
	$125/Permit - sq. feet up to 2,999 
	$125/Permit - sq. feet over 3,000, plus $20 for each additional 1,000 sq. feet 
Misc. Mechanical (HVAC) Permit 	$50/permit 
	*Only charged when no building permit is issued for construction 
Mobile/Manufactured Home 	$100/Permit to include utility connection inspections 
Moving Permit 	$50/Permit 
Plumbing Fee - Commercial 	$35/Permit - sq. feet up to 500 
	$50/Permit - sq. feet up to 1,499 
	$75/Permit - sq. feet up to 1,999 
	$100/Permit - sq. feet up to 2,499 
	$125/Permit - sq. feet up to 2,999 
	$125/Permit - sq. feet over 3,000, plus $20 for each additional 1,000 sq. feet 
Misc. Plumbing Permit 	$50/Permit - misc. plumbing (water heater/gas line to pool/spa) 
	*Only charged when no building permit is issued for construction 
Re-Inspection Fee 	$50/for each additional re-inspection 
	*Only assessed after an inspection fails more than once for the same violation 
Sign Permit 	$50 per sign permit 
Temporary Sign Permit 	$25 per sign 
Pool Permit 	$500/in-ground pools 
	$50/above ground pools and spas/hot tubs 
Temporary Building Permit 	$50.00 
Demolition Permit 	$50 
Network Node (Small Cell) Permit Application Fee 	$320 per application 
Network Node (Small Cell) Right of Way Use Fee 	$28 per node, per month 
Sidewalks/Curb Cut Fees 	Fees based on actual costs as derived from City's current miscellaneous concrete contract, maximum of $1,500 
Supplemental Plan Review Fee 	$50 per hour (minimum 2 hours residential and 3 hours commercial). Only assessed after original set of plans has been reviewed and approved for construction and changes are made to the plans by the developer/owner/builder/representative 
Irrigation Permit 	$50 each - residential 
	$100 each - commercial 
Miscellaneous Inspections 	$50 each 
Lost Packet Fee 	$50 each 
Map Printing Fees (new) 	11" x 17" = None 
	22" x 34" = $15 
	24" x 36" = $15 
	36" x 48" and larger = $25 
Special Event Permit Fee 	$25 
	No permit costs for non-profits 
	$250 - Security deposit 
	$25 per hour/2 hour min. - Maintenance Staff 
	Supplies at cost plus 10% 
 
( Ord. No. 1905 , § 10, 9-18-18; Ord. No. 1934 , § 2, 6-4-19; Ord. No. 1949 , § 2, 9-17-19) 
   
Sec. 2. - Planning and engineering. 
Supplemental Plan Review Fee 	$50 per hour (minimum 2 hours residential and 3 hours commercial). Only assessed after original set of plans has been reviewed and approved for construction and changes are made to the plans by the developer/owner/builder/representative 
Resubmittal Fee 	$500 per resubmittal when plans are resubmitted and 30% or more previous comments have not been addressed. 
Inspection Fee - Streets and Drainage 	Four percent (4%) of construction value, plus $60/hour overtime (as necessary) 
Water and Sewer Inspection 	Four percent (4%) of construction value, plus $60/hour overtime (as necessary) 
Water Service Tap/Meter 
(Corporate City Limits) 	Short Tap and Meter Installation 
	?" - $450 
	¾" - $475 
	1" - $500 
	1½" - $900 
	2"*** - $ 1,025 
	2" Compound Meter - $2,325 
Water Service Tap/Meter 	Long Tap and Meter Installation 
(Corporate City Limits) 	?" - $800 
(cont.) 	¾" - $825 
	1" - $850 
	1½" - $ 1,275 
	2"*** - $1,425 
	2" Compound Meter - $2,725 
	Install meter only 
	?" - $275 
	¾" - $300 
	1" - $325 
	1½" - $725 
	2"*** - $775 
	2" Compound Meter - $2,075 
	* Water main and service on same side of street 
	**Water service (meter installation) on opposite side of street from water main may include bore fees 
	*** Cost includes a 2" turbine or disc-type meter 
	Outside City - Cost as determined on a case by case basis by Director of Public Works based on actual costs and impact to the system 
	3" or more—Actual meter cost plus service charge fees. 
Sewer Service Tap 
(Corporate City Limits) 	$350 - 4-inch tap within the City (if contractor required due to extenuating circumstances, contractor costs are to be borne by the applicant) 
	Actual cost - larger than 4-inch tap within the City 
	
	Outside City - Cost as determined on a case by case basis by Director of Public Works based on actual costs and impact to the system 
Water/Sewer Connection Bore Costs 	Bore fee to apply as needed based on actual linear foot cost 
Street Lights 	$10.50 per month per pole (maximum of 24 months) 
Sanitary Sewer Camera Fee 	$225 each - per residential building permit 
Old Town Keller Asphalt Parking 	• Existing buildings/facilities - actual cost of materials 
	• New buildings/facilities and existing buildings/facilities with privately funded improvements exceeding $50,000 - no cost 
	Public parking space construction scope and schedule to be at the discretion of the Department of Public Works and dependent upon the availability of funding as determined by the City 
Miscellaneous right-of-way encroachment, dedication or abandonment 	$100 each 
Miscellaneous easement dedication or abandonment 	$100 each 
Preliminary Plat 	N/A (see 'Plat' info below) 
Final Plat 	N/A (see 'Plat' info below) 
Replat 	$400 per application plus $20 per lot residential (exceeding one lot); $350 per application for single family lot 
Plat (Preliminary, Final, and Amended) 	$300 per application plus $20 per lot residential (exceeding one lot); $250 per application for single residential lot 
	$300 per application plus $20 per acre for non-residential 
Planned Development 	$400, plus $10 per acre for planned development, planned development amendment and future land use plan amendment 
	$250 thoroughfare plan amendment 
Specific Use Permit 	$350, plus $10 per acre 
Rezoning Application 	$350, plus $10 per acre 
Site Plan Application 	$300 application, plus $10 per acre 
	$200 application for minor amendments to previously approved Site Plans 
Variance Adjustment 	$200 application 
Park Land Dedication 	One (1) acre per thirty (30) residential dwelling units. Payment in lieu of land dedication shall be the average per acre value of the property(s) to be developed as assigned by the Tarrant Appraisal District's most recent appraised market land value, or $30,000 per acre, whichever is greater, not to exceed $50,000 per acre. 
Appeal to Tree Board 	Application - $200 
	$150 per caliper inch mitigation 
Public Art Development Fee 	.25% of Construction Value 
Landscape/Screening Wall Plans 	$200 
Gas Well Permit Fee 	$10,000 per well bore 
 
  
( Ord. No. 1905 , § 10, 9-18-18; Ord. No. 1949 , § 2, 9-17-19) 
   
Sec. 3. - Facility rental fees. 
Field Rentals 	$25 resident - 2 hour baseball & softball field plus $20/2 hour for lights 
	$100 non-resident - 2 hour baseball & softball field, plus $20/2 hour for lights 
	$50 per pad, per day for soccer pad, plus $15/2 hour for lights 
	$200 per pad for 5 days soccer pad, plus $15/2 hour for lights 
	$25 resident - 2 hr. multi use field, plus $17/2 hour for lights 
	$100 non-resident - 2 hour multi-use, field plus $17/2 hour for lights 
	$200 - day for multi-use arena; practice rental $15/3 hour; clinic rental $100/day; half-day clinic, $50; 6 hour event, $100; refundable security deposit, $100; tractor & operator fee, $30/3 hour minimum 
	Refundable deposits - $500 refundable security deposit for utilization of facility keys for Keller Sports Park 
Stage Rental 	Stage rental fee, $1,000 for the first six hours or any portion thereof, (includes delivery, set-up and tear down), and $50 for each additional hour thereafter. 
	Note: Accessories are only available for rent in conjunction with stage rental. 
	· Decorative Stage Skirting, $15 per day 
	· Audio/Light Technician Stage hand, $45 per hour (when using lights and audio, a certified stage hand must be utilized.) 
	· Additional Audio/Light Technician Stage hand, $25 per hour (when using lights and audio, a certified stage hand must be utilized.) 
	· Theater Lights, $100 per day 
	· Portable Stage Sections, $25 each per day (fee includes placement and removal.) 
Picnic Facilities 	Residential rental fee of $30 for 3 hours, plus $15 for each additional hour. Non-residential rental fee of $40 for 3 hours, plus $20 for each additional hour with a 3 hour minimum rental period for both. 
 
( Ord. No. 1905 , § 10, 9-18-18; Ord. No. 1949 , § 2, 9-17-19) 
   
Sec. 4. - Sports fees. 
Non-Resident Fee 	Long-term users shall pay the city a non-resident fee of $30 per player per sport season to recover a portion of the maintenance and operation costs of athletic fields and facilities. Non-resident fees shall be capped at $90 per family, per season. 
 
( Ord. No. 1905 , § 10, 9-18-18; Ord. No. 1949 , § 2, 9-17-19) 
   
Sec. 5. - Facility use fees. 
Library Meeting Room Use 	free - residents 
	$25 for non-residents 
Library Membership Fee 	free - residents 
	$25 for non-residents, per family/year 
	$12.50 for non-resident seniors/year 
	$0.50 replacement card fee 
Library Microfilm/fiche and flash drives 	$0.10 per page for microfilm/fiche 
	$8.11 each for flash drives 
Library Copy Machine 	$0.10 per page for photocopy 
	$0.10 per page for black laser printer 
	$0.25 per page for color laser printer 
Library Fees 	
	Fees for damages/missing: 
	DVD case, $2, Audio or CD case, $1, replacement CD from audio set, $7.50 
Library Test proctoring 	$20 each 
 
  
( Ord. No. 1905 , § 10, 9-18-18; Ord. No. 1949 , § 2, 9-17-19) 
   
Sec. 6. - Animal Control. 
Animal Removal from Privately Owned Traps 	$30 per animal 
Replacement Tag Fee 	$5 per animal 
Microchip Implanting 	$25 per animal 
Surrender Fee 	$30 per animal (residents only) 
Euthanasia Fee 	$30 per animal (residents only) 
Dead Animal Removal 	$30 per animal 
Quarantine Fee 	$25 per animal, per day 
Impoundment 	$ 10 daily, plus: 
	$30 1st offense 
	$50 2nd offense 
	$75 3rd offense 
	$150 4th offense 
	$150 5th offense 
Exotic Pet Fee, Non-Hazardous 	$20 per animal, per year 
Dangerous Dog Registration 	$50 per animal 
 
  
( Ord. No. 1905 , § 10, 9-18-18; Ord. No. 1949 , § 2, 9-17-19) 
   
Sec. 7. - Public safety fees. 
Court Copy Fees 	$0.10 1st copy 
	$2 each - citation list 
	$40 per month - citations faxed 
	(Pursuant to the Texas Administrative Code associated with copies of public information) 
Accident Report 	$5 each 
Burglar Alarm 	$25 annual permit fee; 1 - 3 false alarms, included in annual permit; 4 - 5 false alarms, $50 each; 6 - 7 false alarms, $75 each; 8+ false alarms, $100 each 
Police Copy Fees 	$0.10 per page 
	$5 per disc 
	(Pursuant to the Texas Administrative Code associated with copies of public information) 
Police Special Assignments (Special Events as approved under the City's Special Events Policy) 	$50/hr. minimum 2 hours (all uses) 
Incident Reports 	No charge 
	(Pursuant to the Texas Administrative Code associated with copies of public information) 
Finger Printing 	$10 per person 
Solicitors License 	Charitable Solicitation 
	$35 for the first person 
	$20 for each additional person 
	$65 background check per person 
	Religious - No permit fee 
	$65 background check per person 
	Itinerant Merchants and Publication Sales and Solicitation 
	$50 for the first person 
	$20 for each additional person 
	$65 background check per person 
Emergency Medical Services 	The rate structure for pricing shall be a set fee of $1,750, plus a mileage charge of $15 per loaded transport mile of ambulance service. The City Manager shall be authorized to adjust the set fee structure which shall conform to the reasonable, customary, and usual charges associated with the provisions of health care. 
	Insurance payments, whether private or governmental (Medicare/Medicaid) shall be accepted as payment in full for ambulance service for Keller residents and non-resident employees suffering a non-work related event while on duty. 
	Keller residents that have no medical insurance or if payment is not received from the patient's insurance plan shall be responsible for a maximum fee for ambulance service which shall be the Federal reimbursement rate in effect at the time of service or $300, whichever is greater. 
	Patients who receive ALS treatment by Keller Fire-Rescue but are not transported by Keller Fire-Rescue or a mutual-aid ambulance shall be responsible for the cost of the treatment or a fee not to exceed $200. 
	Patients treated and transported by Keller Fire-Rescue that are not residents of Keller shall be held financially responsible for the outstanding balance for ambulance service not paid by insurance coverage. For Medicare/Medicaid patients this fee responsibility will be up to the Federal reimbursement rate allowable at time of service. 
Fire Construction Permit Fees 	$23.50 $1-$500 cv 
	$23.50 $501-$2,000 cv - First $500, plus $3.05 for each additional $100 or fraction thereof to and including $2,000; plus plan review fee equal to 65% of construction permit fee 
	$69.25 $2,001-$25,000 cv - First $2,000 + $14 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof to and including $25,000; plus plan review fee equal to 65% of construction permit fee 
	$391.25 $25,001-$50,000 - First $25,000, plus $10.10 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof to and including $50,000; plus plan review fee equal to 65% of construction permit fee 
	$643.75 $50,001-$100,000 - First $50,000, plus $7 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof to and including $100,000; plus plan review fee equal to 65% of construction permit fee 
Fire Construction Permit Fees 	$993.75 $100,001-$500,000 - First $100,000, plus $5.60 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof to and including $500,000; plus plan review fee equal to 65% of construction permit fee 
	
	$3,233.75 $500,001-$1,000,000 - First $500,000, plus $4.75 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof to and including $1,000,000; plus plan review fee equal to 65% of construction permit fee 
	$5,608.75 over $1 million - First $1 million, plus $3.65 for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof; plus plan review fee equal to 65% of construction permit fee 
Contractor Documentation Fee 	$50 annually, due January 1st of each year 
Fire Operational Permit Fees 	See Fire Construction Permit Fees 
Fire Apparatus Fees 	$400 hour - Fire apparatus w/crew - 2 hour minimum 
	$200 hour - Brush truck w/crew - 2 hour minimum 
	$250 hour - Ambulance w/crew - 2 hour minimum 
	$150 hour - ATV ambulance w/crew - 2 hour minimum 
	$280 hour - K.I.S.D. football game, EMS - per game 
	$75 hour - Inspector - 2 hour minimum 
	$60 hour - Standby firefighter - 2 hour minimum 
 
  
( Ord. No. 1905 , § 10, 9-18-18; Ord. No. 1949 , § 2, 9-17-19) 
   
Sec. 8. - Water and sanitary sewer fees. 
After Hours Turn On 	$50 per incident 
Customer Deposit 	$80 residential meter 
	Multi-family and non-residential meter deposits based on estimated customer usage for a one month period. 
	Fire hydrant meter rental deposit based on actual replacement cost. 
Master Deposit 	$80 - residential only 
Delinquent Account Deposit 	Applies to customers that have had their service disconnected for failure to pay or non-sufficient funds - new deposit not to exceed an amount equal to double the estimated average monthly bill for said customer. 
Cleaning Deposit 	One time deposit of $20 for ten consecutive days of water meter usage. Deposit applied to final billing. 
Late Utility Payment Fee 	10% of outstanding balance. 
Damaged/Broken Lock 	$100 each per incident. 
Meter Testing 	$50 each per incident for meters 1" and less. 
	Meters 1 ½" and larger, fee shall be the actual cost of testing and the actual cost of installation and removal. If meter test shows it is registering more water than actually going through the meter, the fee is refunded. 
Water Reconnect Fee 	$25 each per incident. 
Account Activation Fee 	$15 each 
Account Transfer Fee 	$15 each 
Damaged meter, transponder, meter box and lid 	Actual cost for replacement and/or repair to include time and materials. 
 
  
( Ord. No. 1905 , § 10, 9-18-18; Ord. No. 1949 , § 2, 9-17-19) 
   
Sec. 9. - Finance. 
Auction Item Storage Fee 	The Buyer will be charged a $25.00 per day/per LOT storage fee after the final removal day. This fee will be collected from the Buyer at the time of pick up. 
 
( Ord. No. 1905 , § 10, 9-18-18; Ord. No. 1949 , § 2, 9-17-19) 
   
Sec. 10. - Utility billing rates. 
WATER RATES 
RESIDENTIAL/NON-RESIDENTIAL 	
MINIMUM BILL (1st 2,000 gallons): 	Rates Per Month: 
?" × ¾" meter (Class Code A) 	$21.969 
¾" × ¾" meter (Class Code AB) 	$27.342 
1" meter (Class Code B) 	$32.898 
1½" meter (Class Code BC) 	$53.511 
2" meter (Class Code C) 	$74.123 
3" meter (Class Code D) 	$115.381 
4" meter (Class Code E) 	$142.745 
5" meter (Class Code F) 	$183.993 
6" meter (Class Code G) 	$225.218 
7" meter (Class Code H) 	$252.626 
8" meter (Class Code I) 	$285.567 
RESIDENTIAL 	
Volume/Commodity Charge 	Rates per 1,000 gallons: 
0—2,000 	$3.119 
2,000—10,000 	$4.314 
10,001—20,000 	$4.723 
20,001—25,000 	$5.283 
25,001—40,000 	$6.715 
40,000 + 	$7.274 
	
NON-RESIDENTIAL 	
Volume/Commodity Charge 	Rates per 1,000 gallons: 
0—2,000 	$3.119 
2,001—10,000 	$4.314 
10,001—20,000 	$5.455 
20,001—25,000 	$6.262 
25,001—40,000 	$6.715 
40,000 + 	$7.274 
WASTEWATER (SEWER) RATES 
RESIDENTIAL/COMMERCIAL 	
MINIMUM BILL: per 1,000 gals. 	Rates Per Month: 
?" × ¾" meter (Class Code A) 	$14.581 
¾" × ¾" meter (Class Code AB) 	$18.088 
1" meter (Class Code B) 	$21.586 
1 ½" meter (Class Code BC) 	$26.764 
2" meter (Class Code C) 	$31.932 
3" meter (Class Code D) 	$47.271 
4" meter (Class Code E) 	$71.171 
5" meter (Class Code F) 	$103.518 
6" meter (Class Code G) 	$153.207 
7" meter (Class Code H) 	$226.723 
8" meter (Class Code I) 	$335.585 
	
Volume/Commodity Charge 	Rates per 1,000 gallons: 
Rates per 1,000 gallons 	$4.408 
Rates per 1,000 gallons water usage: (residential up to 20,000 gallons) 
No maximum volume charge on commercial/non-residential 
	
DRAINAGE UTILITY FEE RATES 
	Per Month: 
Residential 	$7.000 
	
All non-residential real property* 	Impervious Area × $7.000 
	Impervious Area = Number of Acres × ERU 
Property Type: 	Equivalent Residential Units (ERU): 
Commercial 	10.79 
Industrial 	7.25 
Institutional, Churches, Multi-Family 	7.25 
Parks & Open Space 	0.18 
* - City, County, School Districts, State and Federal governments are exempt 
 
( Ord. No. 1905 , § 10, 9-18-18; Ord. No. 1949 , § 2, 9-17-19) 
