CODE OF ORDINANCES TOWN OF LITTLE ELM, TEXAS 
____________ 
Adopted July 11, 2006 
____________ 
Published in 2006 by Order of the Town Council 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
TOWN OF 
LITTLE ELM, TEXAS 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Doug Cravey 
Mayor 
____________ 
Frank Kastner 
Terri Lowery 
Mark Hunsaker 
Dee Dee Lear 
Jim Manning 
Brenda Mills 
Town Council 
____________ 
J.C. Hughes 
Town Manager 
____________ 
John Hill 
Town Attorney 
____________ 
Kathy Phillips 
Town Secretary 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the Town of Little Elm, Texas. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the town council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative table appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been provided catchlines to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Daniel F. Walker, Supervising Legal Editor, and Francine King, Technical Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to J.C. Hughes, Town Manager, and Kathy Phillips, Town Secretary, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the town readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the town's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Little Elm, Texas. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Little Elm, Texas. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Little Elm, Texas. 2006. 
TOWN OF LITTLE ELM, TEXAS 
ORDINANCE NO. 782 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF LITTLE ELM, TEXAS ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE TOWN OF LITTLE ELM, TEXAS; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
    WHEREAS, the Town of Little Elm, Texas (the "Town") is a home rule city operating pursuant to Article 11, Section 5 of the Texas Constitution, applicable State law, and its Home Rule Charter; and 
    WHEREAS, the Town is authorized by Section 53.001 of the Texas Local Government Code to adopt by ordinance a codification of its civil and criminal ordinances, together with appropriate penalties for the violation of the ordinances, which code may be, as authorized by Section 53.003 of the Local Government Code, subdivide into chapters, titles, articles, or sections at the discretion of the Town Council; and 
    WHEREAS, as provided by Section 53.005 of the Local Government Code, a municipal code of ordinances has the force and effect of an ordinance regularly adopted in accordance with law; and 
    WHEREAS, pursuant to Section 53.006 of the Local Government Code, a municipality may have printed, under the direction of the governing body of the municipality, a copy of the code of ordinances that is authenticated and approved by the mayor's signature and attested by the secretary of the governing body; and 
    WHEREAS, as provided by Section 53.001(c) of the Local Government Code, the Code of Ordinances adopted hereby is effective on its adoption; and 
    WHEREAS, the Town Council desires to adopt this Ordinance adopting and approving a Code of Ordinances for the Town of Little Elm, and finds that such adoption is in the best interest of the citizens of the Town 
    NOW, THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED BY THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF LITTLE ELM, TEXAS: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, Town of Little Elm, Texas," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 106, each inclusive (the "Code"), is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before January 17, 2006, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation that governs or regulates fire safety, zoning, public health or sanitation, including the dumping of refuse, and adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000.00, or by a fine not exceeding $500.00 for violation of any other provision of this Code or any other ordinance, rule, regulation or order. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the town may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Town to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after January 17, 2006, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. Upon adoption of this Ordinance adopting the Code, the Town Secretary shall record the Code in the Town's ordinance records. 
    Section 8. The Town shall have printed a copy of the Code that is authenticated and approved by the signature of the Mayor of the Town and attested by the Town Secretary. 
    Section 9. The above and foregoing premises to this Ordinance are true and correct and are incorporated herein and made a part hereof. 
    Section 10. The Code is effective on its adoption. This Ordinance shall be and is effective immediately upon its adoption. 
    PASSED AND APPROVED by the Town Council of the Town of Little Elm, Texas, this the _______day of July, 2006. 
      Frank Kastner, Mayor   ATTEST: 
      Kathy Phillips, Town Secretary   [SEAL] 
Certificate of Adoption 
    I hereby certify and attest that the foregoing is a true copy of Ordinance No. _______ passed at the regular meeting of the Town Council of the Town of Little Elm, Texas, held on the ________ day of July, 2006. 
    Dated this the ________ day of _______, 200___. 
      Kathy Phillips, Town Secretary   [SEAL] 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date
Adopted Include/
Omit Supp. No. 905  7- 1-2008 Include 13 995  5-18-2010 Include 13 1022  9-21-2010 Omit 13 1029 12-21-2010 Include 13 1030 12-21-2010 Include 13 1031 12-21-2010 Omit 13 1009  6-15-2010 Include 14 1035  2-15-2011 Include 14 1041  3-15-2011 Include 14 1042  3-15-2011 Include 14 1043  3-15-2011 Include 14 1052  5-17-2011 Include 14 Amend. of  5-14-2011 Include 15 1057  6-14-2011 Include 15 1058  7- 5-2011 Include 15 1067  9- 6-2011 Include 16 1068  9- 6-2011 Include 16 1076 10-18-2011 Include 16 1077 10- 4-2011 Include 16 1078 10-18-2011 Include 16 1079  9-20-2011 Omit 16 1081 10-18-2011 Include 16 1085 11- 1-2011 Include 16 1087 11- 1-2011 Include 16 1091 12-13-2011 Include 17 1092  1- 3-2012 Include 17 1094  1- 3-2012 Include 17 954  5-19-2008 Include 18 1088 11-15-2011 Include 18 1097  4- 3-2012 Include 18 1098  5-15-2012 Include 18 1099  4- 3-2012 Include 18 1100  5- 1-2012 Include 18 1101  5- 1-2012 Include 18 1106  8- 7-2012 Include 19 1107  8-21-2012 Include 19 1108  9-18-2012 Include 20 1114  9-18-2012 Include 20 1115 10-16-2012 Include 20 1127 12-18-2012 Include 21 1128 12-18-2012 Include 21 1129  3- 5-2013 Include 22 1147  5- 7-2013 Include 23 1151  6- 4-2013 Include 23 1153  6-18-2013 Include 23 1159  8- 6-2013 Include 23 1162  9-17-2013 Include 24 1167  9-17-2013 Include 24 1180 11- 5-2013 Include 25 1189 12-17-2013 Include 25 1209  3- 4-2014 Include 26 1213  4-15-2014 Include 26 1218  6-17-2014 Include 26 1220  6-17-2014 Include 26 1222  7-15-2014 Include 26 1224  8- 5-2014 Omit 26 1227  9-16-2014 Include 27 1228  9- 2-2014 Include 27 1236  9-16-2014 Include 27 1237 11-18-2014 Include 28 1245 12-16-2014 Include 28 1264  2- 3-2015 Include 28 1265  2- 3-2015 Include 28 1272  3- 3-2015 Include 28 1274  3- 3-2015 Include 28 1281  6- 2-2015 Include 29 1282  7- 7-2015 Include 29 1284  8- 4-2015 Omit 30 1285  8- 4-2015 Include 30 1300 10-20-2015 Omit 30 1301 10-20-2015 Include 30 1303 11-17-2015 Omit 31 1308  1- 5-2016 Include 31 1317  3- 1-2016 Include 32 1322  4- 5-2016 Include 32 Ord. No. Date
Adopted Include/
Omit Supp. No. Amend. of 11- 3-2015 Include 33 1334  6- 7-2016 Include 33 1337  7- 5-2016 Include 33 1339  7- 5-2016 Include 33 1340  8- 2-2016 Include 34 1344  8-16-2016 Include 34 1345  8-16-2016 Include 34 1360 11-15-2016 Include 35 1402  7-18-2017 Include 36 1403  7-18-2017 Include 36 1405  8- 1-2017 Include 36 1407  8-15-2017 Include 36 1409  8-15-2017 Include 36 1415  9- 5-2017 Include 36 1431 12-19-2017 Include 37 1437 12-19-2017 Include 37 1444  3- 6-2018 Include 38 1448  3-20-2018 Include 38 1449  3- 6-2018 Include 38 1491  3-19-2019 Include 39 1498  4-16-2019 Include 39  
PART I - HOME RULE CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed in this part is the Home Rule Charter of the Town of Little Elm, Texas, adopted on May 5, 2001. Any additional amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference- Cities of 5,000+ population, Tex. Const. art. XI, sec. 5; Charter adoption and amendment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 9.001 et seq. 

CHAPTER ONE. - INCORPORATION AND BOUNDARIES 

Sec. 1.01. - Incorporation. 
    All inhabitants of the Town of Little Elm, Denton County, Texas, as the boundaries and limits of said Town have heretofore been established and now exist, or may hereafter be established, shall constitute a municipal body politic incorporated under and known by the name "Town of Little Elm" with such powers, rights, duties, privileges, and immunities as are herein provided. 
Sec. 1.02. - Boundaries and limits. 
    The boundaries and limits of the Town of Little Elm shall be those as established and described in ordinances duly passed by the Town Council of the Town of Little Elm in accordance with state law. The Town Secretary shall at all times keep a correct and complete description and official map of the Town's boundaries on file, with recent annexations and disannexations being shown on said map. 
Sec. 1.03. - Annexations and disannexations. 
    The Town may from time to time alter its boundaries by annexing or disannexing territory in any size or shape desired in any manner provided by state law, with or without consent of the owners of such territory or the inhabitants thereof. Any additional territory annexed to the Town shall be a part of the Town for all purposes, and the property situated therein shall bear its pro rata part of the taxes levied by the Town as provided by state law. The inhabitants thereof shall be entitled to all rights and privileges of all citizens and shall be bound by the acts, ordinances, and resolutions of the Town. Whenever, in the opinion of the Town Council, there exists within the corporate limits of the Town any territory, either inhabited or uninhabited, not suitable or necessary for Town purposes, or upon a petition signed by a majority of the qualified voters residing in said inhabited territory, the Council may, upon a public hearing and by ordinance duly passed, discontinue said territory as part of the Town. The Town shall comply with all applicable procedural rules and notice requirements set forth in state law. 
(Amend. of 5-9-2009) 
CHAPTER TWO. - FORM OF GOVERNMENT AND POWERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Form of government in home rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 26.001; home rule municipality has full powers of self government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 51.072; general fiscal powers of home-rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 101.022. 

Sec. 2.01. - Form of government. 
    Municipal government for the Town of Little Elm shall be a "council-manager government." Except as otherwise provided by this Charter and the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, all powers conferred on the Town shall be exercised by a Town Council to be composed of a Mayor and six (6) Council Members in places 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 elected by qualified voters for a term of three (3) years, with the exception of Council Members in places 2, 3, 4 and 5, which shall be elected by the qualified voters of each of the respective Council districts as provided for in Chapter 3. The Mayor and Council Members in places 1 and 6 shall be elected by the qualified voters of the Town at-large. Beginning with the election in May, 2020, place 1 shall be for a term of two (2) years until the election in May, 2022, after which time place 1 shall be for a term of three (3) years from that election going forward. Beginning with the election in May, 2021, place 5 shall be for a term of two (2) years until the election in May, 2023, after which time place 5 shall be for a term of three (3) years from that election going forward. 
(Amend. of 11-3-2015) 
Sec. 2.02. - Powers of the Town. 
    The Town of Little Elm shall be a Home Rule Town under the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas and shall have all powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities of every kind and nature granted to a Home Rule Town under Article XI, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Texas, known as the Home Rule Amendment, and all other laws passed by the Legislature of the State of Texas relating thereto, or which may hereafter be passed by said Legislature in relation to such matters including, but not limited to, the following powers: 
(1)  To assess, levy, and collect taxes for general and special purposes on all lawful subjects of taxation. 
(2)  To fix and regulate the rates of gas, water, electricity, and other utilities, and to regulate and fix the fares, tolls, and charges of local telephones and exchanges, public carriers and motor vehicles where they are transporting passengers, freight or baggage, and generally to fix and regulate the rates, tolls, or charges and the kind of service of all public utilities of every kind, unless otherwise required by state law. 
(3)  To sue and be used, to contract and be contracted with, to buy, sell, lease, mortgage, hold, manage, and control such property as its interests require. 
(4)  To make and enforce all police, health, sanitary and other regulations, and pass such ordinances as may be expedient for maintaining and promoting the peace, good government and welfare of the Town, for the performance of the functions thereof, for the order and security of its inhabitants, and to protect the peace, lives, health, and property of such inhabitants, and to provide suitable penalties for the violation of any ordinance enacted by the Town. 
(5)  To borrow money on the faith and credit of the Town by the issue or sale of bonds, warrants, certificates of obligation, notes or other securities authorized by the laws of the State of Texas. 
(6)  To acquire, by purchase, gift or devise, or by the exercise of the right of condemnation, and own, in fee simple or otherwise, either public or private property located inside or outside of the corporate limits of the Town, for the extension, improvement and enlargement of its waterworks system, including riparian rights, water supply reservoirs, stand pipes, watersheds, dams, the laying, building, maintenance and construction of water mains, rights-of-way in connection therewith, and the laying, erection, establishment or maintenance of any necessary appurtenance or facilities which will furnish to the inhabitants of the Town an abundant supply of wholesome water; for sewerage plants and systems; right-of-way for water and sewer lines; parks, playgrounds, fire stations, police stations, incinerators or other garbage disposal plants; streets, boulevards, and alleys or other public ways; municipal buildings, garages and parking facilities, or any rights-of-way needed in connection with any property used for any purpose hereinabove named; for the straightening or improving of the channel of any stream, branch or drain or for any other municipal purpose. 
(7)  To institute and prosecute suits without giving security therefore, and appeal from judgments of the courts without giving supersedeas or cost bonds, other bonds or security whatever. 
(8)  To have the exclusive right to erect, own, maintain and operate a waterworks and sanitary system for the use of said Town and its inhabitants and to regulate the same, including the right to prescribe rates for water and sanitary sewer services, and to make such rules and regulations as the Town Council may deem expedient, including the power to extend water and sanitary sewer lines and assess a portion or all of the cost therefore and affix a lien against the property and the owner thereof, and do anything whatsoever necessary to operate and maintain said waterworks and to compel the owners of all property and the agents of such owners to pay all charges for water and sanitary sewer services furnished. 
(9)  To acquire property within or without its boundaries or within boundaries of other municipalities for any public purpose, in fee simple or lesser interest or estate, by purchase, gift, devise, lease or condemnation when necessary or desirable to carry out any of the powers conferred upon it by this Charter or by the constitution and the laws of the State of Texas. 
(10)  To lay out, open, close, establish, alter, widen, lower, extend, grade, supervise, maintain, and improve streets, alleys, and parks, and to regulate the use thereof and require removal of all obstructions or encroachments of every nature and character upon said public streets, sidewalks or other public property. 
(11)  To create offices, determine the method for selection of officers, and prescribe the qualifications, duties, and tenure of office for officers. 
(12)  To appropriate the money of the Town for all lawful purposes to create, provide for, construct, regulate and maintain public works, public improvements of any nature, economic development and to furnish municipal services as may be provided by resolution or ordinance of the Town Council, or as required by law. 
Sec. 2.03. - Powers-General. 
    The enumeration of particular powers in the Charter shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive, but in addition to the powers enumerated herein, implied thereby or appropriate to the exercise thereof, the Town shall have and may exercise all other powers that exist now or may be granted to municipalities by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, together with all of the implied powers necessary to carry into execution such powers. 
CHAPTER THREE. - TOWN COUNCIL 

Sec. 3.01. - Mayor. 
    The person elected Mayor shall be the presiding officer of all meetings of the Town Council. The Mayor shall be the official head of the Town government and be able to vote on all matters coming before the Council. 
Sec. 3.02. - Qualifications. 
    Each candidate for election to the Town Council or office of Mayor shall be a qualified voter of the Town, shall be not less than twenty-one (21) years of age, shall have resided in the Town not less than twelve (12) months immediately preceding election day, shall meet the requirements of the Texas Election Code, and shall not, after notice of any delinquency, be in arrears in the payment of any taxes or other liabilities due the Town. Each Council Member and the Mayor must continually reside within the Town during such officer's term of office, and any removal of the officer's residence from the Town during his or her term of office shall constitute a vacation of his or her office, and such vacancy shall be filled as provided in Section 3.05. 
    Candidates for Mayor and Council Members in Place 1 and Place 6 may be residents of any portion of the Town. Council Members for Place 2, 3, 4 and 5 must reside in, and be elected from the district for which the specific place applies. The Town Council, by ordinance, shall establish the district boundaries for Place 2, 3, 4 and 5. The district boundaries shall be equal in population as practical and reviewed and updated by the Town Council every four (4) years. 
Sec. 3.03. - Limitation on successive terms. 
    No person shall serve as Mayor for more than three (3) successive terms, and no person shall serve as Council Member for more than three (3) successive terms. A term of office shall be for a period of three (3) years or any portion thereof. 
(Amend. of 11-3-2015) 
Sec. 3.04. - Compensation. 
    Members of the Town Council shall be entitled to reimbursement of all necessary and reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of their official Town Council duties as may be authorized by the Town Council. The Mayor and each Council Member shall receive compensation in the amount of $25.00 for each regular or special meeting of the Town Council attended. 
(Amend. of 5-7-2005) 
Sec. 3.05. - Vacancies in the Town Council; filling of vacancies. 
A.  The office of a Council Member or office of the Mayor shall become vacant upon the official's death, resignation, or removal from office in any manner authorized by law, removal of the official's residence from the Town of Little Elm or forfeiture of the official's office. 
B.  A Council Member or the Mayor shall forfeit his or her office if the official lacks at any time during the official's term of office any qualification for the office prescribed by this Charter or by State law, or if the official violates any express prohibition of this section or any other provision of this Charter, or if the official fails to attend three (3) consecutive regular Town Council meetings without being excused by the Town Council. The Town Council shall be the final judge in matters involving forfeiture of office by a Council Member or the Mayor. 
C.  If there is a vacancy in the office of Mayor or Council Member, such vacancy shall be filled by special election within one hundred twenty (120) days after such vacancy occurs, in accordance with the Texas Constitution, and the Texas Election Code, as amended. 
Sec. 3.06. - Meetings; quorum. 
    Regular meetings of the Town Council shall be held at such times as may be prescribed from time to time by resolution of the Town Council. Special meetings shall be called by the Town Secretary upon the written request of the Mayor, the Town Manager or two (2) Members of the Town Council. Notice of any regular or special meetings of the Town Council shall state the subject to be considered at the meeting. All official meetings of the Council and of all committees thereof shall be open to the public except as provided by state law. Those meetings involving an attorney and client relationship, and other matters that state law has provided may be discussed in closed session, need not be open to the public. Four (4) Members of the Town Council shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of transaction of business. No action of the Town Council, except as specifically provided in this Charter, shall be valid or binding unless adopted by the affirmative vote of a majority of the Town Council present and qualified to act. The Town Council shall determine its own rules of procedure, may punish its Members for misconduct, and may compel the attendance of absent Members. Should any number of Members of the Town Council be recalled pursuant to Chapter 13 of this Charter, and are no longer qualified to act, a majority of the remaining Members of the Town Council shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of transaction of business. 
(Amend. of 5-9-2009) 
Sec. 3.07. - Abstention. 
    Should any person on the Town Council choose to abstain from voting on any question before the Town Council, where no conflict of interest exists, the person's vote shall have the same effect as a negative vote. 
(Amend. of 5-9-2009) 
Sec. 3.08. - Mayor Pro Tem. 
    The Town Council shall elect one of its Members as Mayor Pro Tem, who shall perform the duties of Mayor in the case of the absence or inability of the Mayor to perform the duties of the Mayor's office, and who shall, during that time, be vested with all the powers belonging to the Mayor. 
CHAPTER FOUR. - TOWN MANAGER 

Sec. 4.01. - Town Manager-Qualifications, appointment and removal; duties; compensation. 
    The Town Manager shall be the chief administrative and executive officer of the Town. The Town Manager is appointed by and serves at the will of the Town Council. The Town Manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of the Town Manager's administrative ability, experience, and training. The Town Manager shall administer the business of the Town, and the Town Council shall ensure that such administration is efficient. The Town Council may by ordinance delegate to the Town Manager any additional powers or duties it considers proper for the efficient administration of Town affairs. The Town Manager shall execute a bond conditioned that the Town Manager will faithfully perform the duties of Town Manager. The amount of such bond shall be as prescribed by ordinance adopted by the Town Council. The Town Council shall be authorized to enter into a Contract of Employment with the Town Manager and to prescribe such compensation therein as it may fix. The action of the Town Council in suspending or removing the Town Manager shall be final, it being the intention of this Charter to vest all authority and responsibility for such suspension or removal in the Town Council. 
Sec. 4.02. - Town Manager-Direction and supervision of employees, noninterference by council; appointments and removals of department heads. 
    Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations as provided by this Charter or otherwise by law, the Town Council or its Members shall deal with Town officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the Town Manager solely through the Town Manager, and no Member of the Town Council shall give orders to any subordinate of the Town Manager, either publicly or privately. Neither the Town Council nor any of its Members shall direct or request the appointment of any person to, or his or her removal from, office by the Town Manager or by any of the Town Manager's subordinates. Except as otherwise provided for in this Charter, the Town Manager shall be responsible for, and have the power to appoint, suspend, and/or remove all or any one of the directors of the departments of the Town with the concurrence of the Town Council. 
Sec. 4.03. - Town Manager-Specific powers and duties. 
    The Town Manager shall be responsible to the Town Council for the proper administration of the affairs of the Town and shall have the power and duty to: 
1)  Exercise control over all departments and subdivisions thereof created by this Charter or by ordinance. 
2)  Prepare and recommend items for inclusion in the official agenda of all Town Council meetings and meetings of the Boards and Commissions as established by this Charter or ordinance. 
3)  Prepare and submit to the Town Council the annual budget and capital program, and administer the budget as adopted by the Town Council. 
4)  Be responsible for the proper administration of all Town affairs placed in his or her hands. 
5)  See that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the Town or its inhabitants in any public utility franchise are faithfully kept and performed. 
6)  See that all laws and ordinances are enforced. 
7)  Keep the Town Council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the Town, and prepare and submit to the Town Council an annual report on the finances and administrative activities of the Town. 
8)  Appoint, suspend, and/or remove employees not otherwise provided for in this Charter. Appointments made by the Town Manager shall be on the basis of executive and administrative experience and ability, and of training fitness and efficiency of such appointees in the work which they are to administer. 
9)  Attend all Town Council meetings and take part in the discussion of any Town business. 
10)  Recommend to the Town Council for adoption such measures as the Town Manager may deem necessary or expedient; to execute deeds, deeds of trust, easements, releases, contracts, and all other legal instruments on behalf of the Town when authorized by ordinance or resolution of the Town Council. 
11)  Perform such other duties as are specified in this Charter, or as may be required by the Town Council by ordinance or resolution, not inconsistent with this Charter. 
(Amend. of 5-9-2009; Amend. of 5-14-2011) 
CHAPTER FIVE. - TOWN SECRETARY 

Sec. 5.01. - Appointment; removal; compensation. 
    The Town Council shall appoint, suspend, and/or remove the Town Secretary. The Town Secretary shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed by the Town Council. 
Sec. 5.02. - Duties of the Town Secretary. 
    The Town Secretary shall: 
1)  Attend all meetings of the Town Council and keep accurate records of all actions taken by the Council; 
2)  Maintain the official records and files of the Town; 
3)  Administer oaths as required by law; 
4)  Attest contracts, assessment certificates, ordinances, resolutions, and other legal instruments when executed by the authorized officers of the Town; 
5)  Serve as the election official for all Town elections; 
6)  Hold and maintain the Town Seal and affix it to all appropriate documents as required; 
7)  Perform such other duties as may be required by the Town Council, this Charter, or the laws of the State of Texas. 
(Amend. of 5-14-2011) 
CHAPTER SIX. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 6.01. - Creation. 
    The Town Council shall, by ordinance, create and provide for a Municipal Court to be known as the Municipal Court of the Town of Little Elm, Texas, and may appoint one or more Municipal Judges to serve in such Court. The Court shall have all the powers and duties as are now or as may hereafter be prescribed by the laws of the State of Texas in connection with the trial of misdemeanor offenses within its jurisdiction. 
Sec. 6.02. - Municipal Court Judge. 
    The Judge of the Municipal Court, and all alternates, shall be competent, duly qualified, and licensed attorneys in the State of Texas. The Judge of the Municipal Court shall be appointed to a term of two (2) years and may be appointed to additional and consecutive terms at the will and pleasure of the Town Council. The Judge shall receive such compensation as may be determined by the Town Council. This compensation shall be fixed, and be commensurate with the duties performed by the Judge. 
Sec. 6.03. - Clerk of the Court. 
    There shall be a Clerk of the Municipal Court appointed by the Town Manager. The Clerk of the Court and any Deputies appointed by the Town Manager shall have the power to administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, affix the seal of said Court as necessary and as required by law, and in general, do and perform any and all acts usual and necessary to be performed by clerks and deputy clerks of municipal courts of the State of Texas. 
Sec. 6.04. - Jurisdiction, power, and fines. 
    The Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction: 
1)  Over the forfeiture and collection of bonds given in proceedings therein, and to order the forfeiture of cash acceptance bonds upon the failure of the defendant to appear, and to accept the same in lieu of a fine; 
2)  Concurrent with the appropriate state Court on all criminal cases arising under the criminal laws of the state where the offense is committed within the Town limits and the penalty does not exceed that which is established for Municipal Courts by state law; 
3)  Over all criminal cases arising under the ordinances of the Town within the Town limits and outside the Town limits to the extent authorized by state law; 
4)  Punish for contempt, admit to bail, and forfeit bonds under such circumstances and as provided by law; 
5)  Enforce all process of the Courts in accordance with state law and Town ordinances, punish witnesses for failing to obey subpoenas, and compel their attendance by process of attachment. 
Sec. 6.05. - Cost, fines, and penalties. 
    All cost, fines, and penalties imposed by the Municipal Court shall be paid into the Town Treasury for the use and benefit of the Town, as may be consistent with present and future state laws. 
CHAPTER SEVEN. - TOWN ATTORNEY 

Sec. 7.01. - Appointment. 
    The Town Council shall appoint a competent licensed attorney, practicing law in the State of Texas, of recognized ability who shall be known as the Town Attorney. The Town Attorney serves at the pleasure of the Town Council and may be removed, without cause, by an affirmative vote of a majority of the full membership of the Town Council. 
(Amend. of 5-7-2005) 
Sec. 7.02. - Compensation. 
    The Town Attorney shall receive for his or her services such compensation as may be fixed by the Town Council at the time of the Town Attorney's appointment, and from time to time by appropriate resolution. 
Sec. 7.03. - Duties of Town Attorney. 
    The Town Attorney shall be the legal adviser of, and attorney for, all of the offices and departments of the Town, and shall represent the Town in all litigation and legal proceedings, provided however, that the Town Council may retain special counsel at any time it deems appropriate and necessary. The Town Attorney shall perform other duties prescribed by the Charter, by ordinance or resolution of the Town Council. 
(Amend. of 5-9-2009) 
CHAPTER EIGHT. - TOWN DEPARTMENTS AND FISCAL MATTERS 

Sec. 8.01. - Administrative departments. 
    There shall be such administrative departments as are established by this Charter and as may be established by ordinance and, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, such administrative departments shall be under the direction and supervision of the Town Manager. The Town Council may discontinue, re-designate, or combine any of the department and/or administrative offices of the Town. The head of each department shall be a director who shall be appointed by the Town Manager with the concurrence of the Council, and such director shall have supervision and control over that director's department. The same individual may head two (2) or more departments, and the Town Manager may head one (1) or more departments. 
Sec. 8.02. - Police and Fire Departments. 
    There is hereby created a Police Department of the Town of Little Elm, at the head of which shall be the Chief of Police. There is hereby created a Fire Department of the Town of Little Elm, at the head of which shall be a Fire Chief. The head of each department shall be a director who shall be appointed by the Town Manager with the concurrence of the Council, and such director shall have supervision and control over the director's department. The duties of the Chief of Police and Fire Chief and the other officers and personnel of such departments shall be as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 8.03. - Tax administration. 
A.  There shall be a department of taxation to assess and collect taxes, the director of which shall be the Town Tax Assessor and Collector who shall be appointed by the Town Manager with concurrence of the Town Council. The Tax Assessor and Collector shall provide a bond with such sureties and in such amount as the Council may require, and the premiums on such bond shall be paid by the Town. The Town Council may provide for such services by contract. 
B.  The Town Council shall have the power, and is hereby authorized to levy, assess, and collect annual taxes not to exceed the maximum limit set by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, as they now exist or as they may be amended, on each one hundred dollars ($100.00) assessed valuation of all property having a location within the corporate limits of the Town and not exempt from taxation by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas. 
C.  All taxes due the Town shall be payable at the office of the Town Assessor and Collector and may be paid at any time after the tax rolls for the year have been completed and approved, which completion and approval shall be not later than October 1. Taxes shall be paid before February 1 of each year succeeding the year for which the taxes are levied, and all such taxes not paid prior to such date shall be deemed delinquent and shall be subject to such penalty and interest as may be provided by law. Failure to levy and assess taxes through omission in preparation of the approved tax rolls shall not relieve the person, firm or corporation so omitted from the obligation to pay such current or past due taxes shown to be payable by recheck of the rolls and receipts for the years in questions, unless otherwise provided by law. 
D.  All property having its location in the Town on the first day of January of each year shall stand charged with a lien in favor of the Town from said date for the taxes due thereon. The lien provided hereby shall be superior to all other liens except other tax liens, regardless of when such other liens were created. All persons purchasing any of said property on or after the first day of January in any year shall take the same subject to the lien herein provided. In addition to the lien herein provided on the first day of January of any year, the owner of property subject to taxation by the Town shall be personally liable for the taxes due thereon for such year. The Town shall have the power to sue for and recover personal judgment for taxes without foreclosure, or to foreclose its lien or liens, or to recover both personal judgment and foreclosure. In such suit where it appears that the description of any property in the Town assessment rolls is insufficient to identify such property, the Town shall have the right to plead a good description of the property to be assessed, to prove the same, and to have its judgment foreclosing the tax lien and/or for personal judgment against the owner for such taxes as such ownership and property appears on the approved tax rolls furnished by the Denton Central Appraisal District. 
Sec. 8.04. - Finance Department. 
    There shall be a Department of Finance, the director of which shall be appointed by the Town Manager with concurrence of the Town Council, The head of the Department of Finance shall be known as the Finance Director who shall also be the Town Treasurer. The Finance Director shall provide a bond with such surety and in such amount as the Council may require and the premiums on such bond shall be paid by the Town. The Finance Director shall have knowledge of municipal accounting and taxation and shall have experience in budgeting and financial control. The Finance Director shall have the custody of all public monies, funds, notes, bonds, and other securities belonging to the Town. The Finance Director, under the direction of the Town Manager, shall oversee the financial operations and procedures that are implemented in each of the Town's departments. The Finance Director shall make payments out of Town funds upon order of the Town Council or other authorized Town Officer as provided herein. The Finance Director shall render a full and accurate statement to the Town Manager and the Town Council of his or her receipts and payments at such times as the Town Manager or Town Council may require. The Finance Director shall perform other such acts and duties as the Town Council may prescribe. 
(Amend. of 5-7-2005) 
Sec. 8.05. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the Town shall begin on the first day of October and end on the following September 30 th , but the fiscal year may be changed by the Town Council by ordinance. 
Sec. 8.06. - Annual budget. 
    It shall be the duty of the Town Manager to submit an annual budget not later than thirty (30) days prior to the end of the current fiscal year to the Town Council for its review, consideration and revision. The Town Council shall call a public hearing or hearings on the budget. The Town Council may adopt a budget with or without amendments. The Town Council may increase or decrease amounts or programs and may delete any programs or amounts except expenditures required by law or for a debt service, provided that no amendment shall increase the authorized expenditures to an amount greater than the total of the estimated-income for the current fiscal year plus funds available from prior years. At the close of each fiscal year, the unencumbered balance of each appropriation shall revert to the fund from which it was appropriated and shall be subject to future appropriations, but appropriations may be made in furtherance of improvements or other objects of work of the Town which will not be completed within the current year. 
State Law reference- Municipal budget, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 102.001-102.111. 
Sec. 8.07. - Failure to adopt annual budget. 
    If the Town Council fails to adopt the budget by the 15 th of September, the amounts appropriated for the current fiscal year shall he deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month to month basis with all items in it prorated accordingly until such time as the Town Council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The property tax levy will be set to equal the total current fiscal year tax receipts, unless the ensuing fiscal year budget is approved by September 15 th of the current fiscal year. 
Sec. 8.08. - Bonds and other evidences of indebtedness. 
    The Town shall have the right and power to borrow money on the credit of the Town for public purposes by whatsoever method it may deem to be in the public interest. The Town shall further have the power to borrow money on the credit of the Town and to issue general obligation bonds and other evidences of indebtedness for permanent public improvements or for any other public purpose not prohibited by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas and to issue refunding bonds to refund outstanding bonds and other evidences of indebtedness of the Town previously issued. All such bonds shall be issued in conformity with the laws of the State of Texas. The Town shall further have the power to borrow money for the purpose of constructing, acquiring, improving, extending or repairing or public utilities, recreational facilities or any other self-liquidating municipal functions not prohibited by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, and to issue revenue bonds to evidence the obligations created thereby. Such bonds shall be a charge upon and payable from the properties, or interest therein pledged, or the income therefrom, or both. The holders of the revenue bonds of the Town shall never have the right to demand payment thereof out of monies raised or to be raised by taxation. All such bonds shall be issued in conformity with the laws of the State of Texas. The Town shall have the power to borrow money for public improvements or any public purpose in any other manner provided by law, including certificates of obligation as authorized by Chapter 271 of the Texas Local Government Code or other applicable laws. All bonds and evidences of indebtedness of the Town having been approved by the Attorney General and registered by the Comptroller of Public Accounts shall thereafter be incontestable in any court or other forum for any reason, and shall be valid and binding obligations of the Town in accordance with their terms for all purposes. 
State Law reference- Home rule municipal authority to issue bonds, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 1331.052; Public Security Procedures Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 1201.001 et seq.; ad valorem taxes as security for payment of tax anticipation notes, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 1431.008. 
Sec. 8.09. - Purchasing. 
A.  The Town Council may by ordinance give the Town Manager general authority to contract for expenditures without further approval of the Town Council for all budgeted items not exceeding limits set by the Town Council within the ordinance. 
B.  All contracts for expenditures or purchases involving more than the limits must be expressly approved in advance by the Town Council. All contracts or purchases involving more than the limits set by the Town Council shall be awarded by the Town Council, in accordance with state law. 
C.  Emergency contracts as authorized by law and this Charter may be negotiated by the Town Council or Town Manager if given authority by the Town Council, without competitive bidding, and in accordance with state law. Such emergency shall be declared by the Town Manager and approved by the Town Council, or may be declared by the Town Council. 
(Amend. of 5-14-2011) 
CHAPTER NINE. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 

Sec. 9.01. - Planning and Zoning Commission. 
    The Town Council shall create a Planning and Zoning Commission of the Town of Little Elm and shall appoint seven (7) members and two (2) alternate members, each member of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be a citizen of Town of Little Elm. Members shall be appointed for three (3) year staggered terms; provided, however, that members of the Planning and Zoning Commission serve at the pleasure of the Town Council and may be removed, without cause, by an affirmative vote of the majority of the full membership of the Town Council. Such appointees shall serve without compensation and may not hold any elective office of the State of Texas or any other political subdivision thereof during their terms. A vacancy in an unexpired term shall be filled by the Town Council for the remainder of the term. The majority of the appointed members shall constitute a quorum, and decisions may only be made with the affirmative vote of a majority of these members present and voting. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall select from any of its members a Chairman and Vice Chairman. 
(Amend. of 5-7-2005; Amend. of 5-14-2011; Amend. of 11-3-2015) 
State Law reference- Zoning commission, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.007; commission compliance with open meetings law, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.0075. 
Sec. 9.02. - Board of Adjustments. 
    The Town Council shall appoint a Board of Adjustments comprising of five (5) regular members and two (2) alternate members for two (2) year staggered terms, all Members of which shall be citizens of the Town of Little Elm. The Board of Adjustments shall be governed by Chapter 211, Texas Local Government Code, or other applicable laws, and have such additional duties as maybe prescribed by ordinance or applicable state law. A vacancy on the board shall be filled by Town Council for the unexpired term. 
(Amend. of 11-3-2015) 
State Law reference- Board of Adjustment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 211.008-211.013. 
Sec. 9.03. - Other boards and commissions. 
    The Town Council shall have the power and is hereby authorized to create, abolish, establish, and appoint such other Town and corporate boards, commissions and committees, which shall be composed of the citizens of the Town of Little Elm except as otherwise required by law, as the Town Council deems necessary to carry out the functions of the Town, and to prescribe the purpose, functions, and tenure of each board, commission, or committee. 
(Amend. of 5-14-2011) 
CHAPTER TEN. - ORDINANCES 

Sec. 10.01. - Procedure for passing ordinances and resolutions. 
    The Town Council shall evidence its official actions by written ordinances, resolutions, or oral motions. The style of all ordinances shall be: "Be it ordained by the Town Council of The Town of Little Elm, Texas" and the style of all resolutions shall be "Be it resolved by the Town Council of the Town of Little Elm, Texas." Each proposed ordinance shall not be amended or repealed except by adoption of another ordinance. All ordinances and resolutions passed by the Town Council shall become effective immediately from and after passage except where publication of a caption is required or where the ordinance, state law, or other provisions of this Charter provide otherwise, in which case the effective date shall be as prescribed in the ordinances. 
Sec. 10.02. - Publication of ordinances. 
    The descriptive caption or title of each ordinance containing a penalty shall be published at least once in the official newspaper of the Town, unless otherwise provided by state law or this Charter. 
Sec. 10.03. - Code of ordinances. 
    The Town Council shall have the power to cause the ordinances of the Town to be printed, in code form, and shall have the same arranged and digested as often as the Town Council may deem advisable, provided that failure to print the ordinances as herein provided shall not affect the validity of the same. 
Sec. 10.04. - Ordinances and resolutions now in effect. 
    All ordinances, portions thereof, resolutions, contracts, bonds, obligations, rules and regulations now in force under the Town government of the Town of Little Elm, and not in conflict with the provisions of this Charter, shall remain in force under this Charter until altered, amended, or repealed by the Town Council in the manner required by law. 
CHAPTER ELEVEN. - ELECTIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Elections, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 1.001 et seq.; age and residency requirements for home rule city office candidates, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 141.003; withdrawal by candidate in home rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Elections Code § 145.097. 

Sec. 11.01. - Town elections. 
    Beginning on the 1st Saturday in May 2002, each qualified voter shall be entitled to vote for the offices of Council Members for Places 1, 2, 4 and 6. The Council Members elected in single member district places 2 and 4 shall serve for an initial term of two (2) years, or until the regular election in May 2004. The Council Members elected in at-large places 1 and 6 shall serve for a term of three (3) years. The Mayor and Council Members in single member district Places 3 and 5 will be elected in May, 2003, for a term of three (3) years. Thereafter, all Council Members shall be elected for a term of three (3) years. All qualified voters of the state who reside within the Town of Little Elm shall have the right to vote in the Town elections. 
    Beginning with the election in May, 2020, the Council Member elected in at-large place 1 shall serve for a term of two (2) years until the election in May, 2022, after which time the Council Member elected in at-large place 1 shall serve a term of three (3) years from that election going forward. Beginning with the election in May, 2021, the Council Member elected in single member district place 5 shall serve for a term of two (2) years until the election in May, 2023, after which time the Council Member elected in single member district place 5 shall serve a term of three (3) years from that election going forward. 
(Amend. of 11-3-2015) 
Sec. 11.02. - Special elections. 
    The Town Council, by ordinance or resolution, may call such special elections as are authorized by the state law or this Charter, fix the time and place of holding the same, and provide all means for holding such special elections, provided that every special election shall be called and held as nearly as practicable according to the provisions governing regular elections. 
Sec. 11.03. - Regulation of elections. 
    All Town elections shall be governed by the Constitution of the State of Texas, general laws of the state, this Charter, and by ordinance of the Town regulating the holding of municipal elections. The Town Council shall appoint the election judges and other election officials and shall provide for the compensation of all election officials in Town elections and for all other expenses in holding said elections. 
Sec. 11.04. - Candidates: filing for office. 
    Any qualified person as prescribed by Section 3.02 may make application to have his/her name placed on the official ballot for the position of Council Member or Mayor. The application shall be made in accordance with all applicable laws and shall state that the candidate agrees to serve if qualified and elected. Each candidate shall execute such oath and other official form of affidavit as may be required by the Town Secretary pursuant to Texas Election Code. The Town Secretary shall review the application and notify the candidate whether or not the application satisfies the requirements of this Charter and the Texas Election Code. If an application is insufficient, the Town Secretary shall return it immediately to the candidate with a statement of such insufficiency. The candidate may file a new application within the regular time for filing applications. The Town Secretary shall keep on file all applications found sufficient at least until the expiration of the term of office for which such candidates filed. 
Sec. 11.05. - Official ballot. 
    The order on the ballot of the names of the candidates shall be determined by the Town Secretary in accordance with the procedures set out in the Texas Election Code. The name of each candidate seeking an elective office, except those who have withdrawn, died, or become ineligible prior to the time permitted for withdrawal, shall be printed on the official ballot in the name designated by the candidate in accordance with the Texas Election Code. Provision for early and absentee voting shall be made as provided by the Texas Election Code. 
Sec. 11.06. - Canvassing and election results. 
    Returns of every municipal election shall be delivered forthwith by the Election Judges to the Town Secretary, with a copy of the returns being sent to the Mayor. The Town Council shall canvass the returns, investigate the qualifications of the candidates and declare the official results of the election not less than two (2) days nor more than six (6) days after the date of the election, or as may be otherwise provided by the Texas Election Code. 
Sec. 11.07. - Runoff election. 
A.  The candidates for Mayor and Council Members in Places 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 receiving a majority of all votes cast for the office of Mayor and Council Members for Places 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 shall be declared elected. 
B.  In the event a candidate for the office of Mayor or Council Member in Places 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 or 6 fails to receive a majority of all votes cast for that office, a runoff election for that office shall be conducted. If more than two (2) candidates tie for the highest number of votes for either the office of the Mayor or Council Members, the tied candidates shall draw by lots to determine which two (2) are to be in a run off election. The Town Secretary shall supervise the drawing of lots under this section. 
C.  Not later than the fifth (5) day after the date of counting of the returns, the Town Council shall order a runoff election to be held consistent with the Texas Election Code. 
CHAPTER TWELVE. - FRANCHISES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- General powers of municipal utility systems, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 402.001; certain public services and utilities in home-rule municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 402.002. 

Sec. 12.01. - Power to grant franchise. 
    The Town Council shall have the power, subject to the provisions hereof, by ordinance to confer upon any person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity the franchise or right to use the public property of the Town for the purpose of furnishing to the public any general public service or benefit, including, but not limited to, heat, light, power, telephone service, transportation, or other telecommunication providers for compensation or hire. No franchise shall be granted by the Town to any person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity to own, control or operate a waterworks therein. The Town shall have the power by ordinance to grant, renew, and extend all franchises of all public utilities of every character operating within the Town. No such franchise shall be granted until after a public meeting shall have been called and held and until such ordinance shall have been passed and accepted by the franchisee. No such ordinance shall become effective until thirty (30) days after its passage. 
Sec. 12.02. - Transfer of franchise. 
    No public utility or other franchise shall be transferable except with the approval of the Town Council, expressed by ordinance. This restriction shall not be construed to prevent the franchise holder from pledging the franchise as security for a valid debt. 
Sec. 12.03. - Ownership, use and control of streets. 
    No franchise or easement involving the right to use the same either along, over, across, under, or upon the streets, alleys, highways, parks, and public ways shall be valid unless granted in compliance with the terms of this chapter. No granting of a franchise by ordinance pursuant to this chapter shall convey any ownership or interest in any property of the Town other than the right to use the public property for purposes of such franchisee's operations as expressed in the ordinance granting such franchise. 
Sec. 12.04. - Right of regulation. 
    In granting, amending, renewing and extending public service and utility franchises, the Town shall retain the right to: 
(1)  Repeal such franchise by ordinance for failure to comply with the terms thereof, such power to be exercised only after due notice and hearing; 
(2)  Require an adequate extension of plant and service as is necessary to provide adequate service to the public, and maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the highest reasonable standard of efficiency; 
(3)  Establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates; 
(4)  Impose regulations to ensure safe, efficient and continuous service to the public. The franchise holder in opening and refilling all earth openings shall relay the pavement and do all other work necessary to complete restoration of streets, sidewalks or grounds to a condition equally as good as or better than when disturbed; and 
(5)  To regulate, locate, or prohibit the erection of any and all poles, wires, or other utility equipment, conveyance, or structure, on the streets, alleys and public places of said Town, and to cause the same to be changed, removed, altered, increased, diminished, placed underground, or be supported by poles of such material, kind, quality and class as may be determined by the Town Council, whether the same be telegraph, telephone, electric, cable television or otherwise, and to enforce the provisions hereof by appropriate action in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
Sec. 12.05. - Compensation for franchise. 
    All persons, corporations, or association of persons, to whom a franchise or privilege may hereafter be granted shall pay to the Town for such privilege such compensation as may be fixed by the Town Council in the grant of such franchise or privilege. Such compensation as fixed by contract or provided by any Texas statute or statutes and any amendments thereto shall become due and payable at such time as the Town Council shall fix in the grant of such franchise or privilege. The failure of any franchisee to pay compensation to the Town when due shall result in forfeiture of the franchise or privilege. 
Sec. 12.06. - Council to fix and regulate charges, fares, or rates. 
    If applicable state law so provides, the Town Council shall determine, fix, and regulate the charges, fares or rates of any person, firm, or corporation enjoying a franchise or privilege granted under the provisions of this chapter, and shall prescribe the kind of service to be furnished to the public by such person, firm or corporation, and the manner in which it shall be rendered and may, from time to time, alter or change such rules, regulations, and compensation after reasonable notice and public hearing, provided that the rates, charges and fares so fixed shall at all times be reasonable and permit a reasonable net return on the actual value of the physical properties and equipment of such utilities. In this connection, the Town Council may require any utility or franchise holder to furnish such financial reports and information as the Town Council may request, including reports of actual operating costs and the financial condition of its operations within the Town, and the Town Council may employ, at the expense of such franchisee, necessary outside experts to examine and audit the accounts and records of the franchisee to determine the reasonableness of such charges, fares, and rates. 
CHAPTER THIRTEEN. - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM, AND RECALL 

Sec. 13.01. - Scope of recall. 
    Any elected Town official shall be subject to recall and removal from office by the qualified voters of the Town of Little Elm on grounds of incompetency, misconduct, or malfeasance in office. 
Sec. 13.02. - Petitions for recall. 
    Before the question of recall of such officer shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the Town of Little Elm, a petition demanding such questions to be submitted shall first be filed with the Town Secretary. If recall is sought for a Council Member in Place 2, 3, 4, or 5, the petition must be signed by qualified voters in the specific district equal to ten (10%) percent of the qualified voters in the specific district, or sixty five (65%) percent of the votes cast at the last general election for the specific place; whichever is greater. If recall is sought for the Mayor or Council Member in Place 1 or 6, the petition must be signed by qualified voters of the Town equal to ten (10%) percent of the qualified voters in the Town, or sixty five (65%) percent of the votes cast at the last general election for such office, whichever is greater. 
    Each signer of such recall petition shall personally sign his or her name thereto in ink or indelible pencil, and shall write after signer's name his or her place of residence, giving the name of the street and number, or place of residence, and shall also write thereon the day, the month, and the year his or her signature was affixed. 
Sec. 13.03. - Form of recall petition. 
    The recall petition mentioned above must be addressed to the Council of the Town of Little Elm, must be distinctly and specifically pointed to the grounds upon which such petition for removal is predicated, and, if there is more than one ground, said petition shall specifically state each ground with such certainty as to give the officer sought to be removed notice of the matters and things with which the officer is charged. The signature shall be verified by oath in the following form: 
"State of Texas" 
County of _____________________________ 
I, _______________________________, being first duly sworn, on oath depose and say that I am one of the signers of the above petition, and that the statements made therein are true, and that each signature appearing thereon was made in my presence on the day and date it purports to have been made, and I solemnly swear that the same is the genuine signature of the person it purports to be. 
_______________________________________ 
Signature 
Sworn and subscribed before me this _____ day of __________, 2_____. 
Signed ________________________________ 
Notary Public in and for the State of Texas 
Sec. 13.04. - Various papers constituting petition. 
    The petition may consist of one or more copies, or subscription lists, circulated separately, and the signatures thereto may be upon the paper or papers containing the form of petition, or upon other paper attached thereto. Verifications provided for in the preceding section of this Chapter may be made by one or more petitioners, and the several parts of copies of the petition may be filed separately and by different persons, but no signatures to such petition shall remain effective to be counted which were placed thereon more than forty-five (45) days prior to the filing of such petition or petitions with the Town Secretary. All papers comprising a recall petition shall be filed with the Town Secretary who shall immediately notify, in writing, the officer sought to be removed, by mailing such notice to the officer's Little Elm address. 
Sec. 13.05. - Presentation of petition to the Council. 
    Within seven (7) days after the date of the filing of the papers constituting the recall petition, the Town Secretary shall present such petition to the Council of the Town of Little Elm. 
Sec. 13.06. - Public hearing to be held. 
    The officer whose removal is sought may, within seven (7) days after such recall petition has been presented to the Council, request that a public hearing be held to permit the officer to present the facts pertinent to the charges specified in the recall petition. In this event, the Town Council shall order such public hearing to be held, not less than five (5) days nor more than fifteen (15) days after receiving such request for a public hearing. 
Sec. 13.07. - Calling of recall election. 
    If the officer whose removal is sought does not resign, then the Town Council shall order an election and set the date for holding such a recall election. The date selected for the recall election shall be in accordance with the Texas Election Code. If after the recall election is established, the officer vacates his or her position, the election shall be cancelled. Any election order so issued shall comply fully with the Texas Election Code. 
Sec. 13.08. - Ballots in recall election. 
    Ballots used at recall elections shall conform to the following requirements: 
(A)  With respect to each person whose removal is sought, the question shall be submitted: 
"Shall ____________________ be removed from the office of ____________________ by recall?" 
(B)  Immediately below each such question there shall be printed the following words, one above the other, in the order indicated: 
"Yes" 
"No" 
Sec. 13.09. - Result of recall election. 
    If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election shall be "No," that is against the recall of the person named on the ballot, the officer shall continue in office for the remainder of the officer's unexpired term, subject to recall as before. If a majority of the votes cast at such election be "Yes," that is for the recall of the person named on the ballot, the officer shall, regardless of any technical defects in the recall petition, be deemed removed from office and the vacancy be filled by the Town Council as provided in this Charter. 
Sec. 13.10. - Recall, restrictions thereon. 
    No recall petition shall be filed against any officer of the Town of Little Elm within three (3) months after the officer's election, no more than twice within an officer's term, and not within three (3) months after an election for such officer's recall. 
Sec. 13.11. - Failure of the Council to call an election-recall. 
    If all the requirements of this Charter shall have been met and the Town Council shall fail or refuse to receive the recall petition, or order such recall election, or discharge any other duties imposed on the Town Council by the provisions of this Charter with reference to such recall, then any petitioning citizen may file with the appropriate court for a writ of mandamus to force the Town to call the election. 
(Amend. of 5-9-2009) 
Sec. 13.12. - General power of initiative and referendum. 
    The qualified voters of the Town of Little Elm, Texas, in addition to the method of legislation herein before provided, shall have the power to direct legislation by the initiative and referendum. 
(A)  Initiative: Such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program or any ordinance not subject to initiative as provided by state law, relating to appropriation of money, issuing of bonds, levy of taxes or salaries of Town officers or employees. 
(B)  Referendum: Such power shall not extend to the budget, or capital program, or any emergency ordinance, or ordinance not subject to referendum as provided by state law, relating to appropriation of money, issuing of bonds, levy of taxes, or zoning. 
Sec. 13.13. - Initiative. 
    Qualified voters of the Town of Little Elm may initiate legislation by submitting a petition addressed to the Town Council which requests the submission of a proposed ordinance to a vote of the qualified voters of the Town. Said petition must be signed by qualified voters of the Town equal to ten (10%) percent of the qualified voters in the Town, or sixty-five (65%) percent of the votes cast at the last municipal general election, whichever is greater and each copy of the petition shall have attached to it a copy of the proposed legislation. The petition shall be signed in the same manner as recall petitions are signed, as provided in this Chapter, and shall be verified by oath in the manner and form provided for recall petitions in this Chapter. The petition may consist of one or more copies as permitted for recall petitions. Such petition shall be filed with the Town Secretary. Within seven (7) days after filing of such petition, the Town Secretary shall present said petition and proposal ordinance to the Council. Upon presentation to it, it shall become the duty of the Council, within ten (10) days after the receipt thereafter, at which the qualified voters of the Town of Little Elm shall vote on the question of adopting or rejecting the proposed legislation. However, if any other municipal election is to be held within sixty (60) days after the filing of the petition, the question may be voted on at such election. Any election order so issued shall comply fully with the Texas Election Code. 
Sec. 13.14. - Referendum. 
    Qualified voters of the Town of Little Elm may require that any ordinance, with the exception of ordinances appropriating money or levying of taxes, passed by the Town Council be submitted to the voters of the Town for approval or disapproval, by submitting a petition for this purpose within thirty (30) days after final passage of said ordinance or resolution, or within thirty (30) days after its publication. Said petition shall be addressed, signed, and verified as required in Section 13.13 of this Charter and shall be submitted to the Town Secretary. Immediately upon the filing of such petition, the Town Secretary shall present said petition to the Town Council. Thereupon, the Town Council shall immediately reconsider such ordinance and, if the Town Council does not entirely repeal the same, shall submit it to popular vote as provided in Section 13.07 of this Charter. Pending the holding of such election, each ordinance shall be suspended from taking effect and shall not later take effect unless a majority of the qualified voters thereon at such election shall vote in favor thereof. 
Sec. 13.15. - Voluntary submission of legislation by the Council. 
    The Council, upon its own motion and by a majority vote of its Members, may submit to popular vote at any election for adoption or rejection any proposed ordinance or resolution or measure, or may submit for repeal any existing ordinance in the same manner and the with same force and effect as provided in this Chapter for submission of petition, and may at its discretion call a special election for this purpose. 
Sec. 13.16. - Form of ballots. 
    The ballots used when voting such referred ordinance shall set forth their nature sufficiently to identify them and shall also set forth upon separate lines the words: 
    "For the Ordinance" or 
    "Against the Ordinance" 
Sec. 13.17. - Publication of proposed ordinances. 
    The Town Secretary of the Town of Little Elm shall publish at least twice in the official newspaper of the Town the proposed or referred ordinance within fifteen (15) days before the date of the election, and shall give other such notices and do other such things relative to said election as required in the general municipal election or by the ordinance or resolution calling said election. 
Sec. 13.18. - Adoption of ordinances. 
    If a majority of the qualified voters voting on any proposed ordinance shall vote in favor thereof, it shall thereupon or any time fixed therein, become effective as a law or as a mandatory order of the Council. 
Sec. 13.19. - Inconsistent ordinances. 
    If the provisions of two or more proposed ordinances approved at the same election are inconsistent, the ordinance receiving the highest number of votes shall prevail. 
Sec. 13.20. - Ordinances passed by popular vote, repeal, or amendment. 
    No ordinance which may have been passed by the Town Council upon a petition or adopted by popular vote under the provisions of this Chapter shall be repealed or amended except by the Town Council in response to a referendum petition or by submission as provided by Section 13.15 of this Charter. 
Sec. 13.21. - Further regulations by the council. 
    The Town Council may pass ordinances providing further regulations for carrying out the provisions of this Chapter consistent herewith. 
Sec. 13.22. - Franchise ordinances. 
    Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed to be in conflict with any of the provisions of this Charter, pertaining to ordinances granting franchises when valuable rights shall have accrued thereunder. 
Sec. 13.23. - Failure of the council to call an election-Initiative or referendum. 
    If all the requirements of this Charter shall have been met and the Town Council shall fail or refuse to receive the initiative or referendum petition, or order such initiative or referendum election, or discharge any other duties imposed on the Town Council by the provisions of this Charter with reference to such initiative or referendum, then any petitioning citizen may file with the appropriate court for a writ of mandamus to force the Town to call the election. 
(Amend. of 5-9-2009) 
CHAPTER FOURTEEN. - GENERAL AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 14.01. - Effect of Charter on existing law. 
    All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations in force in the Town on the effective date of this Charter and not in conflict with this Charter shall remain in full force and effect until altered, amended, or repealed. All taxes, assessments, liens, encumbrances, obligations and demands of or against the Town, fixed or established before such date, shall be valid if properly fixed or established either under the law in force at the time of such proceedings or under the law after the adoption of this Charter. 
Sec. 14.02. - Continuation of present offices. 
    All persons holding administrative offices at the time this Charter takes effect shall continue in office and in the performance of their duties in the capacities to which they have been appointed until provision shall have been made in accordance with the terms of this Charter for the performance of such duties or the discontinuance of such office, if any. The powers conferred and the duties imposed upon any office, department or agency of the Town by the laws of the state shall, if such office, department or agency be abolished by this Charter or under its authority, be thereafter exercised and discharged by the office, department or agency designated by the Council, unless otherwise provided herein. 
Sec. 14.03. - Nepotism. 
    No officer of the Town of Little Elm shall appoint, vote for, or confirm the appointment to any office, position, clerkship, employment or duty, of any person related within the second degree by affinity or within the third degree by consanguinity to any Member of the Town Council or Mayor, when the salary, fees, or compensation of such appointee is to be paid for, directly or indirectly, out of or from public funds or fees of office of any kind or character whatsoever. However, this provision shall not prevent the appointment, voting for, or confirmation of any person who shall have been continuously employed in any such office, position, clerkship, employment or duty for at least thirty (30) days, if the officer is appointed, or at least six (6) months, if the officer is elected. 
    When a person is allowed to continue in any such position, the officer related shall not participate in the deliberation or voting upon the appointment, reappointment, employment, confirmation, re-employment, change in status, compensation, or dismissal of such person, unless such action is taken with respect to a bona fide class or category of employees. 
Sec. 14.04. - Official newspaper. 
    The Town Council shall have the power to designate by resolution a newspaper of general circulation in the Town as the Town's official newspaper. All ordinances, captions of ordinances, notices and other matters required to be published by this Charter, by ordinance, or by state law, shall be published in the official newspaper. 
Sec. 14.05. - Judicial notice. 
    This Charter shall be recorded in the Town Secretary's office in a book kept for that purpose. As soon as practicable after its adoption, an authenticated copy of the Charter shall be certified to the Secretary of State of Texas, the Charter becomes a public act. Such Charter provisions may be read in evidence without pleading or proof of their provisions, and judicial notice shall be taken thereof in all courts and places. 
Sec. 14.06. - Claims for damage or injury. 
    The Town of Little Elm shall never be liable for any personal injury or death or for claims for damages or injury to real or personal property alleged to have been caused by the negligent act or omission of any officer, agent or employee of the Town unless the person who has been injured, the person whose property has been injured or damaged, or someone on his behalf, shall file a claim in writing with the Town Secretary within six (6) months after said injury, death or damage has occurred, stating specifically when, where, and how the injury, death or damage occurred, the full extent thereof, the amount of damages claimed or asserted, and the basis claimed for liability on the part of the Town. The person giving notice under this section shall give the address of every place that said person has resided at during the last six (6) months prior to the injury, death or damage and shall subscribe his or her name thereto. Neither the Town Mayor, Town Council Member, Town Manager, Town Secretary, Town Attorney, or any other officer or employee of the Town shall have authority to waive any of the provisions of this section, but the same may be waived only by resolution of the Town Council made and passed before the expiration of said six (6) month period. 
State Law reference- Six months notice of claim period, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code § 101.101; governmental liability, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code § 101.021. 
Sec. 14.07. - Property not subject to garnishment and execution. 
    No property owned or held by the Town shall be subject to any garnishment or execution of any kind or nature except as specifically provided by state law. 
Sec. 14.08. - Conflict of interest. 
    No Member of the Town Council, the Mayor, or any other officer, whether elected, appointed, paid or unpaid, who exercises responsibilities beyond those that are advisory in nature, shall participate in a vote or decision on a matter involving a business entity in which such officer has a substantial interest if it is reasonably foreseeable that an action on the matter would confer an economic benefit on the business entity. If the officer or a person related to the officer within the second degree of affinity or consanguinity has a substantial interest in the business entity that would be pecuniary affected by an official action of the Town Council, the officer, if a Member of the Town Council, shall file an affidavit stating the nature and extent of the interest and abstain from further participation in the matter. 
State Law reference- Regulation of conflicts of interest in local government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 171.001 et seq. 
Sec. 14.09. - Public meetings and records. 
    All meetings of the Town Council and all boards appointed by the Town Council shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 551 of the Texas Government Code and any amendments thereto with regard to the posting of agenda and the holding of public meetings. All public records of every office, department or agency of the Town shall be open to inspection by any citizen at all reasonable business hours, provided that records excepted from public disclosure by Chapter 552 of the Texas Government Code and any amendments thereto shall be closed to the public and not considered public records for the purpose of this section. 
State Law reference- Open Meetings Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.001 et seq. 
Sec. 14.10. - Indemnification of officers. 
    The Town Council shall, by appropriate ordinance, provide for the indemnification and defense of the officers and employees of the Town, including the Members of the Town Council, or any board, commission, or committee, including volunteers, against any loss, cost, or expense, including court costs and attorney's fees, to the extent allowed by law, arising out of any claim, suit, or judgment or settlement thereof, resulting from any alleged negligent act or omission of such officer, employee, member, or volunteer during the discharge of his/her duties and within the scope of his/her office, employment, membership, or assigned voluntary position with the Town, or in any other case where the Town is directed or authorized by law to do so. Provided, however, that such indemnification will not be provided for any act arising out of the intentional or knowing violation of any penal statute or ordinance or arising out of any conduct determined by final judgment to be an act of fraud or to have been taken with the intent to deceive or defraud, or for any personal or private business of such officer, employee, member, or volunteer, or for the gross negligence or official misconduct, or willful or wrongful act, or omission of such officer, employee, member, or volunteer. 
State Law reference- Local government may provide legal counsel for defendant employees, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code § 102.004. 
Sec. 14.11. - Amendment of Charter. 
    Amendments to this Charter may be submitted by the Town Council to the qualified voters of the Town for their approval at an election, no more often than once every two (2) years, held in accordance with Chapter 9, Texas Local Government Code. 
Sec. 14.12. - Bond or security not required. 
    It shall not be necessary in any action, suit or proceeding in which the Town is a party, for any bond, undertaking, or security to be executed on behalf of said Town, that all such actions, suits, appeals, or proceedings shall be conducted in the same manner as if such bond, undertaking, or security had been given, and said Town shall be liable as if such obligation had been duly given and executed. 
Sec. 14.13. - Severability clause. 
    If any chapter, section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Charter shall be held unconstitutional or invalid for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this Charter nor the context in which such provision so held invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire chapter, section, paragraph, or sentence may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the provision to which such holding shall apply directly. 
Sec. 14.14. - Meaning of words. 
    The provisions of this Charter shall be liberally construed for the purpose of effecting the objects and ends thereof. Unless some other meaning is manifest, the word "Town" shall be construed to mean the "Town of Little Elm," and the word "and" may be read "or" or the "or" may be read "and" if the sense requires. Words in the present tense include future tense and, except when a more restrictive meaning is manifest, singular may mean plural. The word "Council" shall be construed to mean the Town Council of the Town of Little Elm. The gender of the wording as contained in this Charter shall always be interpreted to mean either sex. 
Sec. 14.15. - Effective date. 
    This Charter shall take effect immediately following adoption by the voters and entry of the official order by the Town Council declaring the same adopted as soon as practicable. After adoption, the Town Mayor shall certify to the Secretary of State an authenticated copy of the Charter under the Town's seal showing approval by the voters. The Town Secretary shall record the Charter in a book kept for that purpose and keep and maintain the same as the official record of the Town. 
CHAPTER FIFTEEN. - ADOPTION OF CHARTER 

Sec. 15.01. - Submission and election. 
A.  This Charter Shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the Town of Little Elm for adoption or rejection on the 5 th day of May, 2001, at which election, if a majority of the qualified voters voting in such election shall vote in favor of the adoption of this Charter, it shall then immediately become the governing law of the Town of Little Elm, Texas, until amended or repealed. 
B.  It being impracticable to submit this Charter so that each subject may be voted on separately, it is hereby prescribed that the form of ballot to be used in such election shall be as follows, to wit: 
"FOR" 
ADOPTION OF CHARTER 
"AGAINST" 
    This Home Rule Charter for the Town of little Elm, Texas, is respectfully submitted to the Town Council of the Town of Little Elm for the purpose of calling an election on the question of adoption of the Home Rule Charter this 22 nd day of February, 2001. This proposed Charter represents the recommendation of the majority of the members of the Home Rule Charter Commission, whose membership and signatures are evidenced below. 
Sec. 15.02. - Charter Review Committee. 
A.  The Town Council shall establish and appoint a Charter Review Committee to review and make recommendations regarding the Town Charter. The Charter Review Committee shall be composed of not fewer than seven (7) residents of the Town, and shall be established and appointed by Town Council at least every two (2) years from the date that the prior Charter Review Committee concluded its operations. The Charter Review Committee shall be established and appointed not less than nine (9) months before the selected election date at which any proposed Charter amendments may be considered. 
B.  It shall be the duty of the Charter Review Committee to do the following: 
1.  Inquire into the operation of the Town government under the Charter provisions and determine whether any such provisions require revision. To this end, public hearings may be held; and the Charter Review Committee shall have the power to compel the attendance of any officer or employee of the Town and to require the submission of any non-privileged and non-confidential Town records which the Charter Review Committee may determine is necessary to conduct such hearings. 
2.  Propose any recommendations to the Town Manager and Town Council that the Charter Review Committee may determine are desirable to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Charter by the Town's departments. 
3.  Propose amendments to the Charter to improve the effective application of the Charter to current conditions. 
4.  Report the Charter Review Committee's findings and present its proposed amendments, if any, to the Town Council. Any report of the Charter Review Committee shall be delivered to the Town Attorney at least fifteen (15) days prior to its presentation to the Town Council. Within such time, and no later than ten (10) days prior to its presentation to the Town Council, the Town Attorney shall advise the Charter Review Committee in writing of any changes in proposed amendments which the Town Attorney deems necessary or desirable. A copy of the Town Attorney's recommendations shall be attached to the report of the Charter Review Committee at the time of its presentation to the Town Council. 
C.  The Town Council shall receive any Charter Review Committee report and have published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town all proposed amendments recommended by the final report of the Charter Review Committee. 
D.  The term of office of the Charter Review Committee shall not exceed nine (9) months. If during such term, no report is presented to the Town Council, then all records of the proceedings of the Charter Review Committee shall be filed with the Town Secretary. 
    {Signatures of Home Rule Charter Commission Members omitted} 
(Amend. of 5-14-2011) 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location of the sections of the Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Date Section  Section 
this Charter  5- 5-2001 chs. One-Fifteen Chs. One-Fifteen  5-17-2005 (Res.) C 3.04, 7.01 8.04, 9.01  5- 9-2009 Chs. One-Fifteen  5-14-2011 4.03, 5.02       Added 8.09 9.01, 9.03       Added 15.02 11- 3-2015 2.01, 3.03, 
9.01, 9.02, 11.01  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, Town of Little Elm, Texas," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Little Elm Municipal Code." 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the town council, the following definitions and rules shall be observed unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the town council: 
    Boards, committees, commissions, officers, employees, departments. Any reference to town boards, committees, commissions, officers, employees, or departments shall be construed to mean the respective entities or personnel of the Town of Little Elm, Texas. 
    Code. The term "this Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, Town of Little Elm, Texas, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be conducted, the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall not be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be done shall be counted unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.004. 
    County. The term "county" shall mean the County of Denton, Texas. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a section or provision appears to require the head of a department or some other town officer or employee to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or duty, unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. 
    Gender. A term importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships, associations and corporations, as well as to males. 
    Highway. The term "highway" shall include any street, alley, highway, avenue, public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass and causeway in the town, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
    Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
    Month. The term "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Municipality. The term "municipality" shall mean this political subdivision, the Town of Little Elm, Texas. 
    Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural, and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
    Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Or, and. The term "or" may be read as "and", and the term "and" may be read as "or" if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The term "owner," as applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety of the whole or part of such building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" shall extend to and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals. 
    Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Shall. The term "shall" always means mandatory and never means permissive. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral link of the roadway and adjacent property line, intended for use by pedestrians. 
    Signature, subscription. These terms shall include a mark when a person cannot write. 
    State. The term "state" shall mean the State of Texas. 
    Street. The term "street" shall include any highway, alley, street, avenue, boulevard, public place or square, viaduct, underpass, overpass, tunnel and causeway in the town, dedicated to public use. 
    Texas Admin. Code. The term "Texas Admin. Code" shall mean the Texas Administrative Code. 
    Town. The terms "the town" or "this town" or "town" shall mean the Town of Little Elm, in the County of Denton, in the State of Texas. 
    Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. This means the latest edition or supplement to Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes. 
    V.T.C.A. This means and refers to the latest edition or supplement to Vernon's Texas Code Annotated. 
    Written; in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The term "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of the sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly provided, shall they be so deemed when any of the sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
State Law reference- Headings, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.024. 
Sec. 1-4. - History notes. 
    The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of the matter contained in the section. 
Sec. 1-5. - References and editor's notes. 
    References and editor's notes following certain Code sections are provided as an aid and guide to the reader and are not controlling nor meant to have any legal effect whatsoever. 
Sec. 1-6. - References to chapters, articles, divisions and sections. 
    All references in this Code to chapters, articles, divisions and sections are to the chapters, articles, divisions and sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
Sec. 1-7. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, the repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby and the subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of the subsequent ordinances until the time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _______ of the Code of Ordinances, Town of Little Elm, Texas is hereby amended to read as follows: . . ." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as enacted. 
(c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, Town of Little Elm, Texas, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _______, which section reads as follows: . . . " The new section shall then be set out in full as enacted. 
(d)  In lieu of the foregoing paragraph, when the governing authority desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature embracing a subject not previously existing in the Code, but which the governing authority desires to incorporate into the Code, a provision in substantially the following language may be made a part of the ordinance: "It is the intention of the council, and it is hereby ordained, that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made part of the Code of Ordinance of the Town of Little Elm, Texas, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish that intention." 
(e)  All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-8. - Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
State Law reference- Repeal of a repealing statute, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.030. 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by municipal personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the town. A supplement to the Code shall include substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement, and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that when they are inserted, the Code will be current through the date of adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to the Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency, organization or company authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing sections or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ___ to ___" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of the ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - General penalty. 
    Whenever in this Code or in any town ordinance or in any rule, regulation or order promulgated by any town officer or agency under authority vested in such officer or agency any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided, the violation of any provision of this Code or of any specific ordinance, regulation, rule or order that governs or regulates fire, safety, zoning, public health or sanitation, including the dumping of refuse, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000.00. The violation of any other provision of this Code or any other ordinance, rule, regulation or order shall be punished by fine not exceeding $500.00, unless otherwise specifically stated in this Code. If the maximum penalty provided by this Code for any offense is greater than the maximum penalty for such violation provided by state law, the maximum penalty for such violation shall be that accorded under state law. Except where provided otherwise in this Code, each day an offense shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to establish penalties for violation of Code, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.001. 
Sec. 1-11. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, the unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
Sec. 1-12. - Certain ordinances, rights, etc., not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code, or the ordinance adopting the Code from which this chapter is derived, shall affect: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived; 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the town, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the town or any evidence of the town's indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by the town; 
(3)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the town not in conflict with the provisions of the Code; 
(4)  Any ordinance or resolution fixing salaries of officers or employees of the town, unless superseded; 
(5)  Any appropriation ordinance or resolution; 
(6)  Any right of franchise granted by the council to any person, firm or corporation; 
(7)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, closing, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the town; 
(8)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing and prescribing the street grades of any town streets; 
(9)  Any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefore; 
(10)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the town, or providing regulations for subdivisions; 
(11)  Any ordinance annexing property to the town; 
(12)  Any ordinances or amendments thereto concerning zoning, subdivisions, or land development; 
(13)  Any ordinance or resolution regulating the erection, alteration, repair, demolition, moving or removal of buildings or other structures; 
(14)  Ordinances or resolutions prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones, not inconsistent with this Code; 
(15)  Any ordinance or resolution fixing utility rates and charges, or any valid comprehensive fee schedule; 
(16)  Any ordinance of agreement with another political subdivision; 
(17)  Any ordinance concerning issuance of tax anticipation notes; 
(18)  Any current ordinance concerning personnel benefits included but not limited to participation in the Texas Municipal Retirement System or the Texas Municipal League intergovernmental employee benefits pool; 
(19)  Any ordinance in effect which establishes a requirement or procedure to obtain a municipal permit or license to conduct any commercial activity, construct or alter a building or structure, or otherwise obtain municipal permission or sanction as a precondition; 
(20)  Any ordinance in effect at time of adoption of this Code which imposes a tax; 
(21)  Any ordinance in effect which provides for regulation of adult-entertainment or sexually oriented businesses; 
(22)  Any ordinance in effect which pertains to regulation of alcoholic beverages, including but not limited to hours of sale and the operation of private clubs; 
(23)  Any ordinance, resolution or order of the governing body accepting the designation by a state or federal entity to administer or enforce state or federal laws, regulations, or orders; 
(24)  Any ordinance concerning establishment and operation of the municipal court, including court fees; 
(25)  Any ordinance establishing historic districts, designating landmarks and establishing criteria, appointing a preservation officer or commission and prescribing duties, and otherwise pertaining to historic preservation; 
(26)  Any ordinance establishing fees, rules and regulations concerning public parks, community centers, trail systems and other municipal facilities. 
(b)  Any other ordinance or resolution, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature; or which is referred to elsewhere in this Code as continuing in effect; and all such ordinances and resolutions are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances and resolutions are on file in the town clerk or secretary's office. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Town council, ch. 3; town manager, ch. 4; town secretary, ch. 5; town attorney, ch. 7; town departments, ch. 8; boards and commissions, ch. 9; ordinances, ch. 10. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Public hearing procedures. 
    Pursuant to section 3.06 of the Charter, the town council hereby adopts the following public hearing procedures, which procedures shall be printed and made available at all town council meetings by use of a form approved by town staff: 
PUBLIC HEARING PROCEDURES 
    The purpose of a public hearing is for council to receive the public's input on various issues that come before this council. Council member's role in a public hearing is to listen. We recognize not everyone is going to agree as we all have differing opinions on a variety of issues; but at the same time we expect everyone to respect the rights of one another to speak up. 
(1)  All individuals wishing to speak are required to sign in; if you have not done so; please pick up and fill out the public hearings speakers form, and deliver the completed form to the town secretary. 
(2)  The town council will first hear the town staff comments followed by the applicant's presentation, if present. The town council may question staff or applicant at this time. 
(3)  The mayor will call up to the podium those individuals from the audience who have signed up to speak. All speakers are asked to direct their comments to the town council, not to the audience, and give your courteous attention to other speakers, regardless of their views. Don't applaud or indicate pleasure or displeasure with anyone's remarks. 
(4)  All speakers are to begin by stating their full name and home address for the record. 
(5)  All speakers will keep their remarks to the matter on the agenda. Speakers are asked to indicate whether they are "pro" or "con", when appropriate, to the issue they are addressing. 
(6)  Any questions raised by a speaker will be addressed after everyone has been given a chance to speak. 
(7)  All speakers are given three minutes to speak and may address the council only once. Speakers will not be allowed to cede time to another speaker. Homeowner's associations/large groups are encouraged to designate a spokesperson. Such groups may designate one spokesperson to speak on its behalf with a maximum time of ten minutes. 
(8)  Town staff, town council and/or the applicant will then be given time to address any remarks or questions raised by the speakers. 
(9)  During the public hearing, we ask everyone to show each other mutual respect. As a courtesy to others, please be brief in your comments and refrain from being repetitive of the remarks made by previous speakers. The most effective and useful comments are those which focus directly on the issues under consideration and which may even offer possible solutions or alternatives. 
(10)  The public hearing will then close. 
(11)  Members of the public who constitute the gallery during a public hearing: 
a.  Shall maintain order and quiet. 
b.  Shall not applaud or otherwise interrupt any speech or action of the members of council, or any other person addressing council. 
c.  No placard, banners, or signs will be permitted in the town council chamber or any other room in which the town council is meeting. Exhibits, displays, and visual aids used in connection with presentations to the town council, however, are permitted. 
    The mayor (or the chair) may cause to be expelled and excluded, any person who creates any disturbance, acts improperly, or refuses to follow this procedure during a meeting. Immediately following the close of the public hearing, the council will then take up the item for discussion as shown on the agenda. 
(Ord. No. 1094, § 2, 1-3-2012) 
Sec. 2-2. - Presentation and announcement procedures. 
    Pursuant to section 3.06 of the Charter, the town council hereby adopts the following presentation and announcement procedures, which procedures shall be printed and made available at all town council meetings by use of a form approved by town staff: 
PRESENTATION AND ANNOUNCEMENT PROCEDURES 
    Persons may address the town council on any issue. This is the appropriate time for citizens to address the council on any concern whether on this agenda or not. Please observe the time limit of three minutes. In accordance with the State of Texas Open Meeting Act, the council may not comment or deliberate such statements during this period, except as authorized by V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.072. 
(1)  All individuals wishing to speak are required to sign in; if you have not done so; please pick up and fill out the presentation and announcement speakers form, and deliver the completed form to the town secretary. 
(2)  The mayor will call up to the podium those individuals from the audience who have signed up to speak. All speakers are asked to direct their comments to the town council, not to the audience. 
(3)  All speakers are to begin by stating their full name and home address for the record. 
(4)  All speakers are given three minutes to speak and may address the council only once. Speakers will not be allowed to cede time to another speaker. Homeowner's associations/large groups are encouraged to designate a spokesperson. Such groups may designate one spokesperson to speak on its behalf with a maximum time of ten minutes. 
(5)  The presentations and announcements will then close. 
(6)  Members of the public who constitute the gallery during the presentations and announcements: 
a.  Shall maintain order and quiet. 
b.  Shall not applaud or otherwise interrupt any speech or action of the members of council, or any other person addressing council. 
c.  No placard, banners, or signs will be permitted in the town council chamber or any other room in which the town council is meeting. Exhibits, displays, and visual aids used in connection with presentations to the town council, however, are permitted. 
(7)  In accordance with the State of Texas Open Meeting Act, the council may not comment or deliberate such statements during this period, except as authorized by V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.072. 
    The mayor (or the chair) may cause to be expelled and excluded, any person who creates any disturbance, acts improperly, or refuses to follow this procedure during a meeting. 
(Ord. No. 1094, § 3, 1-3-2012) 
Secs. 2-3-2-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Local Government Records Act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 201.001 et seq.; designation of records management officer, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 203.025. 

Sec. 2-19. - Records management program. 
    The town council deems it necessary to implement a continuing records management program to be administered by a records management officer in accordance with the Local Government Records Act. 
(Ord. No. 274, § 1, 6-18-1991) 
Sec. 2-20. - Definition of town records. 
    All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media, or other information recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by town or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby declared to be the records of the town and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this article or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. 
(Ord. No. 274, § 2, 6-18-1991) 
Sec. 2-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Department head means the officer who by ordinance, order, or administrative policy is in charge of an office of the town that creates or receives records. 
    Essential record means any record of the town necessary to the resumption or continuation of operations of the town, or to the protection and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state. 
    Permanent records means any record of the town for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as permanent. 
    Records control schedule means a document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer listing the records maintained by the town, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that the records management program may require. 
    Records liaison officers mean the persons designated under section 2-29. 
    Records management means the application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation, and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the management of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and space-effective storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems. 
    Records management committee means the committee established in section 2-25. 
    Records management officer means the person designated in section 2-24. 
    Records management plan means the plan developed under section 2-26. 
    Retention period means the minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction. 
(Ord. No. 274, § 3, 6-18-1991) 
Sec. 2-22. - Municipal records are public property. 
    All municipal records as defined in this article are hereby declared to be the property of the town. No municipality official or employee has, by virtue of his position, any personal or property right to such records even through he may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 274, § 4, 6-18-1991) 
Sec. 2-23. - Policy. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the town to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all municipal records through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and accepted records management practice. 
(Ord. No. 274, § 5, 6-18-1991) 
Sec. 2-24. - Designation of records management officer. 
    The town council of the town adopted Resolution No. 900503C, designating the office of town secretary to serve as records management officer for the town. In the event of the resignation, retirement, dismissal, or removal by action of the town council of the individual so designated, the town council shall promptly designate another individual to serve as records management officer. The individual designated as records management officer shall file his name with the director and librarian of the state library within 30 days of the date of designation, as provided by state law. 
(Ord. No. 274, § 6, 6-18-1991) 
Sec. 2-25. - Establishment of records management committee; duties. 
    A records management committee consisting of the town secretary, the town attorney and the mayor is hereby established. The committee shall: 
(1)  Assist the records management officer in the development of policies and procedures governing the records management program; 
(2)  Review the performance of the program on a regular basis and propose changes and improvements if needed; 
(3)  Review and approve records control schedules submitted by the records management officer; 
(4)  Give final approval to the destruction of records in accordance with approved records control schedules; and 
(5)  Actively support and promote the records management program throughout the town. 
(Ord. No. 274, § 7, 6-18-1991) 
Sec. 2-26. - Records management plan; approval; authority. 
(a)  The records management officer and the records management committee shall develop a records management plan for the town for submission to the municipality. The plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the municipality, and to properly preserve those records of the municipality that are of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the records management officer to carry out his duties prescribed by state law and this article effectively. 
(b)  Once approved by the town council the records management plan shall be binding on all offices, departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the town and records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed. 
(c)  State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department head do not exempt the department head or the records in the department head's care from application of this article and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the records management program of the town. 
(Ord. No. 274, § 8, 6-18-1991) 
Sec. 2-27. - Duties of records management officer. 
    In addition to other duties assigned in this article, the records management officer shall: 
(1)  Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its implementation; 
(2)  Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures; 
(3)  In cooperation with department heads identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for each municipal office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to re-establish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense; 
(4)  Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the town; 
(5)  Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies; 
(6)  Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and forms design and control system for the town; 
(7)  Provide records management advice and assistance to all municipal departments by preparation of a manual or manuals of procedure and policy and by on-site consultation; 
(8)  Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the state library and archives commission to determine if the records management program and the municipality's records control schedules are in compliance with state regulations; 
(9)  Disseminate to the town council and department heads information concerning state laws and administrative rules relating to local government records; 
(10)  Instruct records liaison officers and other personnel in policies and procedures of the records management plan and their duties in the records management program; 
(11)  Direct records liaison officers or other personnel in the conduct of records inventories in preparation for the development of records control schedules as required by state law and this article; 
(12)  Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of municipal records is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program and the requirements of state law; 
(13)  Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under records control schedules, the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition; 
(14)  Report annually to the municipality on the implementation of the records management plan in each department of the town, including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under subsection (13) of this section; and 
(15)  Bring to the attention of the town council noncompliance by department heads or other municipal personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the Local Government Records Act. 
(Ord. No. 274, § 9, 6-18-1991) 
Sec. 2-28. - Duties of department heads. 
    In addition to other duties assigned in this article, department heads shall: 
(1)  Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures established in the town for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of this article; 
(2)  Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs, and duties for which the department head and his staff are responsible; and 
(3)  Maintain the records in his care and carry out their preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program of the town and the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 274, § 10, 6-18-1991) 
Sec. 2-29. - Designation of records liaison officers. 
    Each department head shall designate a member of his staff to serve as records liaison officer for the implementation of the records management program in the department. If the records management officer determines that in the best interests of the records management program more than one records liaison officer should be designated for a department, the department head shall designate the number of records liaison officers specified by the records management officer. Persons designated as records liaison officers shall be thoroughly familiar with all the records created and maintained by the department and shall have full access to all records of the town maintained by the department. In the event of the resignation, retirement, dismissal, or removal by action of the department head of a person designated as a records liaison officer, the department head shall promptly designate another person to fill the vacancy. A department head may serve as records liaison officer for his department. 
(Ord. No. 274, § 11, 6-18-1991) 
Sec. 2-30. - Duties of liaison officers. 
    In addition to other duties assigned in this article, records liaison officers shall: 
(1)  Conduct or supervise the conduct of inventories of the records of the department in preparation for the development of records control schedules; 
(2)  In cooperation with the records management officer coordinate and implement the policies and procedures of the records management program in their departments; and 
(3)  Disseminate information to department staff concerning the records management program. 
(Ord. No. 274, § 12, 6-18-1991) 
Sec. 2-31. - Records control schedules; approval; filing with state. 
(a)  The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads and records liaison officers, shall prepare records control schedules on a department by department basis listing all records created or received by the department and the retention period for each record. Records control schedules shall also contain such other information regarding the disposition of municipal records as the records management plan may require. 
(b)  Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state and that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the records management program of the town. 
(c)  Before its adoption a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by the department head and the members of the records management committee. 
(d)  Before its adoption a records control schedule must be submitted and accepted for filing by the director and librarian as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to make it acceptable for filing. The records management officer shall submit the records control schedules to the director and librarian. 
(Ord. No. 274, § 13, 6-18-1991) 
Sec. 2-32. - Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records. 
(a)  A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 2-26 shall be implemented by department heads and records liaison officers according to the policies and procedures of the records management plan. 
(b)  A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending lawsuit, or the department head requests in writing to the records management committee that the record be retained for an additional period. 
(c)  Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained by the records management officer from the records management committee. 
(Ord. No. 274, § 14, 6-18-1991) 
Sec. 2-33. - Destruction of unscheduled records. 
    A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the records management officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian an approved destruction authorization request. 
(Ord. No. 274, § 15, 6-18-1991) 
Sec. 2-34. - Records center. 
    A records center, developed pursuant to the plan required by section 2-26 shall be under the direct control and supervision of the records management officer. Policies and procedures regulating the operations and use of the records center shall be contained in the records management plan developed under section 2-26 
(Ord. No. 274, § 16, 6-18-1991) 
Sec. 2-35. - Micrographics. 
    Unless a micrographics program in a department is specifically exempted by order of the municipality, all microfilming of records will be centralized and under the direct supervision of the records management officer. The records management plan will establish policies and procedures for the microfilming of municipal records, including policies to ensure that all microfilming is done in accordance with standards and procedures for the microfilming of local government records established in rules of the state library and archives commission. The plan will also establish criteria for determining the eligibility of records for microfilming and protocols for ensuring that a microfilming program that is exempted from the centralized operations is, nevertheless, subject to periodic review by the records management officer as to cost-effectiveness, administrative efficiency, and compliance with commission rules. 
(Ord. No. 274, § 17, 6-18-1991) 
Secs. 2-36-2-58. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MUNICIPAL LIABILITY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Six months notice of claim period, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code § 101.101; governmental liability, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code § 101.021. 

Sec. 2-59. - Conditions precedent for possible municipal liability; claim. 
    The town shall never be liable for any claim for property damage, or for personal injury, whether such personal injury results in death or not unless the person damaged or injured, or someone in his behalf, or in the event the injury results in death, the person who may have cause of action under the law by reason of such death or injury, shall, within six months from the date the damage or injury was received, give notice in writing to the mayor and town council of the following facts: 
(1)  The date and time when the injury occurred and the place where the injured person or property was at the time when the injury was received. 
(2)  The nature of the damage or injury sustained. 
(3)  The apparent extent of the damage or injury sustained. 
(4)  A specific and detailed statement of how and under what circumstances the damage or injury occurred. 
(5)  The amount for which each claimant will settle. 
(6)  The actual place of residence of each complainant by street, number, town and state on the date the claim is presented. 
(7)  In the case of personal injury or death, the names, addresses of all persons who, according to the knowledge or information of the claimant witnessed the happening of the injury or any part thereof and the names of the doctors, if any, to whose care the injured persons committed. 
(8)  In the case of property damage, the location of the damaged property at the time the claim was submitted along with the names and addresses of all persons who witnessed the happening of the damage or any part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 330, § 1, 10-17-1994) 
Sec. 2-60. - Application for relief required before filing of suit. 
    No suit of any nature whatsoever shall be instituted or maintained against the town unless the plaintiff therein shall ever prove that previous to the filing of the original petition the plaintiff applied to the town council for redress, satisfaction, compensation, or relief, as the case may be, and that the same was by vote of the town council refused. 
(Ord. No. 330, § 2, 10-17-1994) 
Sec. 2-61. - Service of notice of claim. 
    All notice required by this article shall be effectuated by serving them upon the town secretary at the following locations: 101 Hardwicke Lane, Little Elm, Texas and all such notices shall be effective only when actually received in the office of the person named above. 
(Ord. No. 330, § 3, 10-17-1994) 
Sec. 2-62. - Waiver of notice in event of actual town knowledge. 
    The above written notice requirements shall be waived if the town has actual knowledge of death, injury or property damage likely to result in a claim against the town. The town shall not be deemed to have actual knowledge unless that knowledge is attributable to an appropriate town official who job duties include the authority to investigate and/or settle claims against the town. 
(Ord. No. 330, § 4, 10-17-1994) 
Sec. 2-63. - Notice to be sworn to by claimant or claimant's agent. 
    The written notice required under this article shall be sworn to by the person claiming damage or injuries or by someone authorized by him to do so on his behalf. Failure to swear to the notice as required herein shall not render the notice fatally defective, but failure to so verify the notice may be considered by the town council as a factor relating to the truth of the allegations and to the weight to be given to the allegations contained therein. 
(Ord. No. 330, § 5, 10-17-1994) 
Secs. 2-64-2-84. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE 

Sec. 2-85. - Scope. 
(a)  The Public Funds Investment Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 2256, prescribes that each local government is to adopt rules governing its investment practices and to define the authority of the investment officer. The following investment policy ("investment policy" or "policy") addresses the methods, procedures, and practices which must be exercised to ensure effective and judicious fiscal management of funds of the town and of the Little Elm Economic Development Corporation (sometimes collectively referred to herein as the "entities" and referred to separately as an "entity"). 
(b)  This policy shall apply to the investment and management of all funds of the town and the corporation under their respective control, other than those expressly excluded herein or by applicable law or valid agreement. This policy shall not supersede the restrictions on investment and use applicable to any specific fund and, in the event of any conflict between this policy and the requirements of any fund subject hereto, the specific requirement applicable to such fund shall be followed as well as all other provisions of this policy other than those in conflict. 
(c)  In order to make effective use of the town's and the corporation's resources, the respective monies of each entity may be pooled into one investment bank account for that entity, except for those monies required to be accounted for in other bank accounts as stipulated by applicable laws, bond covenants or contracts. The income derived from this pooled investment account shall be distributed in accordance with the town's and the corporation's internal procedures. 
(Ord. No. 706, § 1, 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 2-86. - Objectives. 
    The entities' principal investment objectives in order of priority are: 
(1)  Preservation of capital and the protection of investment principal. 
(2)  Maintenance of sufficient liquidity to meet anticipated disbursement and cash flows. 
(3)  Conformance with all federal regulations, state statutes and other legal requirements, including the Town Charter, Town Ordinances, and this policy. 
(4)  Diversification to avoid incurring unreasonable risks regarding securities owned. 
(5)  Attainment of a market rate of return equal to or higher than the performance measure established from time to time by the director of finance of the town which is commensurate with the acceptable risk and liquidity objectives of this policy. 
(Ord. No. 706, § 2, 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 2-87. - Delegation of authority. 
(a)  The town council and board of directors of the corporation appoint the director of finance of the town as the "investment officer" of the town and of the corporation. Direct management responsibility for the investment program of each entity is delegated by the town council and board of directors to the investment officer. The investment officer's authority will at all times be limited by all applicable laws and regulations in effect from time to time and this policy. The investment officer shall exercise the judgment and care, under prevailing circumstances, that a prudent person would exercise in the management of the person's own affairs. 
(b)  With written approval from the town manager and the president of the board of directors, as the case may be with respect to each entity, the investment officer may delegate in writing any phase of the investment management program. Such delegation shall state specifically the functions such person is authorized to perform or that the person is authorized to perform all activities of the investment officer under this policy. The investment officer shall obtain and maintain, at the expense of the respective entity, fidelity bonds for the investment officer and each designee. The amount of such bonds shall be as prescribed by ordinance adopted by the town council and by resolution adopted by the board of directors. No person may engage in an investment transaction except as provided under the terms of this policy and the internal procedures established by the investment officer. A current list of persons authorized to transact investment business and wire funds on behalf of the town and the corporation shall be maintained by the investment officer. 
(c)  The investment officer shall develop and maintain written administrative procedures for the operation of the investment program consistent with this policy. The controls shall be designed to prevent, identify and control losses of public funds arising from deviation from this policy, fraud, employee error, misrepresentation by third parties, or imprudent actions by employees and officers of the town and the corporation. 
(d)  In the discretion of the respective entity and in any event upon the termination or reassignment of any investment officer authorized to conduct transactions for the town or the corporation pursuant to this policy, the authority of such person shall be revoked and such revocation of authority shall be immediately communicated by the investment officer orally and in writing to each and every depository, broker/dealer, investment pool, investment advisor, custodian and other agency or entity with whom the respective entity has any existing or continuing relationship in the management of its investments. 
(e)  In order to ensure qualified and capable investment management, the investment officer and any other investment officers shall, within 12 months after taking office or assuming duties, attend at least one training session from an independent source approved by the town council and by the board of directors that addresses investment controls, security risks, strategy risks, market risks, diversification of investment portfolio, and compliance with the public funds investment act and contains at least ten hours of instruction. Additionally, the investment officer and any other investment officers shall complete not less than ten hours of training every two years addressing the aforementioned topics. The Government Finance Officers Association of Texas (GFOAT), Government Treasurers Organization of Texas (GTOT), Texas Municipal League (TML), University of North Texas (UNT), North Central Texas Council of Governments (NTCOG), American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA), and the Government Finance Officers Association (GFOA) are approved independent training sources. 
(Ord. No. 706, § 3, 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 2-88. - Investment advisors. 
(a)  The town and the corporation may, in the discretion of the investment officer, select one or more investment advisors to assist the town's and corporation's financial staff in the management of the town's and corporation's funds. The investment advisor must be registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission under the Investment Advisors Act of 1940 and also be registered with the state securities board as an investment advisor. To be eligible for consideration, an investment advisor shall demonstrate to the investment officer knowledge of and experience in the management of public funds. The investment officer will satisfy himself as to the advisor's qualifications by all appropriate means, including reference checks with the advisor's other clients, the state securities board and the securities and exchange commission. A selected investment advisor shall act solely in an advisor and administrative capacity, within the guidelines of this investment policy and without any discretionary authority to transact business on behalf of the town or the corporation. 
(b)  Each investment advisor selected by the town and the corporation shall agree that its investment advice shall at all times be given with the judgment and care, under circumstances then prevailing, which persons paid for their special prudence, discretion and intelligence in such maters exercise in the management of their client's affairs, not for speculation by the client or production of fee income by the advisor or broker but for investment by the client with emphasis on the probable safety of the capital while considering the probable income to be derived. 
(c)  Selection of an investment advisor shall otherwise be according to the town's and corporation's normal purchasing procedures for obtaining professional services. The town council and board of directors shall approve investment advisor contracts and each contract period shall not be for a term longer than two years. Any approved investment advisor may be terminated for any reason by the town council and the corporation, as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 706, § 4, 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 2-89. - Standard of care. 
(a)  As provided for in the Public Funds Investment Act, the standard of care for the town's and corporation's respective investments shall be that such "investments shall be made with judgment and care, under prevailing circumstances, that a person of prudence, discretion and intelligence would exercise in the management of the person's own affairs, not for speculation, but for investment, considering the probable safety of capital and the probable income to be derived." 
(b)  The overall investment program shall be designed and managed with a degree of professionalism that is worthy of the public trust. The investment officer and any other investment officers shall recognize that the investment activities of the town and corporation are a matter of public record. 
(c)  The investment officer, acting in accordance with written procedures and exercising due diligence and the proper standard of care, shall be relieved of personal responsibility for an individual security's credit risk or market price changes, provided that this policy and the investment officer's procedures were followed. In determining whether the investment officer or any other investment officer has exercised a proper standard of care, all investments over which the individual had responsibility will be considered rather than a single investment, and whether the investment decision was consistent with the written investment policy of the town and corporation, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 706, § 5, 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 2-90. - Authorized securities investments. 
    Subject to any limitations otherwise imposed by applicable law, regulations, bond indentures or other agreements, (including but not limited to V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 2256 the Public Funds Investment Act), the following securities and deposits are the only ones permitted as investments for the entities' funds: 
(1)  Direct obligations of the United States government including, U.S. Treasury Bills, U.S. Treasury Notes, U.S. Treasury Bonds; and U.S. Treasury Strips (book entry U.S. Treasury securities whose coupon has been removed). 
(2)  Debentures or discount notes, guaranteed by, or for which the credit of any federal agencies and instrumentalities is pledged for payment including, Federal National Mortgage Association (FNMA), Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB), Federal Farm Credit Bank (FFCB), Student Loan Marketing Association (SLMA), and Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (FHLMC). Principal-only and interest-only mortgage backed securities and collateralized mortgage obligations and real estate mortgage investment conduits are expressly prohibited. 
(3)  Bonds or other interest bearing obligations of which the principal and interest are guaranteed by the full faith and credit of the United States government. Principal-only and interest-only mortgage backed securities and collateralized mortgage obligations and real estate mortgage investment conduits are expressly prohibited. 
(4)  Financial Institution Deposits, insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) or its successor, in state or national banks, or state or federally chartered savings and loan associations, located within the state which have been approved by the town or corporation (as the case may be) in accordance with section 11 of this investment policy. Any deposits exceeding FDIC insurance limits shall be fully collateralized as per this investment policy. 
(5)  Repurchase agreements with a defined termination date of 90 days or less, secured by obligations of the U.S. Treasury, or Federal Agency or Instrumentality, collateralized initially at a minimum market value of 102 percent of the dollar value of the transaction, with the accrued interest accumulated on the collateral included in the calculation. 
(6)  If the market value of the collateral falls below 101 percent of the dollar value of the transaction, the collateral will be required to be brought up to the 102 percent initial maintenance level. A repurchase agreement is defined as a simultaneous agreement to buy, hold for 90 days or less, and then sell back all obligations described above. 
(7)  Repurchase agreements shall be entered into only with dealers who: 
a.  Are recognized as primary reporting dealers with the Market Reports Division of the Federal Reserve Board of New York; and 
b.  Have an executed, town or corporation (as the case may be) approved master repurchase agreement. 
Collateral (purchased securities) shall be held by the town's or corporation's (as the case may be) custodian bank as safekeeping agent and the market value of the collateral securities shall be marked-to-market daily. 
(8)  For the purpose of this section, the term "collateral" shall mean "purchased securities" under the terms of the town's or corporation's (as the case may be) approved master repurchase agreement. Collateral bearing no coupon will have a maturity not to exceed five years. All other eligible collateral shall have a maturity limit of ten years. 
(9)  The term repurchase agreements include reverse repurchase agreements. The term of a reverse repurchase agreement shall not exceed 90 days and any investments acquired with the proceeds from the reverse repurchase agreement shall not exceed the term of that agreement. 
(10)  Money market mutual funds meeting each of the following criteria: 
a.  Regulated by the Securities and Exchange Commission; 
b.  No commission fee shall be charged on purchases or sales of shares (i.e. "no-load" fund); 
c.  Have an objective of maintaining a constant daily net asset value of $1.00 per share; 
d.  Limit assets of the fund to those described as "government" securities; and 
e.  Have a maximum stated maturity of 13 months and dollar weighted average portfolio maturity of not more than 90 days. A list of the town approved Money Market Mutual Funds shall be kept by the investment officer. 
(11)  State and local government investment pools organized under the Interlocal Cooperation Act that meet the requirements of V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 2256 and have been specifically approved by the investment officer and authorized by the town council and board of directors, as the case may be. 
(12)  Direct obligations of the state or its agencies. 
(13)  Other obligations, the principal of and interest on which are unconditionally guaranteed or insured by the state. 
(Ord. No. 706, § 6, 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 2-91. - Other investment guidelines. 
(a)  The entities seeks active management of their respective portfolio assets. In the effort of meeting the objectives of this policy, the entities, as applicable, may from time to time sell securities that they own in order to better position its portfolio assets. Sales of securities prior to maturity shall be documented and approved by the investment officer before such a transaction is consummated. Sales of securities yielding net proceeds less than 98 percent of the book value of the securities must be approved in advance and in writing by the town manager for town funds and by the president of the board of directors for corporation funds. 
(b)  Each investment transaction must be based upon competitive quotations received from broker/dealers who have been approved by the town and corporation (as applicable) in accordance with state law. 
(c)  The purchase and sale of all securities shall be on a delivery versus payment or payment versus delivery basis (i.e. for securities purchases, monies will not be released by the town's or corporation's safekeeping bank until securities are received at the Federal Reserve Bank for further credit to the town's or corporation's safekeeping bank. In the case of securities sales, monies will be received by the town's or corporation's safekeeping bank via the Federal Reserve Bank, as the securities are simultaneously released to the purchaser). In this manner, the town and the corporation (as the case may be) will always have possession of either its securities or its monies. 
(d)  Neither the town nor the corporation is required to liquidate investments that are authorized by the town or the corporation (as the case may be) at the time of purchase. However, an investment that requires a minimum credit rating does not qualify as an authorized securities investment during the period the investment does not have the minimum credit rating. The investment officer shall take all prudent measures that are consistent with this investment policy to liquidate an investment that does not have the minimum rating. 
(Ord. No. 706, § 7, 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 2-92. - Portfolio maturities. 
(a)  Maturities shall be selected which provide for both stability of income and reasonable liquidity. The maximum stated maturity of any investment is two years. A security's "average life" does not constitute a stated maturity. The weighted average life of all investments shall not exceed nine months. 
(b)  In the case of callable securities, the investment officer shall additionally calculate a weighted average call date. However, at all times the stated final maturity shall be used in portfolio average life calculations and reported as outlined in this policy. 
(c)  Investment of bond proceeds shall be limited to the shorter of the anticipated draw schedule or three years. Additionally, band proceeds may be invested in a repurchase agreement that exceeds 90 days if reductions are: allowed from the agreement without penalty for legitimate bond proceed expenditures and the final maturity is within the "temporary period" as defined by the Internal Revenue Service (this arrangement is commonly referred to as a "flexible repurchase agreement"). 
(Ord. No. 706, § 8, 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 2-93. - Investment allocation limits. 
(a)  It is the policy of the entities to avoid concentration of assets in a specific maturity, a specific issue, or a specific class of securities, with the exception of U.S. Treasury issues. The asset allocation in the portfolio should, however, be flexible depending upon the outlook for the economy and the securities markets. 
(b)  The investment officer shall evaluate how each security purchased fits into the town's or corporation's (as the case may be) overall investment strategies (see section 2-99, Investment strategy statement). 
(Ord. No. 706, § 9, 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 2-94. - Selection of broker/dealers. 
(a)  The town and corporation shall maintain a list of broker/dealers, investment pools, and financial institutions which have been approved by the town council and board of directors. Securities may only be purchased for the town and the corporation (as the case may be) from those authorized institutions and firms. 
(b)  Broker/dealers, investment pools, and other financial institutions will be selected by the investment officer on the basis of their financial stability, expertise in cash management and their ability to service the town's and corporation's account. Each broker/dealer, investment pool, bank, or savings and loan, that has been authorized by the town or corporation (as the case may be), shall be required to submit to the town or corporation (as applicable) information as requested by the investment officer. The investment officer shall maintain a file which includes the most recent information submitted by each firm. 
(c)  The investment officer shall review each broker/dealer, investment pool, and financial institution approved under this section and at least annually the town council and board of directors shall re-approve the applicable list. 
(d)  All business organizations eligible to transact investment business with the town and the corporation shall be presented a written copy of this investment policy. The qualified representative of the business organization seeking to transact investment business with the town or the corporation (as applicable) shall execute a written instrument substantially to the effect that the registered principal has: 
(1)  Received and thoroughly reviewed this policy; and 
(2)  Acknowledged that the business organization has implemented reasonable procedures and controls in an effort to preclude imprudent investment activities with the town. 
(e)  The town and the corporation shall not enter into an investment transaction with a business organization prior to receiving the written instrument described above. 
(Ord. No. 706, § 10, 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 2-95. - Selection of depositories. 
(a)  The town and the corporation shall maintain a list of authorized banks and savings banks which are approved to provide certificates of deposit to the town and the corporation, as applicable. To be eligible for authorization, a bank or savings bank must be a member of the FDIC and meet the minimum credit criteria established by the investment officer. Banks or savings banks failing to meet the minimum criteria or, in the judgment of the investment officer, no longer offering adequate safety for the town or the corporation (as the case may be) will be removed from the list. 
(b)  Consistent with the requirements of state law, the town and the corporation require all bank and savings bank association deposits to be federally insured or collateralized with eligible securities if the amount of deposit exceeds federal insurance levels. Financial institutions serving as depositories for the entities (or either of them) will be required to sign a depository agreement with the respective entity and its custodian. The safekeeping portion of the depository agreement shall define the respective entity's rights to the collateral in case of default, bankruptcy, or closing and shall establish a perfected security interest in compliance with federal and state regulations; including: 
(1)  The agreement must be in writing; 
(2)  The agreement has to be executed by the depository and the town or the corporation (as the case may be) contemporaneously with the acquisition of the asset; 
(3)  The agreement must be approved by the board of directors or the designated committee of the depository and a copy of the meeting minutes must be delivered to the town or the corporation, as applicable; 
(4)  The agreement must be continuously, from the time of execution, an official record of the depository. 
(c)  Eligible collateral for bank and savings bank deposits shall include all items allowable with the Public Funds Investment Act, Public Funds Collateral Act, and V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 105, subject to prior approval and at the sale discretion of the investment officer. 
(Ord. No. 706, § 11, 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 2-96. - Safekeeping and custody. 
(a)  Investment securities purchased for the entities (or either of them) will be delivered by book entry form and shall be held in third-party safekeeping by a Federal Reserve Bank member financial institution designated as the town's or corporation's (as the case may be) safekeeping and custodian bank. Each of the entities may designate more than one safekeeping and custodian bank. In no event will the town's or corporation's custodial or safekeeping institution also be counterparty (broker or dealer) to the purchase or sale of those securities. The town and the corporation, as applicable, shall execute a written safekeeping agreement with each bank prior to utilizing the custodian or safekeeping services. The safekeeping agreement must provide that the safekeeping and custodian bank will immediately record the receipt of purchased or pledged securities in its books and promptly issue and deliver a signed safekeeping receipt to the applicable entity showing the receipt and the identification of the security, as well as the applicable entity's perfected interest. The original safekeeping receipt for each transaction including purchased securities under a repurchase agreement and collateral securing deposits will be delivered to the investment officer for their safekeeping. 
(b)  Only a state or national bank located within the state or any Federal Reserve Bank may be utilized as a custodian of securities pledged to secure certificates of deposit. 
(c)  The investment officer shall maintain a list of designated safekeeping and custodian banks and a copy of the safekeeping agreement executed with each bank. 
(d)  The town and the corporation, as applicable, must approve release of securities held as collateral, in writing, prior to their removal from the custodial account. A telephonic facsimile of a written authorization shall be sufficient if the custodian orally confirms receipt of the transmission and an exact copy of the document is retained in the town's and corporation's (as applicable) files. 
(Ord. No. 706, § 12, 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 2-97. - Recordkeeping and reporting. 
(a)  A record shall be maintained of all bids and offerings for securities transactions in order to ensure that the respective entity receives competitive pricing. All transactions shall be documented by the person authorizing the transaction in a form that shows that person's name, the counterparty to the transaction, the date, a description of the transaction and a brief statement of the reasons for the transaction. 
(b)  Each depository institution of the town's and the corporation's (as the case may be) funds shall maintain separate, accurate, and complete records relating to all deposits of the town's or corporation's funds, the securities pledged to secure such deposits, and all transactions relating to the pledged securities. Each approved custodian shall maintain separate, accurate and complete records relating to all securities received on behalf of the respective entity, whether pledged, purchased or subject to repurchase agreement, as well as all transactions related to such securities. In addition, each depository shall file all reports required by the state depository board. Each depository and custodian shall agree to make all the records described in this article available to the investment officer's designee and the town's or corporation's (as applicable) auditors at any reasonable time. 
(c)  At least once each quarter, the investment officer shall verify that all securities owned by the town or corporation (as the case may be) or pledged to the town or corporation (as the case may be) are held in safekeeping in the applicable entity's custodial bank with proper documentation. At least annually the town's and the corporation's respective investment program, including the records of custodians and depositories, shall be audited by independent certified public accountants selected by the town council and board of directors, as applicable. This annual audit shall include a compliance audit of the management and internal controls on investments and adherence to the town's and corporation's respective investment policy and investment strategies. 
(d)  All contracted investment advisors shall prepare reports as requested by the investment officer. 
(e)  An investment report shall be prepared at least quarterly by the investment officer that: 
(1)  Describes in detail the investment position of the town and of the corporation; 
(2)  States the reporting period beginning book and market values, additions or changes to the book and market values during the period and ending book and market values for the period of each pooled fund group; 
(3)  States the reporting period beginning book and market value and ending book and market value for each investment security by asset type and fund type; 
(4)  States the maturity date of each investment security; 
(5)  States the fund for which each investment security was purchased; 
(6)  States the compliance of the investment portfolio with the town's and the corporation's respective investment policy, investment strategy statement and the Public Funds Investment Act; 
(7)  Summarizes quarterly transactions, including a detailed list of the gains and losses recognized; and 
(8)  Explains the investment return during the previous quarter and compares the portfolio's performance to other benchmarks of performance. 
(f)  This report will be prepared and signed by all of the town's and the corporation's (as the case may be) investment officers and presented to the town council and board of directors. These reports shall be annually reviewed by the town's and the corporation's respective independent auditor, and the result of that review shall be presented to the town council and board of directors, as the case may be. 
(g)  The investment officer shall determine market value of securities owned or pledged as collateral based on sources independent from the transaction. 
(Ord. No. 706, § 13, 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 2-98. - Ethics and conflicts of interest. 
(a)  Officers and employees of each of the entities involved in the investment process shall refrain from personal business activity that involves any of the respective entity's approved custodians, depositories, broker/dealers, or investment advisors and shall refrain from investing in any security issue held by the entities. Employees and officers shall not utilize investment advice concerning specific securities or classes of securities obtained in the transaction of the entities' business for personal investment decisions, shall in all respects subordinate their personal investment transactions to those of each entity particularly with regard to the timing of purchases and sales, and shall keep confidential all investment advice obtained on behalf of the entities and all transactions contemplated and completed by the entities, except when disclosure is required by law. 
(b)  All investment officers of the town and of the corporation shall file with the ethics commission, the town council, and the board of directors a statement disclosing any personal business relationship with any business organization seeking to sell investments to the town or the corporation or any relationship within the second degree by affinity or consanguinity to an individual seeking to sell investments to the town or the corporation. 
(Ord. No. 706, § 14, 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 2-99. - Investment strategy statement. 
    In order to minimize risk of loss due to interest rate fluctuations, investment maturities will not exceed the anticipated cash flow requirements of the funds. Investment guidelines by fund-type are as follows: 
(1)  Operating funds . 
a.  Suitability . Any investment eligible in the investment policy is suitable for the operating funds. 
b.  Safety of principal . All investments shall be of high quality securities with no perceived default risk. Market price fluctuations will however occur. By managing the weighted average days to maturity for the operating fund portfolio to less than nine months and restricting the maximum allowable maturity to two years, the price volatility of the overall portfolio will be minimized. 
c.  Marketability . Securities with active and efficient secondary markets are necessary in the event of an unanticipated cash requirement. Historical market "spreads" between the bid and offer prices of a particular security-type of less than a quarter of a percentage point shall define an efficient secondary market. 
d.  Liquidity . The operating fund requires the greatest short-term liquidity of any of the fund types. Short-term investment pools and money market mutual funds provide daily liquidity and may be utilized as a competitive yield alternative to fixed maturity investments. 
e.  Diversification . Investment maturities shall be staggered throughout the budget cycle to provide cash flow based on the anticipated operating needs of the town and the corporation (as the case may be). Market cycle risk will be reduced by diversifying the appropriate maturity structure out through two years. 
f.  Yield. Attaining a competitive market yield for comparable security-types and portfolio restrictions is the desired objective. The yield of an equally weighted, rolling six-month treasury bill portfolio shall be the minimum yield objective. 
(2)  Capital improvement funds . 
a.  Suitability. Any investment eligible in the investment policy is suitable for capital improvement funds. 
b.  Safety of principal. All investments shall be of high quality securities with no perceived default risk. Market price fluctuations will however occur. By managing capital improvement fund's portfolio to exceed the anticipated expenditure schedule and restricting the maximum allowable maturity to three years, the market risk of the overall portfolio will be minimized. 
c.  Marketability. Securities with active and efficient secondary markets are necessary in the event of an unanticipated cash requirement. Historical market "spreads" between the bid and offer prices of a particular security-type of less than a quarter of a percentage point shall define an efficient secondary market. 
d.  Liquidity. The town funds used for capital improvement programs have reasonably predictable draw down schedules. Therefore investment maturities shall generally follow the anticipated cash flow requirements. Investment pools and money market mutual funds provide readily available funds generally equal to one month's anticipated cash flow needs, or a competitive yield alternative for short-term fixed maturity investments. A singular repurchase agreement may be utilized if disbursements are allowed in the amount necessary to satisfy any expenditure request; this investment structure is commonly referred to as a flexible repurchase agreement. 
e.  Diversification. Market conditions and the arbitrage regulations influence the attractiveness of staggering the maturity of fixed rate investments for bond proceeds and other construction and capital improvement funds. With bond proceeds, if investment rates exceed the applicable arbitrage yield, the town and the corporation (as the case may be) are best served by locking in most investments. If the arbitrage yield cannot be exceeded, then concurrent market conditions will determine the attractiveness of diversifying maturities or investing in shorter and larger lumps. At no time shall be anticipated expenditure schedule be exceeded in an attempt to bolster yield with any entities funds. 
f.  Yield. Achieving a positive spread to the applicable arbitrage yield is the desired objective for bond proceeds. Nonbond proceed construction and capital project funds will target a rolling portfolio of six month treasury bills. 
(3)  Fiduciary funds. 
a.  Suitability. Any investment eligible in the investment policy is suitable for the fiduciary funds. 
b.  Safety of principal. All investments shall be of high quality securities with no perceived default risk. Market price fluctuations will however occur. By managing the weighted average days to maturity for the fiduciary fund portfolio to less than nine months and restricting the maximum allowable maturity to two years, the price volatility of the overall portfolio will be minimized. 
c.  Marketability. Securities with active and efficient secondary markets are necessary in the event of an unanticipated cash requirement. Historical market "spreads" between the bid and offer prices of a particular security-type of less than a quarter of a percentage paint shall define an efficient secondary market. 
d.  Liquidity. The fiduciary fund requires short-term liquidity. Short-term investment pools and money market mutual funds provide daily liquidity and may be utilized as a competitive yield alternative to fixed maturity investments. 
e.  Diversification. Investment maturities shall be staggered throughout the budget cycle to provide cash flow based on the anticipated operating needs of the town and the corporation (as the case may be). Market cycle risk will be reduced by diversifying the appropriate maturity structure out through two years. 
f.  Yield. Attaining a competitive market yield for comparable security-types and portfolio restrictions is the desired objective. The yield of an equally weighted, rolling six-month treasury bill portfolio shall be the minimum yield objective. 
(Ord. No. 706, § 15, 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 2-100. - Policy revisions. 
    The investment policy and investment strategy statement will be reviewed at least annually by the investment officer, the town council, and board of directors and may be amended as conditions warrant by the town council and board of directors. 
(Ord. No. 706, § 16, 5-17-2005) 
Sec. 2-101. - Credit card payments accepted for fees, fines, court costs or other charges. 
(a)  Each office employee by the Town of Little Elm who, as part of that employment, collects fees, fines, court costs, or other charges from members of the public that are due the town is authorized to accept credit cards as payments for such fees, fines, court costs and other charges. 
(b)  For each fee, fine, court cost, or other charge that is paid by credit card, the office employee collecting same shall also collect a processing fee in an amount of $3.00 maximum and $1.00 minimum which is not to exceed three percent of the amount of the fee, fine, court cost, or other charge, as authorized by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 132.003(b). 
c)  If for any reason a payment by credit card is not honored by the credit card company on which the funds are drawn, the officer shall collect from the member of the public who attempted to pay by credit card an additional service charge in an amount equal to the fee then being charged for the collection of a check drawn on a account with insufficient funds, as authorized by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 132.004. 
(d)  Processing fees and service charges collected pursuant to this section shall be deposited in the general fund of the town, as provided by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 132.006. 
(Ord. No. 1057, §§ 1-4, 6-14-2011) 
Secs. 2-102-2-128. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND AGENCIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-129-2-154. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - KEEP LITTLE ELM BEAUTIFUL COMMITTEE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 850, §§ 1-6, adopted Aug. 21, 2007, amended div. 2, §§ 2-155-2-159, in its entirety. Formerly, said division pertained to similar subject matter as enacted by Ord. No. 736, §§ 1-6, adopted Nov. 15, 2005. 

Sec. 2-155. - Created. 
    The Town Council of the Town of Little Elm, Texas (the "town") does hereby create and establish a committee to be known as the "Keep Little Elm Beautiful Committee" (the "committee") for the purpose of assisting the town council in establishing a citywide policy for decreasing the amount of litter in the city. The committee shall be an advisory committee only. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 1, 8-21-2007) 
Sec. 2-156. - Appointment and membership. 
(a)  The committee provided for herein shall be comprised of five members to be nominated by and approved by the town council and shall be residents of the Town of Little Elm except that no more than two members may be residents of communities or towns in the surrounding areas. The committee may consist of representatives from business and industry, media, community organizations, education, and members at large. 
(b)  Two members of the committee originally appointed shall be appointed for a term for one year. Three members of the committee originally appointed shall be appointed for a term of two years. Thereafter, the term of each committee member shall be two years. No committee member shall serve more than two successive terms; provided, however, that a Committee member appointed to complete the unexpired term of another committee member shall, at the completion of such term, be eligible for appointment for another two full terms. In addition to the five members of the committee, the council may appoint a town employee to serve as a non-voting ex-officio member of the committee. Any member of the committee, whether a voting member of a non-voting member, shall serve at the pleasure of the town council, and may be removed by the council at any time and for any reason. 
(c)  The committee shall have an executive director ("executive director"), who shall serve as a non-voting ex-officio member of the committee. The executive director shall be custodian of all minutes and records of the committee and perform such other duties as the committee may deem necessary and consistent with both the responsibilities of the committee and the executive director's responsibilities to the Town of Little Elm through the town manager. The executive director shall work under the supervision and control of the town manager for the purpose of implementing the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 850, §§ 2, 3, 8-21-2007) 
Sec. 2-157. - Quorum; elections; rules and procedure; reporting to town council. 
    Three regular (non ex-officio) members of the committee shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business. The members of the committee shall regularly attend meetings and shall serve without compensation except for reimbursement of authorized expenses attendant to the performance of their duties. 
    Following the initial organization meeting, the committee shall hold an organizational meeting in August of each year and shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman from among its members before proceeding to any other matter of business. The committee shall meet regularly and shall designate the time and place of its meetings. 
    The committee shall adopt its own rules and procedure and keep a record of its proceedings in accordance with the provisions of this article and the Charter of the Town of Little Elm. Newly appointed members shall be installed at the first meeting after their appointment. 
    Each month a report shall be submitted to the town council showing the cumulative attendance of each member with notation of members who have been absent from three consecutive meetings. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 4, 8-21-2007) 
Sec. 2-158. - Duties. 
    The committee shall recommend policies related to litter prevention, beautification and community improvement, and the minimization of solid waste, to the town council so all town activities might follow a common purpose. The committee shall have the following responsibilities: 
(1)  Develop and recommend to the town council town-wide refuse and environmental policy plan(s); 
(2)  Evaluate town actions in light of that policy; 
(3)  Determine and recommend to the town council management and program priorities on a town-wide basis; 
(4)  Recommend enforcement and additional program alternatives; 
(5)  Monitor town performance from data collected and examined under the Keep America Beautiful, Inc. Affiliate System guidelines and make an annual report to the town council; and 
(6)  Carry out such other tasks as the town council may designate. 
To accomplish these responsibilities the committee may establish subcommittees such as, but not limited to, the areas of business and industry, communications, education, beautification, finance/fundraising and cleanup. 
A committee member will chair each subcommittee with an unspecified number of community volunteers chosen by the committee as working subcommittee members. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 5, 8-21-2007) 
Sec. 2-159. - Budget; council-imposed restraints. 
    The Town of Little Elm within the budgetary appropriation process shall furnish that office space, supplies, telephone, postage and secretarial support for the executive director. The Town of Little Elm within council-imposed budgetary restraints shall also supply additional funds for committee activities involving travel or training for the executive director. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 6, 8-21-2007) 
Secs. 2-160-2-164. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD FUNCTION ASSIGNED TO CDC BOARD OF DIRECTORS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1265, § 2, adopted Feb. 3, 2015, amended div. 3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former div. 3, §§ 2-265-2-169, was entitled "Parks and Recreation Board", and derived from Ord. No. 822, § 2, adopted Feb. 20, 2007. 

Sec. 2-165. - Assignment of parks and recreation function to Little Elm CDC Board. 
(a)  The parks and recreation board is hereby abolished and dissolved. All duties and responsibilities of the parks and recreation board are hereby assigned to the Board of Directors of the Little Elm Community Development Corporation ("CDC board"). The CDC board shall operate according to the terms of this Code regarding its parks and recreation functions. 
(b)  The CDC board shall function as an advisory group to the Town of Little Elm Council regarding parks and recreation matters. 
(Ord. No. 1265, § 2, 2-3-2015) 
Sec. 2-166. - Parks and recreation director. 
    The director of parks and recreation department shall be an ex officio member of the CDC board on parks and recreation matters, with the responsibility to participate in discussions but without the right to vote. 
(Ord. No. 1265, § 2, 2-3-2015) 
Sec. 2-167. - Powers and duties. 
    The CDC board, while exercising its parks and recreation function, shall have the following powers and perform the following duties: 
(1)  It shall act principally in an advisory capacity to the town staff and the town council in all matters pertaining to parks and recreation, shall acquaint itself with and make a continuous study and review of the complete parks and recreation services of the town; and shall advise with the staff and town council from time to time as to the present planning, acquisition, development, enlargement and use of policies of the town park and recreation services. 
(2)  It shall study and encourage the development of parks and recreation areas and study and encourage the development of wholesome recreation for all residents of the town. 
(3)  It shall advise with the parks and recreation director on problems of development of recreation areas, facilities, programs and improved recreation services. 
(4)  It shall recommend the adoption of standards on areas and facilities. 
(5)  The members of the CDC board shall study and review the master planning guide for parks and recreation and become familiar with such plan and its relation to existing and proposed facilities and shall become aware of any revision or updating thereof. 
(6)  It shall advise and recommend to the parks and recreation director on the development of long-range capital improvement programs and, when in its opinion the need exists for additional park and recreational facilities, grounds or premises, it shall make appropriate recommendations to the town council. It shall also recommend the acquisition of additional parks. 
(7)  It shall advise for council review, rules, regulations and policies governing the use of park and recreational facilities. 
(8)  It shall make any other recommendations to the town council regarding park and recreation matters that it considers advisable. 
(9)  It may solicit for the town, gifts, revenues, bequests or endowments of money or property as donations or grants from any person, subject to the approval and acceptance by the town council. 
(10)  It may, from time to time, recommend to the town council amendments or changes to this Code. 
(11)  The CDC board's authority shall not extend to the direction, supervision, employment or termination of employees of the parks and recreation department. No supervisory power of the board is created. 
(12)  It shall advise on written policies and procedures for the parks and recreation department. 
(13)  The CDC board will use Robert's Rules of Order for meeting procedures. 
(14)  The CDC board shall not have the power to obligate the town for any funds or expenditures or incur any debt on behalf of the town. 
(15)  All powers and duties prescribed and delegated herein are delegated to the CDC board as a unit, and all action hereunder shall be of the board acting as a whole. No action of an individual member is authorized except through the board. 
(Ord. No. 1265, § 2, 2-3-2015) 
Sec. 2-168. - Regulation of town park and recreation facilities. 
(a)  Operating regulations. The town council directs the CDC board to promulgate official rules and regulations for the operation of the town's parks and recreation facilities and directs that the parks and recreation board review those rules and regulations on a timely basis and update accordingly, with such rules and regulations to be approved by the town council. 
(b)  Programming of activities. The town council directs the CDC board to promulgate appropriate programming of activities for the town's parks and recreation facilities and directs that the established programming be reviewed on a timely basis and updated accordingly, with such programming activities to be approved by the town council. 
(Ord. No. 1265, § 2, 2-3-2015) 
Secs. 2-169-2-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CODE OF ETHICS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1236, § 2, adopted Sept. 16, 2014, amended art. VI in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. VI, §§ 2-191-2-197, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from: Ord. No. 1088, § 2, adopted Nov. 15, 2011; and Ord. No. 1115, § 2, adopted Oct. 16, 2012. 

Sec. 2-191. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Compensation. Any economic benefit received in return for services, property or investment. 
    Discretionary authority. The power to exercise any judgment in a decision or action. 
    Economic benefit. Economic benefit refers to any money, real or personal property, purchase, sale, lease, contract, option, credit, loan, discount, service or other tangible or intangible thing of value, whether similar or dissimilar to those enumerated. 
    Employee. Any person employed by the town, including those individuals employed on a part-time or seasonal basis, but such term shall not be extended to apply to any independent contractor. 
    Entity. A sole proprietorship, partnership, limited partnership, firm, corporation, professional corporation, holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust or any other entity recognized by law through which business may be conducted. 
    Gift. Gift means a favor, hospitality or economic benefit, other than compensation. 
    Non-town board, committee or commission. A board, committee, commission or other governing or advisory body or panel of an organization, business entity or governmental entity that is not a town-appointed board, committee or commission. Examples would include, but not be limited to, serving on the board of directors (or similarly-situated governing or advisory body or panel) of a water district, municipal management district, hospital district, regional council of government organization or appraisal district. 
    Officer or official. Any member of the town council and any town-appointive member of a board, commission, authority or committee set up by ordinance, Town Charter, state law, or otherwise on a temporary or permanent basis, including all members of a board, commission, authority or committee which functions only in an advisory or study capacity and which has no discretionary, governmental, quasi-judicial or administrative authority. 
    Relative. A relative means any person related to an officer, official or employee within the first degree by consanguinity or affinity and shall include a spouse, father, mother, son, daughter, brother or sister. 
    Remote interest. An interest of a person or entity, including an official, who or which would be affected in the same way as the general public. By way of example, the interest of a council member in the property tax rate, general town fees, town utility charges or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or other similar decision is a remote interest to the extent that the council member is affected in common with the general public. 
    Substantial interest. An interest in another person or an entity if: 
(1)  The interest is ownership of ten percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity of ownership of $5,000.00 or more of the equity or market value of the entity; 
(2)  Funds received by the person from the other person or entity either during the previous 12 months or the previous calendar year equaled or exceeded $5,000.00 in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees or $20,000.00 in payment for goods, products or non-professional services, or ten percent of the person's gross income during that period, whichever is less; 
(3)  The person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of the for-profit entity, other than a corporate entity owned or created by the town council; or 
(4)  The person is a creditor, debtor or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more. 
    Substantial interest in partnerships, professional corporations and other entities. If a town officer, official or employee is a member of a partnership or professional corporation, or conducts business through another entity, a substantial interest of the partnership, professional corporation or entity shall be deemed to be a substantial interest of the town officer, official or employee if: 
(1)  The partnership or professional corporation has fewer than 20 partners or shareholders; 
(2)  Regardless of the number of partners or shareholders, the officer, official or employee has an equity interest, share of draw equal to or greater than five percent of the capital or revenues of the partnership, professional corporation or other entity; or 
(3)  With regard to the partnership, professional corporation or other entity's substantial interest in a particular client, the officer, official or employee has personally acted within the preceding 24 months in a professional or fiduciary capacity for that client. 
    Substantial interest in real property. An interest in real property which is an equitable or legal ownership with a market value of $5,000.00 or more. 
(Ord. No. 1236, § 2, 9-16-2014) 
Sec. 2-192. - Policy and purpose. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the policy of the town that the proper operation of democratic government requires that: 
(1)  Town officers, officials and employees, including all members of town-appointed boards, commissions and committees, be independent, impartial and responsible only to the people of the town; 
(2)  Governmental decisions and policies be made using the proper procedures of the governmental structure; 
(3)  No town officer, official or employee, including all members of town-appointed boards, commissions and committees, have any interest, direct or indirect, nor engage in any business transaction or professional activity nor incur any obligation of any nature which is in conflict with the proper discharge of his or her duties in the public interest; 
(4)  Public office not be used for personal gain; and 
(5)  Town officers, officials and employees fully comply with any federal and state statutes, laws and regulations, as amended, concerning conflicts of interest. 
(b)  In furtherance of this policy, the town council has hereby determined that it is advisable to enact this code of ethics for all town officers, officials and employees, whether elected or appointed, advisory or administrative, including all members of town-appointed boards, commissions and committees, to serve not only as a guide for official conduct of the town's elected and appointed public servants, but also as a basis for discipline for those who refuse to abide by its terms and provisions. 
(Ord. No. 1236, § 2, 9-16-2014) 
Sec. 2-193. - Unethical activity. 
    No officer, official or employee of the town, including all members of town-appointed boards, commissions and committees, shall: 
(1)  Accept any gift or economic benefit of more than $50.00 in value from any person or entity which gift or economic benefit might reasonably tend to influence such officer, official or employee in the discharge of official duties, or grant in the discharge of official duties any improper gift, economic benefit, service or thing of value; however, the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any political contribution made pursuant to the Texas Election Code; 
(2)  Use his or her official position to solicit or secure special privileges or exemptions for himself/herself or others; 
(3)  Directly or indirectly disclose or use any information gained solely by reason of his or her official position for his or her own personal gain or benefit or for the private interest of others; 
(4)  Transact any business on behalf of the town in his or her official capacity with any business entity of which he or she is an officer, agent or member or in which he or she owns a substantial interest. If such a circumstance should arise, then in the case of an officer or official, he or she shall make known such interest and abstain from voting on the matter, or in the case of an employee, he or she shall turn the matter over to the employee's supervisor for reassignment, state the reasons for doing so and have nothing further to do with the matter involved; 
(5)  Engage in any outside activities which will conflict with his or her assigned duties in the town, or which his or her employment with the town will give him or her an advantage over others engaged in a similar business, vocation or activity; 
(6)  Engage in outside activities incompatible with the full and proper discharge of his or her duties and responsibilities with the town, or which might impair his or her independent judgment in the performance of his or her public duties; 
(7)  Receive any fee or compensation for his or her services as an officer, official or employee of the town from any source other than the town, except as may otherwise be provided by law. This shall not prohibit an officer, official or employee from performing the same or other services that he or she performs for the town for a private organization if there is no conflict with his or her town duties and responsibilities; 
(8)  Represent, directly or indirectly, or appear on behalf of the private interests of others before any agency, board, commission, authority or committee of the town, or accept any retainer or compensation that is contingent upon a specific action being taken by the town or any of its agencies, boards, commissions, authorities or committees, unless such officer, official or employee of the town has made full disclosure of such representation, retainer or compensation. For purposes of this section, the term "full disclosure" shall mean: 
a.  The filing of an affidavit with the town secretary describing such representation, retainer or compensation; 
b.  Disclosure, either orally or in writing, to the other members of the town agency, board, commission, authority or committee; 
c.  Refraining from any other discussion of the matter with other members of the town agency, board, commission, authority or committee; and 
d.  Refraining from voting on or participating in the consideration of such matter by the town agency, board, commission, authority or committee. 
(9)  Knowingly perform or refuse to perform any act in order to deliberately hinder the execution and implementation of any town ordinances, rules or regulations or the achievement of official town programs; 
(10)  Have a substantial interest, direct or indirect, in any contract with the town or a substantial interest, direct or indirect, in the sale of the town of any land, rights or interest in any land, materials, supplies or service; 
(11)  Participate in a vote or decision on any matter in which the officer or official has a direct or indirect substantial interest or in which a relative of the officer or official has a direct or indirect substantial interest; 
(12)  Grant any special consideration, treatment or advantage to any individual, business organization or group beyond that which is normally available to every other individual, business organization or group. This shall not prevent the granting of fringe benefits to town employees as an element of their employment or as an added incentive to the securing or retention of employees; 
(13)  Knowingly disclose information deemed confidential by law; or 
(14)  Participate in any vote or decision relative to any amendment to the town's comprehensive master plan or any change in the zoning classification of property if the officer, official, employee or a relative of the officer, official or employee has any interest in any property within 200 feet of the property which is the subject of the amendment to the town's comprehensive master plan or on which the change in zoning classification is proposed. Further, any officer, official or employee who has any such interest in property shall be legally disqualified from participating in any vote or decision relative to the comprehensive master plan amendment or change in zoning classification. 
(Ord. No. 1236, § 2, 9-16-2014) 
Sec. 2-194. - Disclosure of interest. 
    Any officer, official or employee of the town, including all members of town-appointed boards, commissions and committees, who has a prohibited or substantial interest in any matter pending before the town shall disclose such interest to other members of the town council, committee, commission or board of which he or she is a member, and shall refrain from further discussion of the matter; shall not be physically present when the subject is discussed in open or executive session; and shall not vote on or participate further in any such matter. 
(Ord. No. 1236, § 2, 9-16-2014) 
Sec. 2-195. - Service on non-town board, committee or commission expressly allowed with permission. 
    Any officer, official or employee of the town, including all members of town-appointed boards, commissions and committees, may serve on a non-town board, committee or commission with the express consent of the town council and such service shall not be considered prohibited under this code of ethics. 
(Ord. No. 1236, § 2, 9-16-2014) 
Sec. 2-196. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any town officer, official or employee, including all members of town-appointed boards, commissions and committees, knowingly violating any provision of this code of ethics shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine as provided in section 1-10 of the Town of Little Elm Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  The penalty prescribed herein shall not limit the power of the town council to discipline its members pursuant to applicable provisions of the Town Charter, this article, state statutes or other laws defining and prohibiting conflicts of interest. 
(c)  The penalty prescribed herein shall not limit the power of the town manager to discipline those employees under the town manager's supervision pursuant to applicable provisions of the Town Charter, this article, the adopted personnel policies of the town, state statutes or other laws defining and prohibiting conflicts of interest. 
(Ord. No. 1236, § 2, 9-16-2014) 
Sec. 2-197. - Adoption of state statute. 
    Chapter 171 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended, being the statute which regulates conflicts of interest of officers of municipalities in the State of Texas, it is hereby adopted and made a part of this code of ethics for all purposes, with the proviso that in case of a conflict between the provisions of this code of ethics and V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 171, the more restrictive provision shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 1236, § 2, 9-16-2014) 
Sec. 2-198. - Cumulative legal effect. 
    In its legal effect, this article is cumulative of all provisions of the Town Charter, the Town of Little Elm Code of Ordinances or federal and state statutes, laws or regulations defining and prohibiting conflicts of interest. 
(Ord. No. 1236, § 2, 9-16-2014) 
Secs. 2-199-2-220. - Reserved. 
Chapter 10 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Local regulation of alcoholic beverages, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.31 et seq.; local fee authorized, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 11.38; local license fee authorized, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 61.36; local regulation of billboards and electric signs, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 108.55; local option elections, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 251.01 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Sale or provision of alcohol in public park. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell or in any way provide for the serving of alcoholic beverages in any public park, unless: 
(1)  Such alcoholic beverage is sold or dispensed by the holder of a valid state alcoholic beverage commission alcoholic beverage permit and applicable town alcohol permit; and 
(2)  The alcoholic beverage is sold or dispensed in conjunction with a properly permitted special event, as set forth in section 10-3 of this Code and in compliance with this Code. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction be subject to a fine not to exceed the sum of $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 575, 2-4-2003; Ord. No. 961, § 2, 7-21-2009) 
Sec. 10-2. - Youth sports. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, consume, provide or sell alcoholic beverages during a period and on the same grounds where youth sports are scheduled for play. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 3, 7-21-2009) 
Sec. 10-3. - Special event permit procedures for public park alcohol sales. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he conducts, operates, or causes to be operated an event where alcohol is sold or dispensed without first obtaining a special event permit from the parks and recreation department. A separate permit is required for each special event. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the required $75.00 fee and completed application form, the special events committee shall review the proposed event and prescribe specific requirements for the special event. Once the conditions are established for the event, an agreement shall be executed prior to the issuance of a permit. 
(c)  Each permit application must contain the name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the permit holder and responsible for the proper operation of the special event and payment of fees or charges levied under this section. 
(d)  A special event permit is nontransferable. A permit holder shall inform the parks and recreation department in writing of any changes that alter information listed on the permit application. No fee will be assessed for such changes. 
(e)  Any false statement or misrepresentation of a material fact made by an applicant or person for the purpose of obtaining a permit shall be sufficient cause for refusal to the granting or suspension of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 4, 7-21-2009) 
Secs. 10-4-10-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALCOHOLIC SALES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 961, § 5, adopted July 21, 2009, repealed the former art. II., entitled "Alcoholic Beverage Sales Permits", §§ 10-21-10-31, and enacted a new art. II., as set out herein. The former art. II. pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 61, §§ 61-1-61-8, 61-10, adopted Sept. 12, 1974; and Ord. No. 243, § 2, adopted Sept. 21, 1987. 

Sec. 10-21. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, certain terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in this article, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Where terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinary, accepted meanings within the context with which they are used. Webster's Third New International Dictionary of The English Language, Unabridged, copyright 1986, shall be considered as providing ordinary, accepted meanings. Words in the singular shall include the plural and the plural the singular. Words used in the masculine gender shall include the feminine and the feminine the masculine. 
    Alcoholic beverage. An alcohol, or any beverage containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume, which is capable of use for beverage purposes, either alone or when diluted. 
    Alcoholic beverage establishment. A person or dealer that sells, as defined herein, alcoholic beverages. 
    Beer. A malt beverage containing one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and not more than four percent of alcohol by weight, and does not include a beverage designated by label or otherwise by a name other than beer. 
    Dealer. This term has the same meaning as that term is used in V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.33, and shall include "person" as that term is defined in this section. 
    Person. A natural person or association of natural persons, trustee, receiver, partnership, corporation, organization, or the manager, agent, servant or employee of any of them. 
    Residential area. Includes the following districts as defined in chapter 106 of this Code: 
SF-RE Ranchette Estate District SF-1 One-Family Residential District SF-2 One-Family Residential District SF-3 One-Family Residential District SF-4 One-Family Residential District* A-1 Single-Family Residential District* A-2 Single-Family Residential District* PH Patio Home Residential District MH-1 Single-Family Modular Home District MH-2 Mobile Home Residential District MF-1 Two-Family Residential District MF-2 Multifamily Residential District  
    Sell. Includes any of the following activities: 
(1)  Manufactures, distills, brews, sells, possesses for the purpose of sale, imports into this state, exports from this state, transports, distributes, warehouses or stores liquor; 
(2)  Solicits or takes orders for liquor; or 
(3)  For the purpose of sales, bottles, rectifies, blends, treats, fortifies, mixes, or processes liquor. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 5, 7-21-2009) 
Sec. 10-22. - State law to control. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed or interpreted to conflict with the V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code ("code"). The provisions of this article shall be subject to the limitations of such code and such code shall control. The municipal court of the town shall have jurisdiction of any offense under this article and under state law only where the constitution and the laws of this state confer such jurisdiction thereon. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 5, 7-21-2009) 
Sec. 10-23. - Business hours. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person or dealer to sell or deliver any alcoholic beverage except within those hours as prescribed by state law. The holder of a mixed beverage late hours permit issued by the state (or any equivalent late hours permit/license issued by the state) may offer alcoholic beverages for sale on Sunday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. and on any other day between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m., in accordance with state law. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale beer or wine, except within those hours as prescribed by state law. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 5, 7-21-2009) 
Sec. 10-24. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person or dealer shall sell alcoholic beverages within the town without first having applied for and been granted a valid permit issued by the town to sell alcoholic beverages. Prior to issuing a town permit to the applicant for the proposed location, the town secretary, or her designee, shall certify whether the location is located in an area that is wet and that the sale of alcoholic beverages at this location is not prohibited by ordinance. Upon the exhibition of a license or permit duly issued by the state to the applicant, the town secretary, or her designee, shall, in the name of the town, issue and deliver to the applicant a permit to engage in the business in the town of the character described in and authorized by the license or permit from the state held by the applicant. The license or permit so issued in the name of the town shall authorize the conduct of such business upon the premises described in a license or permit form the state and shall remain in force only so long as the license or permit from the state remains in force. A permit must be renewed or reapplied for upon renewal or issuance of a new permit from the state. 
(b)  The town secretary, or her designee, shall issue and deliver a receipt under this section to the person or dealer authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages under this article and a state permit or license, if the person or dealer: 
(1)  Pays the fees established by section 10-25; and 
(2)  Exhibits the permit or license issued by the state. 
(c)  The town secretary, or her designee, shall keep a record of all permits issued under this article. 
(d)  A permit shall be cancelled if the state license or permit is revoked. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 5, 7-21-2009) 
Sec. 10-25. - Permit fees. 
(a)  Unless state law exempts a person from payment of a fee established by this section, a person or dealer must pay the town an initial or a renewal permit or license fee of one-half the amount of the state fee for each permit and license, or renewal thereof, authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  A person or dealer shall pay the fees established under subsection (a) to the town no later than the 31st day of January, after the date the person's payment of a state permit or license fee is due. The permit or license fee for the first year shall be due on the 31st day of January following the permit date. Each renewal of a permit or license under this section shall be paid by the 31st day of January after the person's state permit renews. 
(c)  A person who sells an alcoholic beverage at a business location before the person pays the fees established by this section commits a class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $10.00, nor more than $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 5, 7-21-2009) 
Sec. 10-26. - Sale of beer prohibited in residential areas. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or dealer to sell beer in residential areas within the town. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 5, 7-21-2009) 
Sec. 10-27. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates or fails to comply with this article or the provisions of the state rules, and any person who is the alcoholic beverage permit holder or otherwise operates an alcoholic beverage establishment that does not comply with the requirements of this article, and any responsible officer of that alcoholic beverage permit holder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined not more than $500.00. Each day any violation or noncompliance continues constitutes a separate offense. The regulatory authority may seek to enjoin violation of these rules. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 5, 7-21-2009) 
Chapter 18 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 960, § 2, adopted June 16, 2009, repealed the former ch. 18, §§ 18-1-18-203, and enacted a new ch. 18 as set out herein. The former ch. 18 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Ord. No. 186, §§ I-IV, adopted Nov. 8, 1983; Ord. No. 280, §§ 1-16, 20, 21, 23, 24 adopted Aug. 19, 1991; Ord. No. 585, adopted Dec. 17, 2002; and Ord. No. 732, §§ 1-23, adopted Oct. 18, 2005. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases and words used herein shall be interpreted to read as follows and any words not herein defined shall be construed in the context used and by ordinary interpretation, and not as a word of art: 
    Abandon shall mean to dump, desert or leave any animal on public or private property with the intent of terminating any further responsibility for said animal or by failing to provide adequate care or adequate shelter for a period of 24 hours or more; and shall also mean refusing to claim or failing to timely redeem any animal impounded or quarantined by the Town of Little Elm, as specified herein. 
    Adequate/proper shelter shall mean a shelter for an animal that shall effectively protect the animal from any form of cold, overheating, inclement weather and direct effects of wind, rain, snow, ice or the sun. By way of example, and not limitation, a shelter may consist of a three-sided structure, with a roof. The shelter shall provide shade during hot weather months with provisions for cooling the animal when temperatures exceed 90 degrees Fahrenheit. During months when temperatures fall to 50 degrees Fahrenheit or lower, auxiliary heat or clean, dry bedding material shall be provided for the animal to provide insulation against the cold. 
    Adoption of a dog or cat shall mean the release of the animal from the care, custody, control or ownership of the animal shelter to a person who agrees to assume ownership responsibilities for the care of that animal as defined in this chapter. 
    Aggressive animal shall mean any animal which, when unprovoked chases or approaches a person upon any public or private property in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack such that a reasonable person would believe the animal would cause physical injury to the person. 
    Altered animal shall mean any animal, male or female, whose reproductive organs have been surgically removed. 
    Animal shall mean any living creature classified as a member of the animal kingdom including, but not limited to, birds, fish, fowl, mammals and reptiles, but specifically excluding human beings. 
    Animal services officer shall mean the person or person designated by the town to represent and act for the town in the impoundment of animals, controlling of stray animals and as otherwise required in this chapter. 
    Animal shelter shall mean a facility operated, controlled or contracted with the Town of Little Elm, or its designated contractor, for the purpose of impounding, confining, safekeeping, controlling or caring for animals held under, and consistent with the authority of this chapter, or an establishment designated or contracted by the town for the keeping of said animals. 
    Assistance animal shall mean an animal that is specifically trained or equipped to help a person with a disability and that: 
(1)  Is used by a person with a disability who has satisfactorily completed a specific course of training in the use of the animal; and 
(2)  Has been trained by an organization generally recognized by agencies involved in the rehabilitation of persons with disabilities as reputable and competent to provide animals with training of this type. 
    At large shall mean any animal which is not under restraint. 
    Bee shall mean any stage of the common domestic honeybee (Apis mellifera). 
    Bodily injury shall mean physical pain, illness or any impairment of physical condition. 
    Cat shall mean a domesticated animal that is a member of the feline family (Felis domesticus). This term specifically excludes a lion, tiger, bobcat, jaguar, panther, leopard, cougar, any other prohibited animal or any hybrid of a prohibited animal and a domesticated animal. 
    Cruel or inhumane treatment shall mean beating or torturing an animal, abandoning, cruelly confining or transporting, seriously over loading, seriously over working or abusing an animal. 
    Dangerous animal shall mean an animal, other than a dog, that: 
(1)  Makes an unprovoked attack on a person or other animal that causes bodily injury and occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the animal was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the animal from leaving the enclosure on its own; or 
(2)  Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the animal was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the animal from leaving the enclosure on its own and those acts cause a person to reasonably believe that the animal will attack and cause bodily injury to that person. 
    Dangerous dog shall mean a dog that: 
(1)  Makes an unprovoked attack on a person or other animal that causes bodily injury and occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own; or 
(2)  Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own and those acts cause a person to reasonably believe that the dog will attack and cause bodily injury to that person. 
    Direct physical control shall mean the animal is within the owner's observation and in such close proximity as to permit the owner reasonable opportunity to control the animal, should it become necessary to do so in order to protect the animal, a human or another animal from harm. 
    Dog shall mean a domesticated animal that is a member of the canine family (canis familaris). This term shall not include a wolf, jackal, fox, dingo, coyote, other prohibited animal or any hybrid of a prohibited animal and a domesticated animal. 
    Domestic animal shall mean any normal household pets, such as, but not limited to, dogs, cats, cockatiels, ferrets, hamsters, guinea pigs, gerbils, rabbits, fish or small, nonpoisonous reptiles or nonpoisonous snakes. 
    Foster care animal shall mean any animal under the control of a recognized member of a local humane organization which is to be held for a period of time not to exceed 90 days. 
    Fowl shall mean a bird of any kind, including, but not limited to, chickens, ducks, geese, guineas, pigeons, roosters, turkeys and pheasants. 
    Guard dog shall mean a dog that received training for the purpose of protecting property or persons, which is used by law enforcement, private security, or in protective functions where the dog is responsive to control by its owner or handler and used only for protective functions, irrespective of its status as a personal pet of its owner or handler. 
    Harbor shall mean the act of keeping and caring for an animal or providing premises to which the animal returns for food, shelter or care for a period of three consecutive days. 
    Impound shall mean to take an animal into custody by the town; impoundment shall begin at the time any animal control officer or police officer takes control of an animal either by hand, rope, trap, projectile or confinement to a vehicle. 
    Inhumane treatment of animals shall mean any treatment of an animal prohibited by V.T.C.A., Texas Penal Code § 42.09; V.T.C.A., Texas Health and Safety Code chs. 821, 822 or 826, as amended, or by any other provision of law including federal, state and local laws, ordinances or rules. 
    Kennel shall mean any business or establishment other than a veterinary hospital, whether operated separately or in connection with another business or establishment, that keeps, boards and/or trains dogs and/or cats for profit. Kennels must be established, maintained and operated in compliance with all applicable zoning and land use regulations of the Town of Little Elm. 
    Livestock shall mean any horses, mules, donkeys, cattle, goats, sheep, swine, ostriches, emus or rheas. Small livestock shall include, but not be limited to, all types of domesticated swine, sheep and goats. Large livestock shall include, but not be limited to, horses and any member of the domesticated horse family, including, but not limited to, mules, donkeys, ponies; all types and varieties of cattle; ostriches, emus and rheas. 
    Local rabies control authority ("LRCA") shall mean the officer designated by the town under V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.017 or his or her designee. 
    Owner shall mean any person, partnership, corporation or association that harbors, shelters, keeps, controls, manages, possesses, has custody or has whole or part interest in any animal. The occupant, owner or head of a household of any premises where an animal remains for 72 hours or more shall be presumed to be the owner of such animal for the purpose of this chapter. 
    Person shall mean a natural individual, firm, corporation or other legal entity. 
    Pet shall mean any animal normally kept for pleasure rather than utility, excluding livestock. 
    Pet store shall mean any business or establishment other than a veterinary hospital, whether operated separately or in connection with another business or establishment that buys and sells dogs, cats and/or other species of pets for profit. Pet stores or shops must be established, maintained and operated in compliance with all applicable zoning and land use regulations of the Town of Little Elm. 
    Possession shall mean actual care, custody, control or management of a certain animal. 
    Premises shall mean a parcel of land of one or more continuous lots owned, leased or controlled by one or more persons. 
    Prohibited animal shall mean any animal not normally born and raised in captivity, or any hybrid of an animal listed in this definition, regardless of the percentage of the hybrid mix, including, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Class reptilia: Family Helodermatidae (venomous lizards) and family Hydrophiidae (Venomous Marine snakes); family Viperidae (rattlesnakes, pit vipers and true vipers); family Elapidae (coral snakes, cobras and mambas); family Columbridae-Dispholidus Typus (boomslang); Bioga Dendrophilia (mangrove snake) and Kirklandii (twig snake only); order Crocodilia (such as crocodiles and alligators); 
(2)  Class aves: Order Falconiforms (such as hawks, eagles, falcons and vultures); 
(3)  Class mammalia: Order carnivores: 
a.  Family Felidea (such as lions, tigers, bobcats, jaguars, leopards and cougars), except commonly domesticated cats; 
b.  Family Canidae (such as wolves, dingos, coyotes, foxes and jackals), and any hybrid of an animal listed in his section except commonly domesticated dogs; 
c.  Family Mustelida (such as weasels, skunks, martins, minks, badgers and otters) except ferrets; 
d.  Family Procyonidae (such as raccoons and coati); 
e.  Family Ursidae (such as bears); 
f.  Marsupialia (such as kangaroos, opossums, koala bears, wallabys, bandicoots and wombats); 
g.  Chiroperta (bats); 
h.  Edentata (such as sloths, anteaters and armadillo); 
i.  Probosidea (elephants); 
j.  Primata (such as monkeys, chimpanzees, orangutans and gorillas); 
k.  Rodentia (such as beavers and porcupines); and 
l.  Ungulata (such as antelope, deer, bison and camels); 
(4)  Class amphibi: Poisonous frogs; 
(5)  Any species of animal illegal to own under federal, state or local law. 
    Public auction shall mean any place or facility where animals are sold to the highest bidder. This definition does not apply to individual sales of animals by private owners to other private owners. 
    Restraint shall mean that the following conditions exist an animal is restrained: 
(1)  It is securely enclosed or confined to its owner's yard by a physical fence in a manner that will isolate the animal from the public and from other animals except for animals owned or under the control of the owner; or 
(2)  It is accompanied by its owner or trainer at a bona fide dog show, field trial or exhibition; or 
(3)  It is secured by a leash of at least five and not more than ten feet in length and of sufficient strength to control the animal while the animal is being walked; or 
(4)  A specially trained dog that is used by a blind or deaf individual to aid him/her within the town; or 
(5)  A guard dog in the performance of duty in an enclosed building or securely fenced and locked area which is marked on all sides with signs in four-inch letters stating "guard dog" and clearly visible to the public; or 
(6)  A dog in a place of public assembly and effectively and securely muzzled in order to prevent the dog from biting. 
    Secure enclosure shall mean a fence or structure of at least six feet in height, forming or causing an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and suitable to confine a dangerous animal in conjunction with other measures which may be taken by the owner. Such enclosure shall be securely enclosed and locked and designed with secure sides, top and bottom and shall be designed to prevent the animal(s) from escaping from the enclosure. The enclosure shall be posted with signs on all sides in four-inch letters warning of the presence of a dangerous animal and shall include a symbol of a dangerous animal understandable by young children. 
    Senior citizen shall mean any person 65 years of age or older. 
    Serious bodily injury shall mean bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. An injury characterized by severe bite wounds or severe ripping and tearing of muscle that would cause a reasonably prudent person to seek treatment from a medical professional and would require hospitalization without regard to whether the person actually sought medical treatment, satisfies this definition. 
    Stray shall mean an animal that is improperly restrained and that wanders upon a public place, roadway, street, highway or the property of another person. 
    Town shall mean the Town of Little Elm, Texas, Denton County, Texas. 
    Unaltered animal means any animal, male or female, whose reproductive organs are intact and functional. 
    Unprovoked attack by a dog shall mean an incident in which a dog which attacked a human being or an animal was not hit, kicked or struck by a human being with any object or part of a human being's body, nor was any part of the dog's body pulled, pinched or squeezed by a human being, nor was the dog taunted or teased by any human being, nor was the human being in the dog's territory on the property of the dog's owner at the time of the attack. 
    Vaccination shall mean the inoculation of an animal with a rabies vaccine or other medicine that is accepted by the United States Department of Agriculture for use in that species, and which is administered by a veterinarian, licensed in the State of Texas, for the purpose of immunizing the animal against rabies or other diseases. 
    Veterinarian shall mean a veterinarian, licensed by the State of Texas. 
    Veterinary hospital or clinic shall mean any establishment that is maintained and operated by a veterinarian, licensed in the State of Texas, for the diagnosis, treatment or surgery of injuries and diseases to animals. 
    Zoonotic disease shall mean an illness which is of animal origin and usually causes illness to other animals but which can be transmitted to, and cause illness in humans. 
    To the extent not otherwise defined herein, reference may be made, for purposes of clarifying definitions, to state law and/or generally accepted industry publications. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1301, § 2, 10-20-2015) 
Sec. 18-2. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this chapter: 
(1)  To provide regulations by which the transmission of rabies to human beings and domestic animals can be prevented and controlled in the town; 
(2)  To decrease the number of unwanted and stray dogs and cats in the town; 
(3)  To encourage responsible animal ownership; and 
(4)  To protect the public health, safety and welfare of the town. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to authorize the keeping of any animal in violation of any other town ordinance, state or federal statute or law. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 18-3. - Incorporation by reference. 
    Any reference made in this chapter to any other law, statute, code, ordinance, rule or regulation is intended to incorporate such material as it presently exists and also any future amendments, changes, revisions, repeals or recodifications of such material, unless otherwise expressly provided. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 18-4. - Parental responsibility. 
(a)  If an animal is owned or purported to be owned by an individual who is younger than 17 years of age, responsibility and liability for compliance with this chapter with respect to such an animal shall be imposed on the parent, legal guardian or other person who has the duty of control and reasonable discipline of the minor individual, regardless of whether the parent, legal guardian or other person otherwise meets the definition of "owner" with respect to the animal at issue. 
(b)  Financial liability imposed under subsection (a) of this provision shall not exceed limits imposed by state law. 
(c)  It shall be an affirmative defense to imposition of responsibility and liability under subsection (a) that the parent, legal guardian or other person establishes by a preponderance of the evidence that he or she made a reasonable good faith effort to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009) 
Secs. 18-5-18-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL SERVICES OFFICER[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1301, § 2, adopted Oct. 20, 2015 renamed art. II as set out herein. Formerly entitled "Animal Control Officer". 

Sec. 18-21. - Animal services officer. 
(a)  Continuation of office. The office of animal services of the town, a division of the community services department, heretofore created by the town, is hereby established and continued in effect. 
(b)  Appointment. Animal services personnel shall be hired by and under the supervision of the town manager, or his/her designee. 
(c)  Qualifications. The animal services officer shall possess all the qualifications prescribed by the town. 
(d)  Powers and duties. The animal services officer shall perform all of the duties required of him/her by this chapter, regulations adopted by the town council and all action necessary for the effective enforcement of the animal services ordinances. 
(e)  Enforcement. The animal services officer shall have the authority to issue citations for any violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1301, § 2, 10-20-2015) 
Sec. 18-22. - Authority to carry tranquilizer guns. 
    When acting in the course and scope of employment, an animal services officer shall be and is hereby authorized to carry on the officer's person or in town vehicles, loaded tranquilizer guns approved by the chief of police and not in violation of any provision of the Texas Penal Code or any other applicable state law. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 18-23. - Filing of complaints. 
    Any citizen, firm or corporation believing any provision of this chapter to have been violated may file a written complaint with the animal services supervisor of the town. It shall then be the duty of the animal services supervisor to investigate said complaint and act as necessary on the results of that investigation. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1301, § 2, 10-20-2015) 
Sec. 18-24. - Failure to identify; notice of citation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person upon being issued a citation to intentionally or knowingly give the animal services officer other than his true name and address. For purposes of this section, a person shall be in violation upon failure to provide the requisite identification information upon a request for identification being issued by a person who identifies themselves as an animal services officer. 
(b)  If the person being cited is not present, the animal services officer may send the citation to the alleged offender by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested. If said citation should come back unclaimed, the citation shall be sent regular mail. If the regular mailing does not come back unclaimed or undeliverable, then service shall be deemed completed. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1301, § 2, 10-20-2015) 
Sec. 18-25. - Interference with impounding officers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, or attempt to prevent, an animal services officer from capturing or impounding any animal which may be legally impounded or otherwise interfering with the animal services officer while carrying out his or her lawful duties. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1301, § 2, 10-20-2015) 
Sec. 18-26. - Exemption of town officials from liability. 
    All of the regulations provided in this chapter and the functions and duties of all officers, agents, servants or employees of the town in the enforcement of this chapter are declared to be governmental and for the benefit, health and welfare of the general public. Any town official or employee charged with the enforcement of this chapter, acting for the town in the discharge of his/her duties, shall not thereby render himself/herself personally liable by the performance of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his/her duties. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 18-27. - Inspection of animals and premises. 
    The animal services officer shall have the authority to inspect animals and/or premises. For purposes of discharging the duties imposed by the provisions of this chapter or other applicable laws, an animal services officer may enter upon private property to the full extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1301, § 2, 10-20-2015) 
Sec. 18-28. - Authority to kill, impound or destroy animals. 
    The animal services officer shall have authority to do the following: 
(1)  Kill an animal which poses an imminent danger to a person or property and a real or apparent necessity exists for the destruction of the animal; 
(2)  Impound an animal which is diseased and endangers the health and welfare of another animal or person; 
(3)  Destroy an impounded animal if the animal services officer determines that recovery of the animal is doubtful due to injury or disease; 
(4)  Destroy an animal which, after being deemed dangerous according to V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code §§ 822.041-822.047, as amended or superseded; and 
(5)  Impound any animal running at large. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1301, § 2, 10-20-2015) 
Secs. 18-29-18-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ANIMAL NUISANCES 

Sec. 18-40. - Public nuisances. 
(a)  Whatever the animal services supervisor determines to be dangerous to human life or health, or that is offensive to the senses, or that is or threatens to become detrimental to the public health, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be unlawful, and the specific acts, conditions and things set forth in this chapter are, among others, declared to be nuisances and prohibited and made unlawful. 
(b)  It shall be a nuisance and a violation of this chapter for any person to permit, cause or allow an animal, whether by action or inaction, within his/her possession to engage in conduct which establishes such animal as a "dangerous animal" or "dangerous dog". 
(c)  Any animal normally found in the wild that has entered onto any public or private property and by its presence is committing a threat to public health and safety or is generally interrupting the tranquility of the location is a nuisance and a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1301, § 2, 10-20-2015) 
Sec. 18-41. - Maximum number of animals. 
(a)  The keeping of more than the maximum number of animals permitted by this chapter shall be a public nuisance. 
(b)  In no event shall the aggregate number of domestic animals exceed a total of four. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to keep or harbor more than four dogs and four cats in the aggregate six months of age or older on any premises. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 18-42. - Animals creating disturbances. 
    The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or long-continued noise, shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity is declared a nuisance in violation of this section. An audible noise from an animal or bird, in excess of 15 minutes, even if in sporadic bursts, shall be prima facie evidence that the same constitutes a nuisance. A person shall be deemed to have willfully and knowingly violated terms of this subsection if such person shall have been notified by the animal control officer or any police officer of such disturbance and shall have failed or refused to correct such disturbance and prevent its recurrence. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 18-43. - Sanitary standards. 
(a)  The owner of any animal allowed by this chapter to be kept in the town shall comply with the following standards of sanitation for that animal: 
(1)  Place food only in impervious containers or on impervious surfaces; and 
(2)  Equip watering troughs or tanks with adequate facilities for draining the overflow. 
(b)  Odors or unclean conditions prohibited. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow an animal or fowl to be kept in a manner or under conditions which creates foul odors, unsanitary conditions, an unreasonable presence of vermin or their offspring, or other harmful or offensive conditions which can be attributed to the presence of the animal, or to its physical or environmental conditions, including but not limited to the accumulation of animal excreta. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow an animal to produce odors or unclean conditions sufficient to create a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 18-44. - Disposal of excrement: Defecation of animals on public and/or private property. 
(a)  An owner, harborer or other person in possession of an animal commits an offense if he: 
(1)  Knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows the animal to defecate in the town on private or public property; and 
(2)  Fails to promptly remove and dispose of any excreta the animal deposits. 
(b)  An owner, harborer or other person in possession of an animal commits an offense if he: 
(1)  Knowingly permits the animal to enter or be present on public or private property located within the town; and 
(2)  Fails to have in his possession materials or implements that can be used to immediately and in a sanitary manner both remove and dispose of any excreta the animal may deposit on the property. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section if: 
(1)  The property was owned, leased or controlled by the owner, harborer or person in possession of the animal; 
(2)  The animal was a dog specially trained to assist a person with a disability and was in the possession of that disabled person at the time it defecated on the property; 
(3)  The owner or person in control of the property had given prior consent for the animal to defecate on the property; or 
(4)  The animal is a police canine being used in official law enforcement activities. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 18-45. - Animals at large or running at large. 
(a)  Trespass. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any animal in any area which constitutes a nuisance by reason of: Repeated trespasses on public property or private property; attacks on other animals; or damage to public or private property. It shall be unlawful for the owner, harborer or person in possession of any animal to leave the animal unrestrained by a leash and unattended in any manner that allows the animal to enter the private property of another without the effective consent of the owner. 
(b)  At large. It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow an animal to chase vehicles or attack or interfere with other animals or persons on public property, or be at large as defined in section 18-1 herein. It shall be unlawful for the owner, harborer or person in possession of any animal to leave the animal unattended in a public place regardless of whether or not it is restrained by a leash. 
(c)  Impound. The animal services officer is authorized to impound any animal in violation of this section. Such impounded animal shall be held for a period of three calendar days and at the end of this time, if the animal has not been claimed and the proper fee paid as prescribed in article IV, division 3, the animal shall be adopted or disposed of. If the impounded animal is not claimed after three business days or the proper fee remains unpaid, the owner's right to reclaim the animal is terminated, property rights to the animal are extinguished, and ownership of the animal is immediately transferred to the Town. 
(d)  Public safety. This section does not apply to police canines. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1301, § 2, 10-20-2015; Ord. No. 1344, § 2, 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 18-46. - Penalties. 
(a)  Violation; penalty. Any person violating any provision of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and fined as provided in this Code of Ordinances, unless specific provision for a penalty, is provided herein. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues to occur. 
(b)  Mental state. Unless otherwise specifically set forth herein, or in state law as adopted, allegation and evidence of culpable mental state are not required for the proof of an offense defined by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 18-47. - Noncomplying premises; remedies. 
    Where premises do not comply with the provisions of this chapter or if any health ordinance or law is not observed, the animal services officer may, upon written notice to the person owning or controlling the premises, order the correction of the objectionable conditions. In addition to any criminal proceeding, failure to comply with such order shall entitle the town to obtain relief by injunction. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1301, § 2, 10-20-2015) 
Secs. 18-48-18-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CARE OF ANIMALS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-55. - Animal provisions, generally. 
(a)  Confinement of animals by individuals. If a stray animal is found upon the premises of another, the occupant of the premises may confine the animal only for so long as reasonably necessary to notify the animal services officer and have the animal impounded. In attempting to confine the animal, the occupant shall not use any force that is intended or known by the occupant to cause, or in the manner of its use is capable of causing, death or injury to the animal. 
(b)  Inspection of premises where animals are kept. Premises where livestock, fowl or pets are kept or maintained shall be subject to inspection, upon receiving a complaint, by the animal services officer at any reasonable hour of the day while in the presence of the owner. 
(c)  Care of animals. Animals shall be provided humane care, treated and transported in a humane manner and not in violation of V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.09; V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code title 10, as amended, or any other provision of law, including federal, state and local laws, ordinances and rules. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1301, § 2, 10-20-2015) 
Sec. 18-56. - Prohibited actions against animals. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if: 
(1)  A person fails to provide an animal under his or her care, custody, control and/or ownership with adequate wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection from inclement weather and veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering; or 
(2)  A person having charge or care, custody or control of an animal places or confines such animal, or allows such animal to be placed or confined, in a motor vehicle, trailer or other enclosure under such conditions, or for such a period of time, as to endanger the health of the animal due to heat, lack of food or water, or such other circumstances as may cause injury or death to the animal. It is presumed that an animal's health, safety or welfare is endangered when the animal is confined in a parked or standing vehicle for a period of five or more minutes when the ambient outside air temperature measures above 85 degrees Fahrenheit or below 35 degrees Fahrenheit; or 
(3)  A person treats an animal in an inhumane or cruel manner as defined by V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.09, as amended, or V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 821, as amended; or 
(4)  A person knowingly owns, harbors, trains, sells or offers for sale any animal which is to be used for the purpose of fighting; or to be trained, tormented, badgered or baited for the purpose of causing or encouraging said animal to attack human beings or animals when not provoked, except that this section shall not apply to guard dogs; or 
(5)  A person mutilates any animal, whether such animal is dead or alive. This subsection does not apply to medical or veterinary medical research, medical or veterinary medical autopsies, or biology class use of animals for educational purposes; or 
(6)  A person causes an animal to fight another animal or person; or 
(7)  A person other than a licensed veterinarian docks an animal's tail, or crops an animal's ears; or castrates an animal; provided, however, this section shall not apply to normal livestock operations occurring within the town; or 
(8)  A person dyes or colors chicks, ducks, rabbits, reptiles or birds; or 
(9)  A person transporting an animal fails to effectively restrain an animal so as to prevent the animal from leaving or being accidentally thrown from a vehicle during normal operation of the vehicle; or fails to effectively restrain an animal so as to prevent infliction of bodily harm to passersby. Provided, however, the provisions herein shall not prohibit a person from transporting an effectively confined or tethered dog(s) in the open bed of a pickup truck; or 
(10)  A person is in control of a motor vehicle which strikes a domestic animal or livestock within the corporate limits of the town and fails to report the accident to the animal services officer as soon as practical; or 
(11)  A person abandons any animal, including the abandonment of an impounded animal at the animal shelter with the intent to readopt the animal to avoid impoundment fees; or 
(12)  A person ties or tethers a dog in a manner that prevents the animal from access to adequate shelter, food and water; or 
(13)  A person ties or tethers a dog in such a manner that the animal could become entangled or injured; or 
(14)  A person cruelly confines an animal in a manner that prevents the animal from being able to stand to their full height, stretch out, turn around and lie down and make normal postural adjustments comfortably for a period of 24 hours or more; or 
(15)  A person confines an animal in such a way that the animal is forced to stand and or lay within its own feces, standing water or other unsanitary conditions; or 
(16)  A person exhibits any stud horse or bull or other animal indecently or lets any male animal to any female animal unless done in a wholly enclosed location out of the public view; or 
(17)  It shall be unlawful for a person to sell or deliver live chickens, ducklings, goslings or rabbits less than eight weeks of age to any person in quantities of less than five; or 
(18)  It shall be unlawful for a person to give away any live animal as a prize or inducement for the purpose of attracting trade or business; or 
(19)  It shall be unlawful for any person to beat, starve, overwork or to otherwise abuse any animal; or 
(20)  The actions prohibited by this section are in addition to any prohibitions existing elsewhere in this Code or any applicable state or federal law. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit any duty imposed on an owner by any other provision of this Code or any applicable state or federal law. 
(b)  Violations. 
(1)  Public safety officers, including officers in the town public health, fire and police departments, shall have the authority to seize any animal that is the subject of any violation of this section if doing so is believed to be necessary to protect the animal's health, safety or welfare. 
(2)  If an officer personally witnesses a violation of any provision of this section occurring in plain view from or on public property, the officer may seize the animal without seeking issuance of a warrant even if doing so requires entering onto or into private property. 
(3)  If an animal is seized without a warrant under subsection (b)(2), a timely post-seizure hearing shall be held to satisfy the constitutional requirements of due process. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent public safety officers, including officers in the town public health, fire and police departments from euthanizing animals when authorized to do so by any statute, ordinance or law, or when such action is in the interest of the public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1301, § 2, 10-20-2015) 
Sec. 18-57. - Placement and baiting of animal traps. 
(a)  Animal traps. Only humane live animal traps may be used for capturing animals roaming unrestrained in the town; provided, however, this does not preclude the use of commercially sold rat and mousetraps to be utilized, as intended by the manufacturer in accordance with the manufacturer's direction for use, in that person's residence, accessory structure or commercial establishment. 
(b)  Certain traps prohibited. The placing or baiting of any steel-jawed trap (commonly known as a "bear trap", "wolf trap" or "coyote trap") within the corporate limits of the Town of Little Elm is expressly prohibited. As an exception to this subsection, governmental agencies and entities shall be permitted to use such traps and equipment necessary and permitted by state law or regulations. 
(c)  Traps on public property. Any animal traps found on public property are hereby declared to be abandoned, and the animal control officer is hereby authorized and directed to seize any such trap and process the same as abandoned property in accordance with the applicable provisions of state law and town procedures. 
(d)  Domestic animals traps. It shall be a violation of this chapter to use anything other than commercially sold animal food to bait any trap used for the purposes of trapping any at large domestic animal. Unless the adjacent properties are separated by a solid masonry or wood fence of a minimum six-foot height, traps used for such purpose shall not be placed or located within ten feet of adjacent property lines. In the event no such fence exists and the size, shape or other characteristics of the property preclude traps from being placed or located ten feet from adjacent property lines, said traps shall be placed or located as far from adjacent property lines as practicable. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 18-58. - Poisoning of animals prohibited. 
    No person shall place any substance or article which has in any manner been treated with any poisonous substance in any place accessible to human beings, birds, dogs, cats or other animals with the intent to kill or harm animals. This shall include antifreeze purposely left exposed to poison animals. This section, however, does not preclude the use of commercially sold rodent poisons when applied in accordance with the manufacturer's directions for such use, in that person's residence, accessory structure or commercial establishment. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 18-59. - Disposal of dead animals. 
(a)  Disposal of dead animals except livestock. 
(1)  In the event of the death of a dog, cat or other domesticated animal, it shall be the responsibility of the owner of the animal or the owner of the property on which the animal is located to remove and dispose of the dead animal within 12 hours after death of the animal. The animal services officer has the authority to pick up any dead animal found on public property and dispose of it and to assist a citizen with the same if requested. Following the expiration of 24 hours after the death of an animal, the animal services officer or other town representative may enter upon private property and remove any dead animal which the property owner or animal owner has failed to remove and dispose of. 
(2)  The animal services officer shall have the authority to take custody of and dispose of all deceased animals found on any roadway, street, highway and/or public or private property where the owner cannot otherwise be identified. 
(b)  Disposal of dead livestock. It shall be the specific responsibility of the owner of any livestock to have the livestock removed and properly disposed of within 24 hours of the death of said livestock, consistent with state law. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1301, § 2, 10-20-2015) 
Sec. 18-60. - Right of entry. 
(a)  Animal services officers are hereby authorized to enter upon any fenced or unfenced lot, tract or parcel of land, to the extent allowed by law, for the purpose of capturing, impounding and/or quarantining any animal upon having probable cause to believe said animal to: Have bitten, injured or otherwise attacked a human being or other animal; to have, or have been exposed to, rabies or another communicable disease posing a danger to the public health, safety or welfare; or otherwise pose a clear and present danger to human beings or other animals. This authorization is granted due to the emergency created by the potential rabies hazard or danger of injury to persons or other animals, and in recognition of the likelihood that such animal will otherwise escape capture. As a matter of policy, animal services officers shall not enter upon private property to capture and/or impound any animal known to belong to the owner of said property without probable cause. An animal services officer may enter upon such property, however, if it is believed that said animal poses a threat or danger to property, human beings or other animals, or is in violation of the restraint law. 
(b)  Furthermore, should the animal services officer have probable cause to believe an animal has been, or is being, cruelly treated or has rabies or another communicable disease, the animal services officer may, pursuant to V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 821.022, as amended, obtain a seizure warrant and impound such animal, even if it is enclosed on private property. 
(c)  The animal services officer may seek all available remedies allowed by law to gain entry onto property, including, but not limited to search and seizure warrants. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1301, § 2, 10-20-2015) 
Secs. 18-61-18-69. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 18-70. - Prohibited animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person to sell, offer for sale, barter, trade, keep, own, maintain, use or have in a person's possession or on premises under such person's control any of the following: 
(1)  Any dangerous animal, except as provided in article VI, division 1, pursuant to a final determination that the animal is dangerous; or 
(2)  Any prohibited animal unless that person is a person as exempted by V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.102E, Dangerous Wild Animals, as amended. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for a person to sell, offer for sale, barter, trade, keep, own, maintain, use or have in a person's possession or on premises under such person's control any of the following: 
a.  Any dangerous animal except as provided in article VI, division 1, pursuant to a final determination that an animal is dangerous; or 
b.  Any prohibited animal. 
(b)  A prohibited animal is exempt from this section if: 
(1)  The animal(s) belongs to a bona fide zoological park, circus, educational institution, museum, licensed laboratory, publicly owned nature center, or animals kept by bona fide members of an educational or scientific association or society approved by the director of health, or persons holding permits from an agency of the state or the United States for the care and keeping of animals for rehabilitative purposes. If a person holds a permit from the Texas State Department of Parks and Wildlife to operate a wildcard center in the town, the permit holder must also comply with the town comprehensive zoning ordinance, as amended, and must keep any and all animals or reptiles in cages of sufficient size, construction and strength to restrain the animal or reptile at all times; or 
(2)  The animal is an assistance or service animal as defined herein, that has been registered with the town and has provided to the animal control officer: 
a.  Records of vaccination appropriate for the species of animal; 
b.  Documentation from a veterinarian that the animal is healthy; 
c.  Proof of proper restraint for the animal; and 
d.  Proof that the animal has been or is being trained to perform tasks of an assistance or service animal. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 18-71. - Impoundment, quarantine or seizure of prohibited animals. 
    The animal services officer may seize and/or order the immediate impoundment or quarantine, at the owner's expense, of any wild or exotic animal found in the town where there is a potentially serious threat to public health, safety or welfare, and/or if in violation of any provision of this chapter. The animal services officer may seek a seizure warrant from a justice court, county court or municipal court, which court, upon probable cause, may issue a warrant authorizing a seizure. A hearing shall be conducted on whether the animal is subject to an exception within ten business days of the date of seizure. The owner or harborer of the animal, to the extent the same is known or can be determined through reasonable due diligence, shall receive written notice of the hearing, by personal service and/or certified mail, return receipt requested, as soon as practicable but not later than five business days prior to the hearing. Any order regarding the disposition of the animal shall terminate the owner's right to reclaim the animal, extinguish the owner's property rights to the animal, and transfer ownership of the animal to the Town. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1301, § 2, 10-20-2015; Ord. No. 1344, § 3, 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 18-72. - Special provisions concerning fowl, rabbits and guinea pigs. 
(a)  Enclosure requirements. Fowl, rabbits and guinea pigs must be kept indoors, or if outdoors, in a secure pen or enclosure that is at least 30 feet from any inhabited dwelling other than the dwelling of the owner. Any enclosure in which fowl, a rabbit or a guinea pig is kept must be cleaned and disinfected daily. Litter and droppings from fowl, rabbits and guinea pigs must be collected daily and properly disposed of. Provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to ducks or other waterfowl inhabiting natural or man made watercourses or bodies of water. 
(b)  Number of rabbits and guinea pigs. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly be in possession of more than two, rabbits or guinea pigs on any premises in the town. It shall be a defense to prosecution regarding the number of rabbits or guinea pigs being kept, that the same rabbits or guinea pigs and no more than the number and kinds of rabbits or guinea pigs in question were being kept on the same premises, by the same owner, prior to the adoption of this chapter. Provided, however, that no rabbits or guinea pigs that dies or is otherwise disposed of by the owner, may be replaced to the extent that such replacement would be in excess of the two number limitation. 
(c)  Regulation of fowl. 
(1)  Roosters are prohibited within the town limits of Little Elm and are declared to be nuisances under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 217, when located in residential districts. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep at any one location more than ten fowl. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having control of any chicken, duck, goose, turkey or other domestic fowl to permit the same to run at large on any street or sidewalk or on any other property, except his or her own, in the town. 
(d)  Sale of baby fowl, ducks. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, lease, rent or in any way transfer, barter or give away baby fowl or ducklings as pets or novelties, whether dyed or not dyed, colored or otherwise artificially treated; provided, however, this subsection shall not be construed to prohibit the display or sale of natural chicks or ducklings in proper breeding facilities for hatcheries or stores engaged in business of selling the same to be raised for legitimate commercial purposes. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 18-73. - Keeping of bees. 
    It is unlawful for any person to keep, or allow to be kept, bees in such a manner as to deny the reasonable use and enjoyment of adjacent property or endanger the personal health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the town. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009) 
Secs. 18-74-18-89. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ANIMAL IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 18-90. - Impoundment. 
(a)  Animal services officers are hereby authorized to capture and impound any animal upon having probable cause to believe said animal to be in violation of any provision of the ordinance from which this chapter derives or state law which authorizes or requires the animal's capture and impoundment, and in so doing, to enter upon any fenced or unfenced lot, tract or parcel of land when deemed necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, as allowed by law. As a matter of policy, animal services officers shall not enter upon private property to capture and/or impound any animal known to belong to the owner of said property without probable cause. An animal services officer may enter upon the property, as allowed by law, to capture an animal if it is believed that said animal poses a threat or danger to property, human beings or other animals. 
(b)  Additionally, it is the responsibility of the animal services officer to accept any animal delivered to the animal shelter pursuant to the requirements of this chapter, except those animals that are voluntarily released by their owners. For an animal to be voluntarily released, the owner must sign an owner release form that terminates the owner's right to reclaim the animal, extinguishes the owner's property rights to the animal, and transfers ownership of the animal to the Town. In addition, it is the duty of the animal services officer to capture and impound wild or nondomesticated animals in response to citizen's complaints of public nuisance or to control feral populations. 
(c)  If the lawful owner of an animal requests euthanasia due to injury or illness where recovery of the animal is unlikely and private means are not readily available, the owner must first sign all required forms and pay the required fees as adopted by the town. 
(d)  Baby nursing animals impounded without the mother or whose mother cannot or refuses to provide milk, may be transferred to a licensed rehabilitation facility whenever such facility is willing and able to provide care for the baby nursing animals. Should no facility be available, the animals may be humanely destroyed to prevent further suffering. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1301, § 2, 10-20-2015; Ord. No. 1344, § 4, 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 18-91. - Impoundment procedures. 
(a)  If, by identification tag, the owner of an impounded animal can be identified, the animal services officer will, as soon as practical, notify the owner either in person or by telephone of said impoundment. If the animal is locally owned within the Town of Little Elm and telephone contact can or cannot be made, the animal services officer will post a notice on the front door of the owner's residence indicating that the animal has been impounded and notifying the owner of the date that his or her right to reclaim the animal is terminated and property rights to the animal are extinguished. 
(b)  All impounded animals shall be kept for not less than three business days, unless the animal is reclaimed earlier by the owner under acceptable conditions. However, no impoundment period is required for an animal voluntarily delivered and released to the animal shelter or town by its owner. 
(c)  After the expiration of any required impoundment period, the owner's right to reclaim the animal is terminated, property rights to the animal are extinguished, and ownership of the animal is immediately transferred to the Town. The impounded animal shall be released to the animal shelter. At that time, the animal shall be disposed of by adoption from the facility, by offering it to a local animal humane group for adoption, by public auction, or by humanely destroying the animal. 
(d)  Any animal which is in great pain and suffering due to injury and probably will not recover, or which appears to have rabies, and/or which is at large and is posing an imminent danger to human beings or to other animals, may be humanely destroyed by the animal services officer. 
(e)  Any owner or person redeeming an unaltered animal from the animal shelter for the third time within any 12-consecutive month period must have the animal sterilized within ten days of the date the animal is released from the facility. Proof of said sterilization must be provided to the animal shelter within ten days of release from the animal shelter. 
(f)  When acting in the course and scope of their employment, the animal services officer is hereby authorized to carry on his person, or in town vehicles, loaded tranquilizer guns approved by the division of community services, or other weapons upon demonstration of proficiency and as qualified by the police department, and not in violation of any provision of the state penal code or any applicable state law. 
(g)  Inspection of the premises where livestock, fowl or pets are kept or maintained shall be subject to inspection upon receiving a complaint, at any reasonable hour of the day while in the presence of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1301, § 2, 10-20-2015; Ord. No. 1344, § 4, 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 18-92. - State laws for cat and dog sterilization adopted. 
    The town shall comply with all sterilization laws as set forth in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 828, as amended. A copy of the statute may be obtained from the town animal services supervisor. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1301, § 2, 10-20-2015) 
Sec. 18-93. - Requirements to redeem an impounded animal. 
    An animal which has been impounded under the provisions of this chapter may be redeemed by its owner or the lawful representative provided that the redeeming person: 
(1)  Is at least 18 years of age and presents identification, which verifies his/her identity and date of birth; 
(2)  Identifies themselves as the owner of the impounded animal or provides proof that he is the lawful representative of such owner including possession of the applicable required permit; 
(3)  Proof of current rabies vaccinations, or vaccination prior to release; 
(4)  Properly completes all applicable redemption forms as required; 
(5)  Pays the applicable impoundment fees and charges; 
(6)  Consents to the micro-chipping of the animal; and 
(7)  Consents to the spay/neuter of the animal upon the third impoundment. Exceptions may be granted by the animal services supervisor if the owner can prove that the animal is a registered breed animal or if on other merits as determined by staff. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1301, § 2, 10-20-2015) 
Sec. 18-94. - Fees. 
    All fees associated with the operation of the Little Elm Animal Shelter shall be reflected on the current adopted development services comprehensive fee schedule. The Little Elm Animal Shelter Advisory Committee shall provide recommendations for any proposed fee changes to be considered by town council. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1301, § 2, 10-20-2015) 
Sec. 18-95. - Euthanasia requirements and fees. 
    If the lawful owner of an animal requests euthanasia due to probable reasons, the owner must first sign the required forms. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1301, § 2, 10-20-2015) 
Sec. 18-96. - Requirements for adoption of animals from animal shelter and fees therefore. 
(a)  Requirements for adoption and fees. Requirements for adoption of an animal and fees in connection therewith shall be determined by the business entity which provides housing for animals pursuant to an agreement with the town. 
(b)  Determination of health of animals for adoption. A determination of the health of an animal in connection with the animal's adoption shall be determined by the business entity which provides housing for animals pursuant to an agreement with the town. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009) 
Secs. 18-97-18-114. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ANIMAL RESTRAINT 

Sec. 18-115. - Restraint of animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner or person in control of an animal to fail to keep the animal under restraint in a securely enclosed or confined area and in a manner that will isolate the animal from the public and other animals except for animals owned or under the control of the owner. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for an owner to fail or refuse to exercise diligent care and control of his or her animal to prevent such animal from becoming a public nuisance. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a person to use a chain, rope, tether, leash, cable or other device to attach a dog to a stationary object or trolley system. 
(d)  It is an affirmative defense to a violation of subsection (d) that the dog tethering: 
(1)  Is during a lawful animal event, veterinary treatment, grooming, training or law enforcement activity; 
(2)  Is required to protect the safety or welfare of a person or the dog, and the dog's owner maintains direct physical control of the dog; 
(3)  Occurs in the direct physical control of the owner in a designated town dog park; or 
(4)  Occurs on the owner's premises and: 
a.  While the dog is within the owner's direct physical control; and 
b.  Prevents the dog from advancing to within 15 feet of the edge of any public street. 
(e)  The affirmative defenses provided in subsection (e) are only available if the following specifications are met: 
(1)  The chain, rope, tether, leash, cable or other device is attached to a properly fitted collar or harness worn by the dog; 
(2)  The chain, rope, tether, leash, cable or other device is not placed directly around the dog's neck; 
(3)  The chain, rope, tether, leash, cable or other device does not exceed 1/20 th of the dog's body weight; 
(4)  The chain, rope, tether, leash, cable or other device, by design and placement allows the dog a reasonable and unobstructed range of motion without entanglement; and 
(5)  The dog has access to adequate shelter and clean and wholesome water. 
(f)  A person commits an offense if the person fails to comply with this section. 
(1)  An offense under this section is a class C misdemeanor. If a person fails to comply with this section with respect to more than one dog, the person's conduct with respect to each dog constitutes a separate offense. 
(2)  An offense under this section is punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00. 
(g)  This section does not prohibit a person from walking a dog with a hand-held leash. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009) 
Secs. 18-116-18-124. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - REGISTRATION 

Sec. 18-125. - Animal registration requirements. 
    Animals in the Town of Little Elm are not required to be registered with the town. However, all applicable state laws must be followed. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1301, § 2, 10-20-2015) 
Secs. 18-126-18-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RABIES CONTROL 

Sec. 18-140. - State law adopted. 
    The Town of Little Elm hereby adopts the Rabies Control Act of 1981 (V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 826) as amended, and the standards established by the Texas Board of Health as minimum standards for rabies control and quarantine provisions within the Town of Little Elm. In addition thereto, all of the rabies control provisions of this chapter, which are adopted pursuant to V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code §§ 826.015 and 826.033, shall have application within the Town of Little Elm. A copy of the statute may be obtained from the animal services officer. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1301, § 2, 10-20-2015) 
Sec. 18-141. - Reporting of rabies cases or suspected rabid animal required; confinement of animals. 
(a)  Reporting of rabies required. It shall be the duty of the owner, custodian or the veterinarian to report to the animal services supervisor all cases of rabies or suspected rabies of which any of the persons have knowledge. 
(b)  Confinement. Any animal having rabies or symptoms thereof or suspected of having rabies, or which has been exposed to rabies, shall be immediately released by the owner to the town for confinement in a veterinary hospital approved by the town, or for confinement in the animal shelter, or immediately upon facts having come to the attention of the owner or custodian of such animal with respect to its being rabid or having been exposed to rabies, such dog, cat or other animal shall be immediately and securely quarantined and kept under supervision of the animal services supervisor for a period of not less than ten days. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1301, § 2, 10-20-2015) 
Sec. 18-142. - Procedure when animal has bitten person or animal; exceptions thereto; quarantine fees. 
(a)  Procedure. When any dog, cat or other animal has bitten, scratched or otherwise attacked a person or animal, any person having knowledge of such incident shall immediately notify the town and such dog, cat or other animal shall be confined in the animal shelter or in a veterinary hospital for a period of ten business days at the expense of the owner and such dog, cat or other animal shall during such period of confinement be subject to inspection by town personnel or a licensed veterinarian. After the ten-day period the owner shall be notified of the date that his or her right to reclaim the animal is terminated and property rights to the animal are extinguished and granted five additional business days to reclaim the animal. The charge for each day of confinement of the animal shall be reflected on the current adopted development services comprehensive fee schedule. After the expiration of this period, the owner's right to reclaim the animal is terminated, the property rights to the animal are extinguished, and ownership is immediately transferred to the Town. Subsequently, the animal services supervisor may adopt out or dispose of the animal. 
(b)  Exceptions to procedure. If the animal in question has a valid and current vaccination, was not running at large at the time of the exposure, and is not a repeated biting animal, the animal services officer may allow the owner to secure the animal on his property if the owner can provide secure and adequate facilities for such confinement, provided that the animal be inspected by a veterinarian at the end of the quarantine period. The animal services officer shall also be granted access to the animal at any time during the ten-day quarantine to insure the conditions of the quarantine are being met. Failure to allow inspection of the animal will result in revocation of the home quarantine. Police K-9 shall be exempt from the confinement requirements. The police K-9 shall be checked by a licensed veterinarian immediately and at the end of the ten-day period. 
(c)  Quarantine fee. The owner of any dog or cat held in quarantine for observation purposes shall be charged a fee reflected on the current adopted development services comprehensive fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1301, § 2, 10-20-2015; Ord. No. 1344, § 5, 8-16-2016) 
Secs. 18-143-18-154. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DANGEROUS ANIMALS 
DIVISION 1. - DANGEROUS ANIMALS-GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-155. - State law adopted. 
    The town council hereby expressly adopts the regulations and procedures outlined in V.T.C.A., Texas Health and Safety Code § 822.001 et seq., as amended. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 18-156. - Application. 
    For purposes of this article VI, division 1 only, the term "dangerous animal" shall include a "dangerous dog", unless otherwise stated. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 18-157. - Nuisance declared. 
    It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance that an owner or other person harbors, keeps or maintains a dangerous animal in the town unless the owner complies with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 18-158. - Dangerous animals. 
    No person shall knowingly sell, own, offer for sale, breed, possess, keep, buy or attempt to buy, or train a dangerous animal within the Town of Little Elm unless the owner has received the proper permit(s) pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 18-159. - Finding of an animal as "dangerous". 
(a)  A person learns that the person is the owner of a dangerous animal when: 
(1)  The owner knows of an attack as described in section 18-1, definition of "Dangerous animal" or "Dangerous dog"; or 
(2)  The owner is informed by the animal services officer that the animal is a dangerous animal. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a written sworn notarized affidavit by any person, charging that a particular animal is dangerous, an animal services officer may investigate the incident to determine whether such animal is, in fact, dangerous. If the animal has bitten a human then the animal must be held at the animal shelter or at an approved quarantine veterinarian clinic for the period required by law. Any written sworn notarized affidavit shall contain at least the following information, if known: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the complainant and witnesses; 
(2)  Date, time and location of the incident(s); 
(3)  A complete description of the animal including breed, color, sex, size, etc.; 
(4)  Name, address and telephone number of the animal's owner, if known, and/or the premises where the animal is kept; 
(5)  A statement that the animal bit or attacked with as much detail as possible with regard to the incident and whether medical attention was required; and 
(6)  Any other facts that the complainant believes to be relevant. 
(c)  The following will apply regarding the investigation to determine whether an animal shall be declared "dangerous": 
(1)  The owner of the animal shall deliver the animal to the animal services officer for impoundment within five days of the notice that a sworn complaint has been filed. 
(2)  The suspect animal shall be seized by the animal services officer pursuant to a sworn complaint, and impounded and if necessary medically examined at the owner's expense if the animal caused serious bodily injury to a person requiring medical treatment. An animal causing serious bodily injury shall be held at an animal shelter pending the outcome of an investigation and determination as to whether the animal is, in fact, classifiable as dangerous. Such an investigation to determine if an animal is dangerous shall be conducted within ten days after receipt of the complaint or seizure of the animal. 
(3)  Notice of the investigation shall be provided by an animal services officer to the owner of the animal either in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested. The complainant in the matter shall also be notified either in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested of the investigation. During the investigation all parties shall be given the opportunity to present evidence on the issue of whether such animal is to be declared dangerous. 
(d)  Upon conclusion of an investigation to determine if an animal is dangerous, the animal services officer may find that the animal is not dangerous. In such case, the animal shall be returned to the owner, provided the animal has been properly vaccinated and registered, and all impoundment and medical fees paid. 
(e)  Notification to an owner that his dog has been declared dangerous shall include the following information: 
(1)  Failure to comply with the requirements will result in the animal's seizure, the termination of ownership and destruction of the animal. 
(2)  The owner has the right to appeal the decision to a justice or municipal court of competent jurisdiction and that such appeal must be filed, in writing, not late than the 15 th day after the date the owner is notified. 
(3)  The owner may appeal that decision of the justice or municipal court in the same manner as appeal for other cases. 
(f)  No animal shall be declared a dangerous animal if the threat, injury or damages caused by the animal were the result of a willful trespass upon another's property; or the person injured was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal or its owner, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime at the time of injury. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1301, § 2, 10-20-2015; Ord. No. 1344, § 6, 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 18-160. - Requirements for owner of dangerous animal. 
(a)  Not later than the 30th day after a person learns that the person is the owner of a dangerous animal, the person shall: 
(1)  Register the dangerous animal with the animal services officer and pay the applicable registration fee; 
(2)  Restrain the dangerous animal at all times on a leash in the immediate control of a person or in a secure enclosure as described in section 18-1, "Secure enclosure". A dangerous animal on a leash or in a secure enclosure shall also be subject to the following: 
a.  All dangerous dogs, if not in a secure pen, shall be securely confined indoors. 
b.  No dangerous animal may be kept on a porch, patio, or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the animal to exit such building of its own volition. In addition, no dangerous animal may be kept in a house or structure when the windows are open or when screen windows or screen doors are the only obstacles preventing the animal from existing the structure. 
c.  No person shall permit a dangerous animal to be kept outside its cage, pen or enclosure on a chain, rope or other type of leash unless the owner is in physical control of the chain, rope or other type of leash. Dangerous animals shall not be leashed to inanimate objects such as trees, posts, buildings, etc. Signs giving notice of the dangerous animal shall be prominently displayed so that all persons entering said property are immediately notified a dangerous animal is being kept at the location. 
(3)  Further secure the dangerous animal with a muzzle in a manner that will not cause injury to the animal, nor interfere with its vision or respiration but shall prevent it from biting any person or animal when the dangerous animal is taken off the property of the owner for any reason; 
(4)  Obtain liability insurance coverage or show financial responsibility in an amount of at least $100,000.00 to cover damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous animal causing bodily injury to a person and provide proof of the required liability insurance coverage or financial responsibility to the animal services officer. Acceptability of such proof of liability insurance coverage shall be subject to the final review and approval of the town attorney, which coverage shall require that it may not be cancelled without prior written notification to the town not less than 30 days prior to cancellation. It shall be unlawful for an owner of any dangerous dog found in the town to fail or refuse to present proof to an animal services officer or a designated representative, upon request of current liability insurance coverage as required under this section; 
(5)  Provide to the animal services officer the name and address of the owner, breed, age, sex, color and any other identifying marks of said animal; the location where the animal is to be kept if not at the address of the owner; two color photographs of the dangerous animal; 
(6)  Provide the dangerous animal with a fluorescent yellow collar visible at 50 feet in normal day light so that the animal can be identified; 
(7)  Spay or neuter the dangerous animal; and 
(8)  Microchip the dangerous animal for its life with a national registry, and present proof to the animal services officer. The owner of the dangerous animal shall microchip the animal by implanting a microchip identification device on the animal within seven calendar days after being notified by the animal services officer or by the municipal court that such animal is dangerous. The cost of the service shall be at the owner's expense. 
(b)  The owner may permanently remove the dangerous animal from the town limits, upon compliance with the following conditions: 
(1)  The new owner must comply with local and state regulations for owning a dangerous dog and acknowledge, by sworn affidavit, that he/she has been advised that the dog has been deemed dangerous, is aware of the state law requirements and agrees to be bound by state law requirements. 
(2)  The name, address and phone number of the location the animal will be kept must be submitted to animal services officer. 
(3)  The animal services officer shall notify the local authority of the classification of said animal as dangerous. 
(4)  Proof of compliance with the local and state laws from the local authority relating to dangerous dogs must be provided to the town. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1301, § 2, 10-20-2015) 
Sec. 18-161. - Failure to comply with requirements. 
    If the owner of an animal determined to be dangerous under this article fails or refuses to comply with all the requirements specified in section 18-160, ownership shall be transferred to the Town and the animal shall be seized by the animal services officer and euthanized by the animal services officer, its authorized agent, or a licensed veterinarian. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1301, § 2, 10-20-2015; Ord. No. 1344, § 6, 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 18-162. - Violations. 
(a)  A person who owns or keeps custody or control of a dangerous animal or dangerous dog commits an offense if the person fails to comply with any of the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Criminal responsibility for the keeping of a dangerous dog may be established by intent, knowledge or recklessness. 
(c)  Violation of any section under this article is punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 18-163. - Defense. 
(a)  It is a defense to prosecution under this article that the person is a veterinarian, a peace officer, a person employed by a recognized animal shelter or person employed by the state or a political subdivision of the state to deal with stray animals, and that the person has temporary ownership, custody or control of the animal; provided, however, that for any person to claim under this section, that person must be acting within the course and scope of his or her official duties as regards to the dangerous animal or dangerous dog. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under this division that the person is an employee of the institutional division of the Texas Department of Criminal Justice or of a law enforcement agency and trains or uses dogs for law enforcement or corrections purposes; provided, however, that for any person to claim a defense under this section, that person must be acting within the course and scope of his or her official duties with regard to the dangerous dog. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under this division that the dog at issue is a trained guard dog in the performance of official duties while confined or under the control of its handler. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009) 
Secs. 18-164-18-169. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REQUIREMENTS FOR ANIMALS OTHER THAN DOGS 

Sec. 18-170. - Registration of a dangerous animal other than a dog. 
(a)  The animal services officer shall annually register a dangerous animal if the owner presents proof of: 
(1)  Liability insurance or financial responsibility as required in section 18-160; 
(2)  Current rabies vaccination of the dangerous animal, if such vaccination is available for the species; 
(3)  The secure enclosure in which the animal will be kept; and 
(4)  Payment of an annual registration fee as reflected on the current adopted development services comprehensive fee schedule. 
(b)  The owner of a dangerous animal shall notify the animal services officer within 24 hours if the dangerous animal is at large, unconfined, has attacked a human being or another animal, has died, or has been sold or given away. If the animal has been sold or given away, the former owner shall provide the animal services officer with the name, address and telephone number of the new owner. If the new owner's address is in the town or if the animal is kept in the town, the animal services officer shall notify the new owner by certified mail, return receipt requested, or in person that the animal has been determined to be a dangerous animal and provide the new owner a copy of the requirements contained in this article. The new owner must be given notice to comply with the requirements for owners of dangerous animals, if the animal is physically located for any time within the town. It shall be unlawful for new owners to fail to comply with any requirement of this article. The same reporting requirements are imposed on any and all subsequent owners of the dangerous animal. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1301, § 2, 10-20-2015) 
Sec. 18-171. - Attack by dangerous animal other than a dog. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of a dangerous animal other than a dog and the animal makes an unprovoked attack on a person or another animal outside the animal's enclosure and causes bodily damage to the person or other animal. 
(b)  An offense under this section is a class C misdemeanor, unless the attack causes serious bodily injury or death, in which event the offense is a class A misdemeanor. 
(c)  If a person is found guilty of an offense under this section, the court may order the dangerous animal destroyed by an animal control officer or licensed veterinarian. 
(d)  In addition to criminal prosecution, a person who commits an offense under this section is liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $10,000.00. The town attorney may file suit in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect the penalty. Penalties collected under this subsection shall be retained by the town. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009) 
Secs. 18-172-18-179. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REQUIREMENTS FOR DANGEROUS DOGS 

Sec. 18-180. - Dangerous dog determination. 
    An owner learns that he/she is the owner of a dangerous dog when one of following events occurs: 
(1)  The owner knows of an attack as described in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code §§ 822.041(2)(A) or (B) and as provided herein; 
(2)  The dog makes an unprovoked attack on a person that causes bodily injury and occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own; 
(3)  The dog commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own and those acts cause a person to reasonably believe that the dog will attack and cause bodily injury to that person; 
(4)  The owner is informed by the animal services officer that the dog is dangerous as determined by the animal services officer through investigations and upon sworn statements. The owner may appeal this decision to the municipal court within 15 days; or 
(5)  The owner receives notice that the municipal court has found the dog is dangerous after a hearing on the matter, either on a report of an attack that caused bodily injury, or after an owner fails to comply with the requirements of an owner of a dangerous dog. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1301, § 2, 10-20-2015) 
Sec. 18-181. - Dangerous dog incident. 
    A dangerous dog incident means an incident as described in section 18-1, definition of "Dangerous dog". 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 18-182. - Reporting of incident. 
(a)  A person may report a dangerous dog incident as set forth in section 18-159 of this article to the animal services officer. 
(b)  The animal services officer shall provide a sworn report describing the dangerous dog incident to the town prosecutor's office. 
(c)  The town prosecutor's office shall evaluate the case and determine whether to file a dangerous dog incident report with the municipal court ("court"). If such a report is filed and the court finds probable cause to believe that the dog is a dangerous dog as stated in the report, the court shall order the animal services officer or his designee to seize the dog and the court shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure. The animal services officer shall seize the dog and shall provide for the impoundment of the dog in secure and humane conditions until the court determines one of the following: 
(1)  That the dog is not a dangerous dog pursuant to section 18-183 of the Code; 
(2)  That the dog is a dangerous dog and the court or animal services officer finds the owner has complied with the ownership of a dangerous dog pursuant to section 18-187; or 
(3)  That the dog should be humanely destroyed or is deceased. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1301, § 2, 10-20-2015) 
Sec. 18-183. - Hearing for dangerous dog determination. 
(a)  The court, upon receiving a report of an incident, finding probable cause, and issuing a warrant authorizing the seizure of a dog under section 18-182, shall set a time for a hearing to determine whether the dog is a dangerous dog. The hearing must be held not later than the tenth day after the date on which the dog is seized or delivered. 
(b)  The court shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to: 
(1)  The owner of the dog or the person from whom the dog was seized; 
(2)  The person who made the complaint; and 
(3)  Any witnesses. 
(c)  Any interested party, including the town prosecutor attorney, is entitled to present evidence at the hearing. 
(d)  The court shall issue its ruling within 24 hours from the conclusion of the hearing. 
(e)  Appeals from convictions under this division shall be handled like other appeals from convictions in municipal court. During the appeal period, the dog shall remain in the custody, care and control of the animal services officer. If the appeal is ultimately unsuccessful, the owner of the dog shall be responsible for the dog's impoundment fees during the period the case was being appealed. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1002, § 2, 2-16-2010; Ord. No. 1301, § 2, 10-20-2015) 
Sec. 18-184. - Failure to comply. 
(a)  If, upon application, a justice court, county court or municipal court finds that the owner has failed or is failing to comply with this division, the court shall order the animal services officer to seize the dog and shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure of the dog. The animal services officer shall seize or cause to be seized the dog and provide for impoundment under secure, humane conditions. The owner shall pay any cost or fee assessed by the town related to the seizure, acceptance and impoundment of the dog. The owner then has 11 calendar days after the seizure to comply or the court shall transfer ownership to the Town and order the dog to be humanely destroyed. After 15 calendar days, if the owner cannot be located, then the court shall transfer ownership to the Town and order the dog to be humanely destroyed. 
(b)  Failure to comply constitutes a misdemeanor, which upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. Subsequent offenses are class B misdemeanors and shall be referred to the appropriate court. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1301, § 2, 10-20-2015; Ord. No. 1344, § 7, 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 18-185. - Destruction of dog. 
(a)  A dog must be destroyed if the court finds that the dog caused the death of a person. The dog may be ordered destroyed if the court finds it caused only serious bodily injury by attacking, biting or mauling a person. If such findings are not made, the court is to release the dog to the owner, the person from whom the dog was seized or to any other authorized person upon compliance with this article. 
(b)  Exceptions to destruction. Even if the dog caused serious bodily injury to a person by attacking, biting or mauling, the court may not order its destruction if it also finds one of the following to be true: 
(1)  The dog was being used for protection of a person or a person's property and: 
a.  The attack, bite or mauling occurred in the dog's enclosure; 
b.  The enclosure was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own; 
c.  Notice was provided of the presence of the dog; 
d.  The injured person was at least eight years old; and 
e.  Was trespassing in the enclosure at the time of the attack, bite or mauling. 
(2)  The dog was not being used for the protection of a person or a person's property but: 
a.  The attack, bite or mauling occurred in the dog's enclosure; 
b.  The injured person was at least eight years old; and 
c.  Was trespassing in the enclosure at the time of the attack, bite or mauling. 
(3)  The attack, bite or mauling occurred during an arrest or other action by a peace officer while the peace officer was using the dog for law enforcement purposes; 
(4)  The dog was defending a person from an assault or person's property from damage or theft by the injured person; or 
(5)  The injured person was younger than eight years old and: 
a.  The attack, bite or mauling occurred in the dog's enclosure; and 
b.  The enclosure was reasonably certain to keep a person younger than eight years old from entering the enclosure. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 18-186. - Failure to surrender dog. 
    It shall be a separate violation of this division for any person to refuse or fail to surrender a dog subject to this article, or harbor, hide or secret, transport or secure the transport of a dog subject to this article, for the purpose of preventing its impoundment. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 18-187. - Additional requirements for owners of a dangerous dog. 
(a)  The owner of a dangerous dog shall notify the animal services officer within 24 hours if the dangerous dog is at large, unconfined, has attacked a human being or another animal, has died, or has been sold or given away. 
(b)  If an owner of a registered dangerous dog sells or moves the dog to a new address, that owner, not later than the 14th day after the date of the sale or move, shall notify the animal services officer for the area in which the new address is located. Upon selling or moving the registered dangerous dog, that owner must notify the new owner or person who has care and control of the dog that he or she is keeping or owning a dog that has been declared dangerous. 
(c)  The owner of a registered dangerous dog shall notify the office in which the dangerous dog was registered of any attacks the dangerous dog makes on people or other animals. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1301, § 2, 10-20-2015) 
Sec. 18-188. - Culpable mental state. 
    Criminal responsibility for the keeping of a dangerous dog may be established by intent, knowledge or recklessness. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 18-189. - Dogs that attack domestic animals. 
(a)  The animal services officer or police officer, to the extent applicable, shall adhere to procedures relative to dogs that are a danger to animals, as set forth in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.011B et seq. 
(b)  Dogs deemed to be dangerous due to attacks on domestic animals shall be subject to the procedures set forth in this division for registration, hearing, determination and/or destruction. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1301, § 2, 10-20-2015) 
Secs. 18-190-18-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ADOPTIONS AND STERILIZATION 

Sec. 18-200. - Requirements for adoption. 
(a)  The animal shelter may not release a dog or cat for adoption unless the animal: (1) has a microchip implantation; (2) has been sterilized; and (3) has received rabies vaccination according to article V of this chapter or the release is made to an owner who has signed an agreement to have the animal sterilized and vaccinated. 
(b)  The adoption sterilization agreement must contain: 
(1)  A sterilization completion date, which is: 
a.  The 30th day after the date of adoption in the case of an adult animal; or 
b.  The 30th day after a specific date estimated to be the date an adopted infant female animal becomes six months old or an adopted infant male becomes eight months old. 
(2)  A statement, printed in conspicuous, bold print, that sterilization of the animal is required, and that if the animal is not sterilized on or before the appropriate date the owner commits a criminal offense punishable as a class C misdemeanor. 
(c)  Except as provided by this subsection, a new owner who signs an adoption sterilization agreement under this section shall have the adopted animal sterilized on or before the sterilization completion date stated in the agreement. If the sterilization completion date falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the deadline is extended to the first day that is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. The animal shelter may extend the deadline for 30 days on presentation of a written report from a licensed veterinarian stating that the life or health of the adopted animal may be jeopardized by surgery. There is no limit of the number of extensions that may be granted for this reason. 
(d)  When adopting an animal from the animal shelter, a new owner must sign an adoption agreement and must present photo identification to the town so that the town can make a copy of it. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for a person who obtained a dog or cat from the animal shelter and executed an adoption sterilization agreement for the adopted animal to fail or refuse to have the animal sterilized by the date specified in the sterilization agreement or in subsequent extension(s) of the deadline as may be granted by the animal shelter pursuant to subsection (c) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 18-201. - Confirmation of sterilization, death or lost or stolen animal. 
(a)  Except as provided by subsections (b) and (c) of this section, every new owner who signs an adoption sterilization agreement under section 18-200 of this article shall provide the animal shelter from which the owner adopted a dog or cat, a certificate of sterilization signed by the veterinarian who performed the surgery and briefly describe the animal and provide the date of sterilization. It shall be unlawful for a person who obtains a dog or cat from the animal care and control center and who has executed a sterilization agreement for the subject animal to fail or refuse to provide a certificate of sterilization for the animal to the animal care and control center by seven days from the date the animal is sterilized. 
(b)  If the adopted animal dies on or before the deadline provided by section 18-200 of this article, the new owner shall provide to the animal shelter, no later than seven days from the date of the animal's death, a signed letter stating that the animal is dead, describing the cause of death, if known, and providing the date of death. The letter required by this subsection is in lieu of the letter required by subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  If an adopted animal is lost or stolen before the sterilization completion date, the new owner shall deliver to the animal shelter a signed letter stating that the animal is lost or stolen. The letter must be delivered not later than the seventh day after the date of the animal's disappearance and must described the circumstances surrounding the disappearance and provide the approximate date of the disappearance. The letter required by this subsection is in lieu of the letter required by subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 18-202. - Noncompliance with sterilization agreement; animal shelter right of reclamation. 
    The animal shelter may issue a citation the new owner if the animal shelter does not receive the following from the new owner after the expiration of the seventh day after the sterilization completion date agreed to under section 18-200: We do not want to reclaim the animal. 
(1)  A certificate of sterilization under subsection 18-201(a); or 
(2)  A letter stating the animal has died under subsection 18-201(b); or 
(3)  A letter stating that the animal is lost or stolen under subsection 18-201(c) from the new owner. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 18-203. - Affirmative defense. 
    It shall be an affirmative defense to sections 18-200 and 18-201 that a dog or cat is claimed from the animal shelter by a person who is the present owner of the animal, provided: 
(1)  The animal is not determined to be vicious; and 
(2)  The animal has not been determined to be a public nuisance, or threat to the public. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009) 
Secs. 18-204-18-224. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - LIVESTOCK 

Sec. 18-225. - Adoption of state law. 
    The town council hereby expressly adopts the regulations and procedures regarding the securing of livestock outlined in V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code ch. 143A, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 18-226. - Livestock required to be fenced in. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep on premises under his control any livestock without providing adequate fences or barriers that will prevent such livestock from damaging shrubbery and other property situated on adjacent property. All livestock shall be kept in a suitable pen or enclosure situated no less than 300 feet from any inhabited dwelling. This distance requirement shall not apply to the dwelling of the owner of the livestock. 
(b)  All pens and other enclosures wherein livestock are kept within the town shall be maintained and kept in such a manner as to protect the public health and safety and shall not be allowed to become unsanitary, offensive or disagreeable to persons residing in the vicinity thereof, nor shall they be so maintained or kept as to breed flies or other insects or in any manner cause any injury to the public or any person residing in the town. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 18-227. - Places prohibited for livestock. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or allow any type of livestock upon any public school grounds, college grounds, public park, property or municipal grounds within the town except those designated as bridle paths or other designated riding or exhibiting areas for animals. On streets, horses shall be ridden as close as possible to the curb and in no event shall horses be allowed on highways. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or allow any type of livestock upon the property of another within the town except with the express consent of the owner of the person in charge of such property obtained prior thereto. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 18-228. - Permit required for keeping of livestock. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep livestock in the town without first obtaining a permit from the animal services supervisor. Such permit shall be valid only for the location for which it was issued. Only a person who complies with the requirements of this chapter shall be entitled to receive and retain a permit. Every person who is a keeper of any livestock shall make application in writing upon forms prescribed and furnished to said person for a permit to keep livestock. The animal services supervisor may refuse to issue a permit if it determines that the area in which the livestock is to be kept is insufficient, including, without limitation, an area that is too small for the livestock or an area that is too close to a residential dwelling. For purposes of determining the sufficiency of area for the livestock permit, the animal services supervisor may consider any publicly available information, the conditions present at the premises where the permit is requested and any other relevant factors. Appeals to the decision of the animal services supervisor shall be considered by the town manager, whose determination is final. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1301, § 2, 10-20-2015) 
Sec. 18-229. - Impounding of livestock. 
    The animal services officer shall take appropriate measures for the safety of the public with regard to any livestock found at large. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1301, § 2, 10-20-2015) 
Sec. 18-230. - Disposal of impounded livestock. 
(a)  In the event that ownership of livestock impounded under this chapter can not be determined, and after being held for a period of three calendar days, the livestock becomes the property of the Town and may be impounded by the Denton County Sheriff's Department. At such time the livestock shall become the responsibility of the Denton County Sheriff's Department. Should the owner be located within the three-day period, the owner shall pay all required fees set forth in this chapter. The town, by this provision, intends to comply with any applicable provision of state law relative to the impoundment of strays. 
(b)  If impounded livestock are sold at public auction by Denton County Sheriff's Department, the county holding facility will apply such amount of the proceeds as necessary to satisfy the fees and costs incurred because of animal impoundment and auction, any fees and costs incurred by the town for impounding the livestock, restitution for any damage sustained by a property owner for said livestock having been at-large, upon submission of a notarized affidavit and satisfactory proof of such damage. Upon payment of all fees, costs and restitution, any remaining monies shall be returned to the owner of the livestock, upon submission of a sworn, notarized affidavit that the applicant was in fact the owner of the livestock immediately prior to the sale. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 1344, § 8, 8-16-2016) 
Secs. 18-231-18-239. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ANIMAL SHELTER ADVISORY COMMITTEE 

Sec. 18-240. - Little Elm Animal Shelter Advisory Committee. 
    The Little Elm Animal Shelter Advisory Committee is hereby created and established, which shall abide by all applicable state laws and be organized as follows: 
(1)  The Little Elm Animal Shelter Advisory Committee shall consist of five regular members who shall be appointed by town council. 
(2)  Terms expire at the end of September every three years beginning in 2015. 
(3)  Term limits shall not apply, so long as each member serves at the will and pleasure of town council. 
(4)  The committee shall meet as needed and as often as necessary to satisfy state law. 
(5)  Membership shall include a licensed veterinarian, one representative from an animal welfare organization, one municipal official, one person whose duties include the daily operations of the animal shelter, and one at-large position as appointed by the town council. 
(6)  Duties shall include making recommendations to animal services regarding policies and procedures of the animal shelter operations, making recommendations to town council on revisions to chapter 18 (Animals) of the Little Elm Code of Ordinances, making recommendations to town council on revisions to applicable fees, and general discussion of animal related issues within the town. 
(7)  Nothing herein grants the committee privilege to manage staff, issue policy, create or alter fees, or otherwise interfere with the operations of the Little Elm Animal Shelter. Recommendations shall be considered for implementation by the appropriate authority (town staff or town council, depending upon the nature of the recommendation). 
(Ord. No. 1301, § 2, 10-20-2015) 
Secs. 18-241-18-260. - Reserved. 
Chapter 22 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal regulation of housing and other structures, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.001 et seq.; International Residential Code, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.212; national electrical code applicable statewide for residential construction, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.214; standards for public pools and spas, 25 Tex. Admin. Code § 265.181 et seq.; home rule municipality may require buildings to comply with energy conservation standards, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.901; state license requirements for air conditioning and refrigeration contracting, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1302.251 et seq.; municipal licensing and regulation of air conditioning and refrigeration contracting, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code §§ 1302.301-1302.303. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1-22-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TECHNICAL CODES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1043, § 1, adopted Mar. 15, 2011, amended art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. II, §§ 22-19-22-27, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Ord. No. 554, §§ 1, 2, 4-7, adopted Jan. 15, 2002; Ord. No. 752, §§ 2(A)-2(D), 2(F)-2(I), adopted Jan 3, 2006; Ord. No. 929, §§ 2A.-2E., 2G.-2J., adopted Dec. 16, 2008. 
State Law reference- International Residential Code, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.212; National Electrical Code applicable state-wide for residential construction, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.214; home rule municipality may require buildings to comply with energy conservation standards, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.901. 

Sec. 22-19. - Adoption by reference. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted by the town for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the construction, alteration, removal, demolition, equipment, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of buildings and structures, including permits and penalties, the following codes: 
(1)  The International Building Code, being in particular the 2012 edition with American Wood Council Span amendments, except as it may be in conflict with the provisions of any ordinance of the city. 
(2)  The International Fire Code, being in particular the 2012 edition, except as it may be in conflict with the provisions of any ordinance of the city. 
(3)  The International Residential Code, being in particular the 2012 edition with American Wood Council Span amendments,, except as it may be in conflict with the provisions of any ordinance of the city council including appendix G Sections AG 101-108, Appendix H Sections AH 101-106, Appendix J, Sections AJ 101-601 and Appendix M Sections AM 101-104 is hereby adopted by reference. Unless deleted, amended, expanded or otherwise changed herein, all provisions of such code shall be fully applicable and binding. 
(4)  The International Mechanical Code, being in particular the 2012 edition, except as it may be in conflict with the provisions of any ordinance of the city. 
(5)  The International Fuel Gas Code, being in particular the 2012 edition, except as it may be in conflict with the provisions of any ordinance of the city. 
(6)  The International Plumbing Code, being in particular the 2012 edition, except as it may be in conflict with the provisions of any ordinance of the city. 
(7)  The National Electrical Code, being in particular the 2014 edition, as published by the National Fire Protection Association, except as it may be in conflict with the provisions of any ordinance of the city. 
(8)  The International Energy Conservation Code, being in particular the 2015 edition, except as it may be in conflict with the provisions of any ordinance of the city. 
(9)  The International Property Maintenance Code, being in particular the 2012 edition, except as it may be in conflict with the provisions of any ordinance of the city. 
(10)  The International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, being in particular the 2012 edition, except as it may be in conflict with the provisions of any ordinance of the city. 
(b)  The building codes adopted by reference in subsection (a) of this section are hereby amended in the following particulars: 
(1)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Permanent toilet facilities means a room in an existing building (including a construction trailer) or in the building being constructed with a water closet installed in such room which conforms to the plumbing code, and is continuously available to all workers involved in a construction project. 
Temporary toilet facilities means a portable, fully enclosed, chemically sanitized toilet which is serviced and cleaned at least once each week. 
(2)  Every construction project requiring a permit within the city shall have adequate toilet facilities for workers associated with the project. The following shall be considered adequate facilities: 
Commercial and residential construction projects: At least one permanent toilet facility for every ten workers shall be maintained in each subdivision for the employees or subcontractors of each builder holding a permit for a building in that subdivision. A toilet facility must be provided by each builder as long as the builder holds an active permit in the subdivision. 
(c)  Authority to establish policy standards, the building official shall have authority to establish certain policy guidelines or standards regulating various provisions of the residential, building, plumbing, fuel gas, mechanical, electrical, property maintenance, swimming pool, spa, abatement of dangerous buildings and health codes adopted in this chapter that are subject to the standardization of construction or health methods and/or local interpretation. The building official shall have the authority to outline conditions and provide for code consistency to rules, regulations, or laws with county, state or federal agencies. 
(d)  Unless deleted, amended, expanded or otherwise changed herein, all provisions of such code shall be fully applicable and binding. Any reference to the NFPA Codes other than the National Electric Code shall mean the most current edition available. 
(e)  Amendments. The following noted portions of the above-noted codes are hereby amended to read as follows. 
(Ord. No. 1043, § 1, 3-15-2011; Ord. No. 1264, § 2, 2-3-2015; Ord. No. 1340, § 2, 8-2-2016) 
Sec. 22-20. - International Building Code amendments. 
The following noted portions of the International Building Code are hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 101.4; change to read as follows: 
101.4 Referenced codes. The other codes listed in Sections 101.4.1 through 101.4.6 and referenced elsewhere in this code, when specifically adopted, shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the Electrical Code shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted. 
Section 101.4.7; add the following: 
101.4.7 Electrical. The provisions of the Electrical Code shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
Section 103 and 103.1 amend to insert the Department Name 
SECTION 103
Building Safety Division 
103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. The Building Safety Division is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official. 
Section 104.10.1; Delete 
Section 105.2; under sub-title entitled "Building" delete items 1, 2, 10 and 11 and re-number as follows: 
Building: 
1.  (Unchanged) 
2.  (Unchanged) 
3.  (Unchanged) 
4.  (Unchanged) 
5.  (Unchanged) 
6.  (Unchanged) 
7.  (Unchanged) 
8.  (Unchanged) 
9.  (Unchanged) 
Section 109; add Section 109.7 to read as follows: 
1.7 Re-inspection Fee. A fee as established by city council resolution may be charged when: 
1.  The inspection called for is not ready when the inspector arrives; 
"Not ready" is defined as being obviously incomplete. 
(Example: required element is missing, such as no water on DWV water test), 
No brick ties on framing brick tie inspection. 
2.  No building address is clearly posted; 
Address must be posted according to the following minimums: 
T-Pole/Plumbing Rough-in: on T-pole brace, 
Framing/MEP: clearly posted on structure, trash container or sign 
Meter release or other inspection after "dry-in": permanent address displayed on structure 
3.  City approved plans are not on the job site available to the inspector; 
4.  The building is locked or work otherwise not available for inspection when called; 
5.  The job site is red-tagged twice for the same item; 
6.  Failure to maintain erosion control, trash control or tree protection. 
Any re-inspection fees assessed shall be paid before any more inspections are made on that job site. 
Section 109; add Section 109.8, 109.8.1, 109.8.2 and 109.9 to read as follows: 
109.8 Work without a permit. 
109.8.1 Investigation. Whenever work for which a permit is required by this code has been commenced without first obtaining a permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. 
109.8.2 Fee. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by this code or the city fee schedule as applicable. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt the applicant from compliance with all other provisions of either this code or the technical codes nor from penalty prescribed by law. 
109.9 Unauthorized cover up fee. Any work concealed without first obtaining the required inspection in violation of Section 110 shall be assessed a fee as established by the city fee schedule. 
Section 202; amend definition of Ambulatory Care Facility as follows: 
AMBULATORY CARE FACILITY. Buildings or portions thereof used to provide medical, surgical, psychiatric, nursing or similar care on a less than 24-hour basis to individuals who are rendered incapable of self-preservation by the services provided. This group may include but not be limited to the following: 
-  Dialysis centers 
-  Sedation dentistry 
-  Surgery centers 
-  Colonic centers 
-  Psychiatric centers 
Section 202; add definition of Assisting Living Facilities to read as follows: 
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES. A building or part thereof housing persons, on a 24-hour basis, who because of age, mental disability or other reasons, live in a supervised residential environment which provides personal care services. The occupants are capable of responding to an emergency situation without physical assistance from staff. 
Section 202; change definition of "Atrium" as follows: 
ATRIUM. An opening connecting three or more stories... (Balance remains unchanged) 
Section 202; amend definition to read as follows: 
HIGH-RISE BUILDING. A building with an occupied floor located more than 55 feet (16,764 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access. 
Section 303.1.3; add a sentence to read as follows: 
303.1.3 Associated with Group E occupancies. A room or space used for assembly purposes that is associated with a Group E occupancy is not considered a separate occupancy. Except when applying the assembly requirements of Chapters 10 and 11. 
Section 304.1; add the following to the list of occupancies: 
Fire stations 
Police stations with detention facilities for 5 or less 
Section 307.1; add the following sentence to Exception 4: 
4. Cleaning establishments... (Text unchanged) ...with Section 707 or 1-hour horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 or both. See also IFC Chapter 12, Dry Cleaning Plant provisions. 
Section 403.1, Exception 3; change to read as follows: 
3. Open air portions of buildings with a Group A-5 occupancy in accordance with Section 303.6. 
Section 403.3, Exception; delete item 2. 
Section 404.5; delete Exception. 
Section 406.3.2; add item 3 to read as follows: 
3. A separation is not required between a Group R-2 and U carport provided that the carport is entirely open on all sides and that the distance between the two is at least 10 feet (3,048 mm). 
Section 406.8; add a second paragraph to read as follows: 
This occupancy shall also include garages involved in minor repair, modification and servicing of motor vehicles for items such as lube changes, inspections, windshield repair or replacement, shocks, minor part replacement and other such minor repairs. 
Table R502.3.1 (1); amend to read as follows: 
Section 506.2.2; add sentence to read as follows: 
506.2.2 Open Space Limits. Such open space shall be either on the same lot or dedicated for public use and shall be accessed from a street or approved fire lane. In order to be considered as accessible, if not in direct contact with a street or fire lane, a minimum 10-foot wide pathway meeting fire department access from the street or approved fire lane shall be provided. 
Section 712.1.8, change item 5 to read as follows: 
5. Is not open to a corridor in Group I and H occupancies. 
Section 713.14.1 Elevator Lobby. Exceptions: 4.3 change to read as follows: 
Section 713.14.1; Exception 4.3 Elevators serving floor levels over 55 feet (16,764 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access in high rise buildings. 
Section 903.1.1; change to read as follows: 
[F] 903.1.1 Alternative protection. Alternative automatic fire-extinguishing systems complying with Section 904 shall be permitted in addition to automatic sprinkler protection where recognized by the applicable standard, or as approved by the fire code official. 
Section 903.2; add the following: 
[F] 903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures shall be provided in the locations described in Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.12. Automatic Sprinklers shall not be installed in elevator machine rooms, elevator machine spaces, and elevator hoistways, other than pits where such sprinklers would not necessitate shunt trip requirements under any circumstances. Storage shall not be allowed within the elevator machine room. Signage shall be provided at the entry doors to the elevator machine room indicating "ELEVATOR MACHINERY - NO STORAGE ALLOWED." 
Section 903.2; delete the exception. 
Section 903.2.9; add Section 903.2.9.3 to read as follows: 
[F] 903.2.9.3 Self-service storage facility. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all self-service storage facilities. 
Exception: One-story self-service storage facilities that have no interior corridors, with a one-hour fire barrier separation wall installed between every storage compartment. 
Section 903.2.11; change 903.2.11.3 and add 903.2.11.7, 903.2.11.8, and 903.2.11.9 as follows: 
903.2.11.3 Buildings 35 feet or more in height. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout buildings with a floor level, other than penthouses in compliance with Section 1509 of the International Building Code, 35 feet (10,668 mm) or more above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access. 
Exception: Open parking structures in compliance with Section 406.5 of the International Building Code. 
903.2.11.7 High-Piled Combustible Storage. For any building with a clear height exceeding 12 feet (4,572 mm), see IFC Chapter 32 to determine if those provisions apply. 
903.2.11.8 Spray Booths and Rooms. New and existing spray booths and spraying rooms shall be protected by an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system. 
903.2.11.9 Buildings over 5,000 sq. ft. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all buildings with a building area over 5,000 sq. ft. For the purpose of this provision, fire walls shall not define separate buildings. 
Exception: Open parking garages in compliance with Section 406.5 of the International Building Code. 
Section 903.3.1.1.1; change to read as follows: 
[F] 903.3.1.1.1 Exempt locations. When approved by the fire code official, automatic sprinklers shall not be required in the following rooms or areas where such. (Text unchanged) ... because it is damp, of fire-resistance-rated construction or contains electrical equipment. 
1.  Any room where the application of water, or flame and water, constitutes a serious life or fire hazard. 
2.  Any room or space where sprinklers are considered undesirable because of the nature of the contents, when approved by the code official. 
3.  Generator and transformer rooms, under the direct control of a public utility, separated from the remainder of the building by walls and floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies having a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours. 
4.  Elevator machine rooms, machinery spaces, and hoistways, other than pits where such sprinklers would not necessitate shunt trip requirements under any circumstances. 
Section 903.3.1.2; add Section 903.3.1.2.2 to read as follows: 
[F] Section 903.3.1.2.2 Attics, Open Breezeways, and Attached Garages. Sprinkler protection is required in attic spaces of such buildings two or more stories in height, open breezeways, and attached garages. 
Section 903.3.1.3; add the following: 
[F] 903.3.1.3 NFPA 13D sprinkler systems. Automatic sprinkler systems installed in one- and two-family dwellings, Group R-3 and R-4 congregate living facilities and townhouses shall be permitted to be installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13D or in accordance with state law. 
Section 903.3.5 Water Supplies; add a second paragraph to read as follows: 
[F] Water supply as required for such systems shall be provided in conformance with the supply requirements of the respective standards; however, every fire protection system shall be designed with a 10 psi safety factor. Reference Section IFC 507.4 for additional design requirements. 
Section 903.4 Sprinkler system supervision and alarms; add a second paragraph after the exceptions to read as follows: 
[F] Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for fire department hose connection valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the central station upon tampering. 
Section 903.4.2 Alarms; add second paragraph to read as follows: 
[F] The alarm device required on the exterior of the building shall be a weatherproof horn/strobe notification appliance with a minimum 75 candela strobe rating, installed as close as practicable to the fire department connection. 
Section 905.2 Installation standard; change to read as follows: 
[F] 905.2 Installation standard. Standpipe systems shall be installed in accordance with this section and NFPA 14. Manual dry standpipe systems shall be supervised with a minimum of 10 psig and a maximum of 40 psig air pressure with a high/low alarm. 
Add Section 905.3.9 and exception to read as follows: 
[F] 905.3.9 Building area. In buildings exceeding 10,000 square feet in area per story, Class I automatic wet or manual wet standpipes shall be provided where any portion of the building's interior area is more than 200 feet (60,960 mm) of travel, vertically and horizontally, from the nearest point of fire department vehicle access. 
Exception: Automatic dry and semi-automatic dry standpipes are allowed as provided for in NFPA 14. 
Section 905.4, item 5; change to read as follows: 
[F] 5. Where the roof has a slope less than four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33.3 percent slope), each standpipe shall be provided with a two-way hose connection located to serve the roof or at the highest landing of a stairway with stair access to the roof provided in accordance with Section 1009.16. An additional hose connection shall be provided at the top of the most hydraulically remote standpipe for testing purposes. 
Section 905.4 Location of Class I standpipe hose connections; add the following item 7: 
[F] 7. When required by this Chapter, standpipe connections shall be placed adjacent to all required exits to the structure and at two hundred feet (200') intervals along major corridors thereafter. 
Section 905.9 Valve supervision; add a second paragraph after the exceptions to read as follows: 
[F] Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for fire department hose connection valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the central station upon tampering. 
Add Section 907.1.4 to read as follows: 
[F] 907.1.4 Design standards. All alarm systems new or replacement shall be addressable. Alarm systems serving more than 20 smoke detectors shall be analog addressable. 
Exception: Existing systems need not comply unless the total building remodel or expansion initiated after the effective date of this code, as adopted, exceeds 30% of the building. When cumulative building remodel or expansion exceeds 50% of the building must comply within 18 months of permit application. 
Section 907.2.1; change to read as follows: 
[F] 907.2.1 Group A. A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with new Section 907.6 shall be installed in Group "A" occupancies having an occupant load of 300 or more persons or more than 100 persons above or below the lowest level of exit discharge. Group "A" occupancies not separated from one another in accordance with Section 707.3.9 of the International Building Code shall be considered as a single occupancy for the purposes of applying this section. Portions of Group E occupancies occupied for assembly purposes shall be provided with a fire alarm system as required for the Group E occupancy. 
Exception: (unchanged.) 
Activation of fire alarm notification appliances shall: 
1.  Cause illumination of the means of egress with light of not less than 1 foot-candle (11 lux) at the walking surface level, and 
2.  Stop any conflicting or confusing sounds and visual distractions. 
Section 907.2.3; change to read as follows: 
[F] 907.2.3 Group E. A manual fire alarm system that initiates the occupant notification signal utilizing an emergency voice/alarm communication system meeting the requirements of Section 907.5.2.2 and installed in accordance with Section 907.6 shall be installed in Group E educational occupancies. When automatic sprinkler systems or smoke detectors are installed, such systems or detectors shall be connected to the building fire alarm system. An approved smoke detection system shall be installed in Group E day care occupancies. Unless separated by a minimum of 100' open space, all buildings, whether portable buildings or the main building, will be considered one building for alarm occupant load consideration and interconnection of alarm systems. 
Section 907.2.3; add exception 1.1 to read as follows: 
[F] Exceptions: 
1.  A manual fire alarm system is not required in Group E educational and day care occupancies with an occupant load of 30 or less when provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system. 
1.1.  Residential In-Home day care with not more than 12 children may use interconnected single station detectors in all habitable rooms. (For care of more than five children 21/2 or less years of age, see Section 907.2.6.) 
Section 907.4.2 Manual fire alarm boxes to read as follows: 
[F] (Text unchanged)...... Sections 907.4.2.1 through 907.4.2.7. 
Add Section 907.4.2.7 to read as follows: 
[F] 907.4.2.7 Type. Manual alarm initiating devices shall be an approved double action type. 
Add Section 907.6.1.1 to read as follows: 
[F] 907.6.1.1 Wiring Installation. All fire alarm systems shall be installed in such a manner that a failure of any single initiating device or single open in an initiating circuit conductor will not interfere with the normal operation of other such devices. All signaling line circuits (SLC) shall be installed in such a way that a single open will not interfere with the operation of any addressable devices (Class A). Outgoing and return SLC conductors shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 72 requirements for Class A circuits and shall have a minimum of four feet separation horizontal and one foot vertical between supply and return circuit conductors. The initiating device circuit (IDC) from an addressable input (monitor) module may be wired Class B, provided the distance from the addressable module to the initiating device is ten feet or less. 
Add Section 907.6.5.3 to read as follows: 
[F] 907.6.5.3 Communication requirements. All alarm systems, new or replacement, shall transmit alarm, supervisory and trouble signals descriptively to the approved central station, remote supervisory station or proprietary supervising station as defined in NFPA 72, with the correct device designation and location of addressable device identification. Alarms shall not be permitted to be transmitted as a General Alarm or Zone condition. 
Section 910.1; change Exception 2 to read as follows: 
[F] 2. Where areas of buildings are equipped with early suppression fast-response (ESFR) sprinklers, only manual smoke and heat vents shall be required within these areas. Automatic smoke and heat vents are prohibited. 
Section 910.2 Where required to read as follows: 
[F] (Text unchanged)...... Sections 910.2.1 through 910.2.4. 
Add subsections 910.2.3 with exceptions to read as follows: 
[F] 910.2.3 Group H. Buildings and portions thereof used as a Group H occupancy as follows: 
1.  In occupancies classified as Group H-2 or H-3, any of which are more than 15,000 square feet (1,394 m 2 ) in single floor area. 
Exception: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only noncombustible materials. 
2.  In areas of buildings in Group H used for storing Class 2, 3, and 4 liquid and solid oxidizers, Class 1 and unclassified detonable organic peroxides, Class 3 and 4 unstable (reactive) materials, or Class 2 or 3 water-reactive materials as required for a high-hazard commodity classification. 
Exception: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only noncombustible materials. 
Add subsections 910.2.4 to read as follows: 
[F] 910.2.4 Exit access travel distance increase. Buildings and portions thereof used as a Group F-1 or S-1 occupancy where the maximum exit access travel distance is increased in accordance with Section 1016.2.2. 
Table 910.3; Change the title of the first row of the table from "Group F-1 and S-1" to include "Group H" and to read as follows: 
Group H, F-1 and S-1 
Add Section 912.2.3 to read as follows: 
[F] 912.2.3 Hydrant distance. An approved fire hydrant shall be located within 100 feet of the fire department connection as the fire hose lays along an unobstructed path. 
Section 913.1; add second paragraph and exception to read as follows: 
[F] When located on the ground level at an exterior wall, the fire pump room shall be provided with an exterior fire department access door that is not less than 3 ft. in width and 6 ft. - 8 in. in height, regardless of any interior doors that are provided. A key box shall be provided at this door, as required by IFC Section 506.1. 
Exception: When it is necessary to locate the fire pump room on other levels or not at an exterior wall, the corridor leading to the fire pump room access from the exterior of the building shall be provided with equivalent fire resistance as that required for the pump room, or as approved by the fire code official. Access keys shall be provided in the key box as required by IFC Section 506.1. 
Section 1007.1; add the following Exception 4: 
Exceptions: 
(Previous exceptions unchanged) 
4.  Buildings regulated under State Law and built in accordance with State registered plans, including any variances or waivers granted by the State, shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of Section 1007. 
Section 1007.5; Platform lifts, amend to read as follows: 
1007.5 Platform lifts. Platform (wheelchair) lifts ... required accessible route in Section 1109. 8, Items 1 through 10. Standby power (Remainder unchanged). 
Section 1008.1.9.4; amend exceptions 3 and 4 as follows: 
Exceptions: 
3.  Where a pair of doors serves an occupant load of less than 50 persons in a Group B, F, M or S occupancy (Remainder unchanged). 
4.  Where a pair of doors serves a Group A, B, F, M or S occupancy. (Remainder unchanged) 
Section 1008.1.9.9; change to read as follows: 
1008.1.9.9 Electromagnetically locked egress doors. Doors in the means of egress in buildings with an occupancy in Group A, B, E, I-1, I-2, M, R-1 or R-2 and doors to tenant spaces in Group A, B, E, I-1, I-2, M, R-1 or R-2 shall be permitted to be electromagnetically locked if equipped with listed hardware that incorporates a built-in switch and meet the requirements below: (remaining text unchanged) 
Section 1015; add new section 1015.7 to read as follows: 
1015.7 Electrical Rooms. For electrical rooms, special exiting requirements may apply. Reference the electrical code as adopted. 
Section 1016; add new section 1016.2.2 to read as follows: 
1016.2.2 Group F-1 and S-1 increase. The maximum exit access travel distance shall be 400 feet (122 m) in Group F-1 or S-1 occupancies where all of the following are met: 
1.  The portion of the building classified as Group F-1 or S-1 is limited to one story in height; 
2.  The minimum height from the finished floor to the bottom of the ceiling or roof slab or deck is 24 feet (7,315 mm); and 
3.  The building is equipped throughout with an automatic fire sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. 
Section 1018.1; add exception 6 to read as follows: 
(Previous text unchanged) 
6. In Group B office buildings, corridor walls and ceilings within single tenant spaces need not be of fire-resistive construction when the tenant space corridor is provided with system smoke detectors tied to an approved automatic fire alarm. The actuation of any detector shall activate alarms audible in all areas served by the corridor. 
Section 1018.6; amend to read as follows: 
1018.6, Corridor Continuity. All corridors shall be continuous from the point of entry to an exit, and shall not be interrupted by intervening rooms. (Remainder unchanged) 
Section 1026.6; amend exception 4 to read as follows: 
Exceptions: (Exceptions 1 through 3 unchanged.) 
4. Separation from the open-ended corridors of the building... (remaining text unchanged) 
Section 1029.1; amend to read as follows: 
1029.1 General. In addition to the means of egress required by this chapter, provisions shall be made for emergency escape and rescue openings in Group R and I-1 occupancies (Remainder unchanged). 
Exceptions: (Exceptions 1 through 3 unchanged.) 
4. In other than Group R-3 occupancies, buildings equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2. 
Section 1101.2; Add exception to read as follows: 
Exception: Projects registered with the Architectural Barriers Division of the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this Chapter. 
Section 1203.1; amend to read as follows: 
1203.1 General. Buildings shall be provided with natural ventilation in accordance with Section 1203.4, or mechanical ventilation in accordance with the International Mechanical Code. 
Where air infiltration rate in a dwelling unit is 5 air changes or less per hour when tested with a blower door at a pressure 0.2 inch w.c. (50 Pa) in accordance with Section 402.4.1.2 of the International Energy Conservation Code, the dwelling unit shall be ventilated by mechanical means in accordance with Section 403 of the International Mechanical Code. 
Table 1505.1; delete footnote c and replace footnote b with the following: 
b. Non-classified roof coverings shall be permitted on buildings of U occupancies having not more than 120 sq. ft. of protected roof area. When exceeding 120 sq. ft. of protected roof area, buildings of U occupancies may use non-rated, non-combustible roof coverings. 
Section 1505.7; delete the section 
Section 1510.1; add a sentence to read as follows: 
1510.1 General. Materials and methods of applications used for recovering or replacing an existing roof covering shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 15. All individual replacement shingles or shakes shall be in compliance with the rating required by Table 1505.1 (text of exception unchanged). 
Section 2901.1; add a sentence to read as follows: 
[P] 2901.1 Scope. (existing text to remain) The provisions of this Chapter are meant to work in coordination with the provisions of Chapter 4 of the International Plumbing Code. Should any conflicts arise between the two chapters, the Building Official shall determine which provision applies. 
Table 2902.1; change footnote f to read as follows: 
f. Drinking fountains are not required in M Occupancies with an occupant load of 100 or less, B Occupancies with an occupant load of 25 or less, and for dining and/or drinking establishments. 
Section 2902.1.3; add new Section 2902.1.3 to read as follows: 
2902.1.3 Additional fixtures for food preparation facilities. In addition to the fixtures required in this Chapter, all food service facilities shall be provided with additional fixtures set out in this section. 
2902.1.3.1 Hand washing lavatory. At least one hand washing lavatory shall be provided for use by employees that is accessible from food preparation, food dispensing and ware washing areas. Additional hand washing lavatories may be required based on convenience of use by employees. 
2902.1.3.2 Service sink. In new or remodeled food service establishments, at least one service sink or one floor sink shall be provided so that it is conveniently located for the cleaning of mops or similar wet floor cleaning tool and for the disposal of mop water and similar liquid waste. The location of the service sink(s) and/or mop sink(s) shall be approved by the Town of Little Elm Health Department. 
Section 3006.1; change to read as follows: 
3006.1, General. Elevator machine rooms shall be provided. (Remainder unchanged.) 
Section 3006.4; add a sentence to read as follows and delete exceptions 1 and 2: 
[F] 3006.4. Machine Rooms and Machinery Spaces: (text unchanged) ... Storage shall not be allowed within the elevator machine room. Provide approved signage at each entry door to the elevator machine room stating "Elevator Machinery - No Storage Allowed." 
Section 3109.1; change to read as follows: 
3109.1 General. Swimming pools shall comply with the requirements of sections 3109.2 through 3109.5 and other applicable sections of this code and complying with applicable state laws. 
Section 3401.5 Alternative Compliance. Work performed in accordance with the International Existing Building Code shall be deemed to comply with the provisions of this chapter with prior approval from the Building Official. 
Section 3401.6 Dangerous Conditions. (Remainder unchanged.) 
(Ord. No. 1043, § 1, 3-15-2011; Ord. No. 1108, § 1, 9-18-2012; Ord. No. 1264, § 2, 2-3-2015) 
Sec. 22-21. - International Residential Code amendments. 
The following noted portions of the International Residential Code are hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section R102.4; change to read as follows: 
R102.4 Referenced codes and standards. The codes, when specifically adopted, and standards referenced in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference and as further regulated in Sections R102.4.1 and R102.4.2. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference made to NFPA 70 or the Electrical Code shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted. 
Section 108.7; add Section 108.7 to read as follows: 
R108.7 Re-Inspection Fee. A fee as established by Town Council resolution may be charged when: 
1.  The inspection called for is not ready when inspector arrives; "Not Ready" is defined as being obviously incomplete. (Example; required element is missing, such as brick ties, on framing/brick-tie inspection, no water on DWV water test.) 
2.  No building address is clearly posted; Address must be posted to the following minimums: T-Pole/Plumbing Rough-in: On T-Pole brace, Framing/MEP: Clearly posted on structure, trash container or sign, Meter Release or other inspection after dry-in: Permanent address displayed on structure. 
3.  Approved plans are not on job site available to inspector. 
4.  The project fails twice for the same item. 
5.  Failure to maintain erosion control, trash control or tree protection. 
Any re-inspection fees assessed shall be paid before any more inspections are made on that job site. 
Section R202; change definition of "Townhouse" to read as follows: 
TOWNHOUSE. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of three or more attached units separated by property lines in which each unit extends from foundation to roof and with a yard or public way on at least two sides. 
Table R301.2 (1); fill in as follows: 
GROUND SNOW LOAD WIND DESIGN SEISMIC DESIGN 
CATEGORY SPEED (mph) Topographic Effects 5 lb/ft 2 90 (3-sec-gust)/76 fastest mile No A  
SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM Weathering a Frost line depth;sup\sup; Termite c moderate 6" very heavy  
WINTER DESIGN 
TEMP e ICE BARRIER 
UNDER-LAYMENT 
REQUIRED h FLOOD HAZARDS g AIR FREEZING 
INDEX;sup \sup; MEAN ANNUAL 
TEMP j 22;deg;F No local code 150 64.9;deg;F  
Section R302.1; add exception #6 to read as follows: 
Exceptions: (previous exceptions unchanged) 
6. Open non-combustible carport structures may be constructed when also approved within adopted ordinances. 
Section R302.2, Exception; change to read as follows: 
Exception: A common two-hour fire-resistance-rated wall assembly, or one-hour fire-resistance-rated wall assembly when equipped with a sprinkler system... (remainder unchanged) 
Section R302.2.4, Exception 5; change to read as follows: 
Exception: (previous exceptions unchanged) 
5. Townhouses separated by a common fire-resistance-rated wall as provided in Section R302.2. 
Section R302.3; add Exception #3 to read as follows: 
Exceptions: 
1.  (Existing text unchanged.) 
2.  (Existing text unchanged.) 
3.  Two-family dwelling units that are also divided by a property line through the structure shall be separated as required for townhouses. 
Section R302.5.1; change to read as follows: 
R302.5.1 Opening protection. Openings from a private garage directly into a room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted. Other openings between the garage and residence shall be equipped with solid wood doors not less than 13/8 inches (35 mm) in thickness, solid or honeycomb core steel doors not less than 13/8 inches (35 mm) thick, or 20-minute fire-rated doors. 
Section R303.3, Exception; amend to read as follows: 
Exception: The glazed areas (remainder unchanged) unless the space contains only a water closet, a lavatory, or water closet and a lavatory may be ventilated with an approved mechanical recirculating fan or similar device designed to remove odors from the air. 
R303.4 Mechanical Ventilation; change to read as follows: 
Where the air infiltration rate of a dwelling unit is 5 air changes per hour when tested with a blower door at a pressure of 0.2 inch w.c. (50 Pa) in accordance with Section N1102.4.1.2, the dwelling unit shall be provided with whole-house mechanical ventilation in accordance with Section M1507.3. 
R314 Smoke Alarms; change to read as follows: 
R314 Combination Smoke/Carbon Monoxide Alarms. 
R314.1 Smoke detection and notification; change to read as follows: 
R314.1 Smoke/Carbon Monoxide detection and notification. 
All combination smoke/carbon monoxide alarms shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 217, UL 2034 and UL 2075, and installed in accordance with the provisions of this code and the household fire warning equipment provisions of NFPA 72 and NFPA 720. 
R314.2 Smoke detection systems; change to read as follows: 
R314.2 Smoke/Carbon Monoxide detection system. 
Household fire alarm and carbon monoxide systems installed in accordance with NFPA 72 and NFPA 720 that include smoke alarm, carbon monoxide or a combination of smoke and carbon monoxide detectors and audible notification devices installed as required by this section for smoke/carbon monoxide alarms, shall be permitted. 
The household fire alarm and carbon monoxide system shall provide the same level of smoke/carbon monoxide detection and alarm as required by this section for smoke/carbon monoxide alarms. Where a household fire and carbon monoxide warning system is installed using a combination of smoke/carbon monoxide detector and audible notification devise(s), it shall become a permanent fixture of the occupancy and owned by the homeowner. The system shall be monitored by an approved supervising station and be maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 and NFPA 720. 
Exception: Where smoke/carbon monoxide alarms are provided meeting the requirements of Section R314.3 and R314.4. 
R314.3 Location; amend and add location # 4 and # 5 as follows: 
Combination smoke and carbon monoxide alarms (remainder unchanged). 
#4. In each room with doors install such as study, media, storage or similar room capable of turning into sleeping room. 
#5. Texas basements or similar rooms without gypsum board installed shall be roughed-in with capability to be permanent when required. 
R314.3.1 Alternations, repairs and additions; amend to read as follows: 
When alternations, repairs or additions (text unchanged) combination smoke/carbon monoxide alarms (remainder unchanged) 
R314.4 Power source; amend to read as follows: 
Combination smoke/carbon monoxide alarms (remainder paragraph unchanged). 
Exceptions: 
1.  Combination smoke/carbon monoxide alarms (remainder unchanged) 
2.  Hard wiring of combination smoke/carbon monoxide alarms (remainder unchanged) 
R314.5 Interconnection; amend to read as follows: 
Where more than one combination smoke/carbon monoxide alarm (text unchanged) Physical interconnection of combination smoke/carbon monoxide alarms (remainder unchanged). 
Exception: Interconnection of combination smoke/carbon monoxide alarm (remainder unchanged). 
R315 Carbon Monoxide Alarms (Sections R315.1 through R315.4); Delete this section. 
Section R401.2, amended by adding a new paragraph following the existing paragraph to read as follows: 
Section R401.2. Requirements. (Existing text unchanged) ... 
Every foundation and/or footing, or any size addition to an existing post-tension foundation, regulated by this code shall be designed and sealed by a Texas-registered engineer. 
Section 502.3 Allowable joist span; amend tables as follows: 
TABLE R502.3.1(1) 
FLOOR JOIST SPANS FOR COMMON LUMBER SPECIES 
(Residential sleeping areas, live load = 30 psf, L/? = 360) a 
JOIST
SPACING
(inches) SPECIES
AND
GRADE DEAD LOAD = 10 psf DEAD LOAD = 20 psf 2 × 6 2 × 8 2 × 10 2 × 12 2 × 6 2 × 8 2 × 10 2 × 12 Maximum floor joist spans (ft. - in.) (ft. - in.) (ft. - in.) (ft. - in.) (ft. - in.) (ft. - in.) (ft. - in.) (ft. - in.) 12 Douglas fir-larch SS 12-6 16-6 21-0 25-7 12-6 16-6 21-0 25-7 Douglas fir-larch #1 12-0 15-10 20-3 24-8 12-0 15-7 19-0 22-0 Douglas fir-larch #2 11-10 15-7 19-10 23-0 11-6 14-7 17-9 20-7 Douglas fir-larch #3 9-8 12-4 15-0 17-5 8-8 11-0 13-5 15-7 Hem-fir SS 11-10 15-7 19-10 24-2 11-10 15-7 19-10 24-2 Hem-fir #1 11-7 15-3 19-5 23-7 11-7 15-2 18-6 21-6 Hem-fir #2 11-0 14-6 18-6 22-6 11-0 14-4 17-6 20-4 Hem-fir #3 9-8 12-4 15-0 17-5 8-8 11-0 13-5 15-7 Southern pine SS 12-3 16-2 20-8 25-1 12-3 16-2 20-8 25-1 Southern pine #1 11-10 15-7 19-10 24-2 11-10 15-7 18-7 22-0 Southern pine #2 11-3 14-11 18-1 21-4 10-9 13-8 16-2 19-1 Southern pine #3 9-2 11-6 14-0 16-6 8-2 10-3 12-6 14-9 Spruce-pine-fir SS 11-7 15-3 19-5 23-7 11-7 15-3 19-5 23-7 Spruce-pine-fir #1 11-3 14-11 19-0 23-0 11-3 14-7 17-9 20-7 Spruce-pine-fir #2 11-3 14-11 19-0 23-0 11-3 14-7 17-9 20-7 Spruce-pine-fir #3 9-8 12-4 15-0 17-5 8-8 11-0 13-5 15-7 16 Douglas fir-larch SS 11-4 15-0 19-1 23-3 11-4 15-0 19-1 23-0 Douglas fir-larch #1 10-11 14-5 18-5 21-4 10-8 13-6 16-5 19-1 Douglas fir-larch #2 10-9 14-1 17-2 19-11 9-11 12-7 15-5 17-10 Douglas fir-larch #3 8-5 10-8 13-0 15-1 7-6 9-6 11-8 13-6 Hem-fir SS 10-9 14-2 18-0 21-11 10-9 14-2 18-0 21-11 Hem-fir #1 10-6 13-10 17-8 20-9 10-4 13-1 16-0 18-7 Hem-fir #2 10-0 13-2 16-10 19-8 9-10 12-5 15-2 17-7 Hem-fir #3 8-5 10-8 13-0 15-1 7-6 9-6 11-8 13-6 Southern pine SS 11-2 14-8 18-9 22-10 11-2 14-8 18-9 22-10 Southern pine #1 10-9 14-2 18-0 21-4 10-9 13-9 16-1 19-1 Southern pine #2 10-3 13-3 15-8 18-6 9-4 11-10 14-0 16-6 Southern pine #3 7-11 10-0 12-1 14-4 7-1 8-11 10-10 12-10 Spruce-pine-fir SS 10-6 13-10 17-8 21-6 10-6 13-10 17-8 21-4 Spruce-pine-fir #1 10-3 13-6 17-2 19-11 9-11 12-7 15-5 17-10 Spruce-pine-fir #2 10-3 13-6 17-2 19-11 9-11 12-7 15-5 17-10 Spruce-pine-fir #3 8-5 10-8 13-0 15-1 7-6 9-6 11-8 13-6 19.2 Douglas fir-larch SS 10-8 14-1 18-0 21-10 10-8 14-1 18-0 21-0 Douglas fir-larch #1 10-4 13-7 16-9 19-6 9-8 12-4 15-0 17-5 Douglas fir-larch #2 10-1 12-10 15-8 18-3 9-1 11-6 14-1 16-3 Douglas fir-larch #3 7-8 9-9 11-10 13-9 6-10 8-8 10-7 12-4 Hem-fir SS 10-1 13-4 17-0 20-8 10-1 13-4 17-0 20-7 Hem-fir #1 9-10 13-0 16-4 19-0 9-6 12-0 14-8 17-0 Hem-fir #2 9-5 12-5 15-6 17-1 8-11 11-4 13-10 16-1 Hem-fir #3 7-8 9-9 11-10 13-9 6-10 8-8 10-7 12-4 Southern pine SS 10-6 13-10 17-8 21-6 10-6 13-10 17-8 21-6 Southern pine #1 10-1 13-4 16-5 19-6 9-11 12-7 14-8 17-5 Southern pine #2 9-6 12-1 14-4 16-10 8-6 10-10 12-10 15-1 Southern pine #3 7-3 9-1 11-0 13-1 6-5 8-2 9-10 11-8 Spruce-pine-fir SS 9-10 13-0 16-7 20-2 9-10 13-0 16-7 19-6 Spruce-pine-fir #1 9-8 12-9 15-8 18-3 9-1 11-6 14-1 16-3 Spruce-pine-fir #2 9-8 12-9 15-8 18-3 9-1 11-6 14-1 16-3 Spruce-pine-fir #3 7-8 9-9 11-10 13-9 6-10 8-8 10-7 12-4 24 Douglas fir-larch SS 9-11 13-1 16-8 20-3 9-11 13-1 16-2 18-9 Douglas fir-larch #1 9-7 12-4 15-0 17-5 8-8 11-0 13-5 15-7 Douglas fir-larch #2 9-1 11-6 14-1 16-3 8-1 10-3 12-7 14-7 Douglas fir-larch #3 6-10 8-8 10-7 12-4 6-2 7-9 9-6 11-0 Hem-fir SS 9-4 12-4 15-9 19-2 9-4 12-4 15-9 18-5 Hem-fir #1 9-2 12-0 14-8 17-0 8-6 10-9 13-1 15-2 Hem-fir #2 8-9 11-4 13-10 16-1 8-0 10-2 12-5 14-4 Hem-fir #3 6-10 8-8 10-7 12-4 6-2 7-9 9-6 11-0 Southern pine SS 9-9 12-10 16-5 19-11 9-9 12-10 16-5 19-8 Southern pine #1 9-4 12-4 14-8 17-5 8-10 11-3 13-1 15-7 Southern pine #2 8-6 10-10 12-10 15-1 7-7 9-8 11-5 13-6 Southern pine #3 6-5 8-2 9-10 11-8 5-9 7-3 8-10 10-5 Spruce-pine-fir SS 9-2 12-1 15-5 18-9 9-2 12-1 15-0 17-5 Spruce-pine-fir #1 8-11 11-6 14-1 16-3 8-1 10-3 12-7 14-7 Spruce-pine-fir #2 8-11 11-6 14-1 16-3 8-1 10-3 12-7 14-7 Spruce-pine-fir #3 6-10 8-8 10-7 12-4 6-2 7-9 9-6 11-0  
For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa. 
Dead load limits for townhouses in Seismic Design Category C and all structures in Seismic Design Categories D 0 , D 1 and D 2 shall be determined in accordance with Section R301.2.2.2.1. 
TABLE R502.3.1(2) 
FLOOR JOIST SPANS FOR COMMON LUMBER SPECIES 
(Residential living areas, live load = 40 psf, L/? = 360) b 
JOIST
SPACING
(inches) SPECIES
AND
GRADE DEAD LOAD = 10 psf DEAD LOAD = 20 psf 2 × 6 2 × 8 2 × 10 2 × 12 2 × 6 2 × 8 2 × 10 2 × 12 Maximum floor joist spans (ft. - in.) (ft. - in.) (ft. - in.) (ft. - in.) (ft. - in.) (ft. - in.) (ft. - in.) (ft. - in.) 12 Douglas fir-larch SS 11-4 15-0 19-1 23-3 11-4 15-0 19-1 23-3 Douglas fir-larch #1 10-11 14-5 18-5 22-0 10-11 14-2 17-4 20-1 Douglas fir-larch #2 10-9 14-2 17-9 20-7 10-6 13-3 16-3 18-10 Douglas fir-larch #3 8-8 11-0 13-5 15-7 7-11 10-0 12-3 14-3 Hem-fir SS 10-9 14-2 18-0 21-11 10-9 14-2 18-0 21-11 Hem-fir #1 10-6 13-10 17-8 21-6 10-6 13-10 16-11 19-7 Hem-fir #2 10-0 13-2 16-10 20-4 10-0 13-1 16-0 18-6 Hem-fir #3 8-8 11-0 13-5 15-7 7-11 10-0 12-3 14-3 Southern pine SS 11-2 14-8 18-9 22-10 11-2 14-8 18-9 22-10 Southern pine #1 10-9 14-2 18-0 21-11 10-9 14-2 16-11 20-1 Southern pine #2 10-3 13-6 16-2 19-1 9-10 12-6 14-9 17-5 Southern pine #3 8-2 10-3 12-6 14-9 7-5 9-5 11-5 13-6 Spruce-pine-fir SS 10-6 13-10 17-8 21-6 10-6 13-10 17-8 21-6 Spruce-pine-fir #1 10-3 13-6 17-3 20-7 10-3 13-3 16-3 18-10 Spruce-pine-fir #2 10-3 13-6 17-3 20-7 10-3 13-3 16-3 18-10 Spruce-pine-fir #3 8-8 11-0 13-5 15-7 7-11 10-0 12-3 14-3 16 Douglas fir-larch SS 10-4 13-7 17-4 21-1 10-4 13-7 17-4 21-0 Douglas fir-larch #1 9-11 13-1 16-5 19-1 9-8 12-4 15-0 17-5 Douglas fir-larch #2 9-9 12-7 15-5 17-10 9-1 11-6 14-1 16-3 Douglas fir-larch #3 7-6 9-6 11-8 13-6 6-10 8-8 10-7 12-4 Hem-fir SS 9-9 12-10 16-5 19-11 9-9 12-10 16-5 19-11 Hem-fir #1 9-6 12-7 16-0 18-7 9-6 12-0 14-8 17-0 Hem-fir #2 9-1 12-0 15-2 17-7 8-11 11-4 13-10 16-1 Hem-fir #3 7-6 9-6 11-8 13-6 6-10 8-8 10-7 12-4 Southern pine SS 10-2 13-4 17-0 20-9 10-2 13-4 17-0 20-9 Southern pine #1 9-9 12-10 16-1 19-1 9-9 12-7 14-8 17-5 Southern pine #2 9-4 11-10 14-0 16-6 8-6 10-10 12-10 15-1 Southern pine #3 7-1 8-11 10-10 12-10 6-5 8-2 9-10 11-8 Spruce-pine-fir SS 9-6 12-7 16-0 19-6 9-6 12-7 16-0 19-6 Spruce-pine-fir #1 9-4 12-3 15-5 17-10 9-1 11-6 14-1 16-3 Spruce-pine-fir #2 9-4 12-3 15-5 17-10 9-1 11-6 14-1 16-3 Spruce-pine-fir #3 7-6 9-6 11-8 13-6 6-10 8-8 10-7 12-4 19.2 Douglas fir-larch SS 9-8 12-10 16-4 19-10 9-8 12-10 16-4 19-2 Douglas fir-larch #1 9-4 12-4 15-0 17-5 8-10 11-3 13-8 15-11 Douglas fir-larch #2 9-1 11-6 14-1 16-3 8-3 10-6 12-10 14-10 Douglas fir-larch #3 6-10 8-8 10-7 12-4 6-3 7-11 9-8 11-3 Hem-fir SS 9-2 12-1 15-5 18-9 9-2 12-1 15-5 18-9 Hem-fir #1 9-0 11-10 14-8 17-0 8-8 10-11 13-4 15-6 Hem-fir #2 8-7 11-3 13-10 16-1 8-2 10-4 12-8 14-8 Hem-fir #3 6-10 8-8 10-7 12-4 6-3 7-11 9-8 11-3 Southern pine SS 9-6 12-7 16-0 19-6 9-6 12-7 16-0 19-6 Southern pine #1 9-2 12-1 14-8 17-5 9-0 11-5 13-5 15-11 Southern pine #2 8-6 10-10 12-10 15-1 7-9 9-10 11-8 13-9 Southern pine #3 6-5 8-2 9-10 11-8 5-11 7-5 9-0 10-8 Spruce-pine-fir SS 9-0 11-10 15-1 18-4 9-0 11-10 15-1 17-9 Spruce-pine-fir # 8-9 11-6 14-1 16-3 8-3 10-6 12-10 14-10 Spruce-pine-fir #2 8-9 11-6 14-1 16-3 8-3 10-6 12-10 14-10 Spruce-pine-fir #3 6-10 8-8 10-7 12-4 6-3 7-11 9-8 11-3 24 Douglas fir-larch SS 9-0 11-11 15-2 18-5 9-0 11-11 14-9 17-1 Douglas fir-larch #1 8-8 11-0 13-5 15-7 7-11 10-0 12-3 14-3 Douglas fir-larch #2 8-1 10-3 12-7 14-7 7-5 9-5 11-6 13-4 Douglas fir-larch #3 6-2 7-9 9-6 11-0 5-7 7-1 8-8 10-1 Hem-fir SS 8-6 11-3 14-4 17-5 8-6 11-3 14-4 16-10 a Hem-fir #1 8-4 10-9 13-1 15-2 7-9 9-9 11-11 13-10 Hem-fir #2 7-11 10-2 12-5 14-4 7-4 9-3 11-4 13-1 Hem-fir #3 6-2 7-9 9-6 11-0 5-7 7-1 8-8 10-1 Southern pine SS 8-10 11-8 14-11 18-1 8-10 11-8 14-11 18-0 Southern pine #1 8-6 11-3 13-1 15-7 8-1 10-3 12-0 14-3 Southern pine #2 7-7 9-8 11-5 13-6 7-0 8-10 10-5 12-4 Southern pine #3 5-9 7-3 8-10 10-5 5-3 6-8 8-1 9-6 Spruce-pine-fir SS 8-4 11-0 14-0 17-0 8-4 11-0 13-8 15-11 Spruce-pine-fir #1 8-1 10-3 12-7 14-7 7-5 9-5 11-6 13-4 Spruce-pine-fir #2 8-1 10-3 12-7 14-7 7-5 9-5 11-6 13-4 Spruce-pine-fir #3 6-2 7-9 9-6 11-0 5-7 7-1 8-8 10-1  
For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa. 
Dead load limits for townhouses in Seismic Design Category C and all structures in Seismic Design Categories D 0 , D 1 , and D 2 shall be determined in accordance with Section R301.2.2.2.1. 
Section 503.3 Floor Cantilever; amend tables as follows: 
TABLE R502.3.3(1) 
CANTILEVER SPANS FOR FLOOR JOISTS SUPPORTING LIGHT-FRAME EXTERIOR BEARING WALL AND ROOF ONLY a, b, c, f, g, h 
(Floor Live Load = 40 psf, Roof Live Load = 20 psf) 
Member
&
Spacing Maximum Cantilever Span (Uplift Force at Backspan Support in Lbs.) d, e Ground Snow Load = 20 psf 30 psf 50 psf 70 psf Roof Width Roof Width Roof Width Roof Width 24 ft. 32 ft. 40 ft. 24 ft. 32 ft. 40 ft. 24 ft. 32 ft. 40 ft. 24 ft. 32 ft. 40 ft. 2 × 8 @ 12" 20" 
(177) 15" 
(227) - 18" 
(209) - - - - - - - - 2 × 10 @ 16" 29" 
(228) 21" 
(297) 16" 
(364) 26" 
(271) 18" 
(354) - 20" 
(375) - - - - - 2 × 10 @ 12" 36" 
(166) 26" 
(219) 20" 
(270) 34" 
(198) 22" 
(263) 16" 
(324) 26" 
(277) - - 19" 
(356) - - 2 × 12 @ 16" - 32" 
(287) 25" 
(356) 36" 
(263) 29" 
(345) 21" 
(428) 29" 
(367) 20" 
(484) - 23" 
(471) - - 2 × 12 @ 12" - 42" 
(209) 31" 
(263) - 37" 
(253) 27" 
(317) 36" 
(271) 27" 
(358) 17" 
(447) 31" 
(348) 19" 
(462) - 2 × 12 @ 8" - 48" 
(136) 45" 
(169) - 48" 
(164) 38" 
(206) - 40" 
(233) 26" 
(294) 36" 
(230) 29" 
(304) 18" 
(379)  
For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa. 
Tabulated values are for clear-span roof supported solely by exterior bearing walls. 
b. ;hg;Spans are based on minimum design properties for No. 2 Grade lumber of Douglas fir-larch, hem-fir, and spruce-pine-fir for repetitive (three or more) members. No. 1 or better grade lumber shall be used for southern pine. 
c. ;hg;Ratio of backspan to cantilever span shall be at least 3:1. 
d. ;hg;Connections capable of resisting the indicated uplift force shall be provided at the backspan support. 
e. ;hg; Uplift force is for a backspan to cantilever span ratio of 3:1. Tabulated uplift values are permitted to be reduced by multiplying by a factor equal to 3 divided by the actual backspan ratio provided (3/backspan ratio). 
f. ;hg;See Section R301.2.2.2.5, Item 1, for additional limitations on cantilevered floor joists for detached one- and two-family dwellings in Seismic Design Category D 0 , D 1 , or D 2 and townhouses in Seismic Design Category C, D 0 , D 1 or D 2 . 
g. ;hg;A full-depth rim joist shall be provided at the unsupported end of the cantilever joists. Solid blocking shall be provided at the supported end. 
h. ;hg;Linear interpolation shall be permitted for building widths and ground snow loads other than shown. 
TABLE R502.3.3(2) 
CANTILEVER SPANS FOR FLOOR JOISTS SUPPORTING EXTERIOR BALCONY a, b, e, f 
Member Size Spacing Maximum Cantilever Span 
(Uplift Force at Backspan Support in lb) c, d Ground Snow Load = 30 psf 50 psf 70 psf 2 × 8 12" 42" (139) 39" (156) 34" (165) 2 × 8 16" 36" (151) 34" (171) 29" (180) 2 × 10 12" 61" (164) 57" (189) 49" (201) 2 × 10 16" 53" (180) 49" (208) 42" (220) 2 × 10 24" 43" (212) 40" (241) 34" (255) 2 × 12 16" 72" (228) 67" (260) 57" (268) 2 × 12 24" 58" (279) 54" (319) 47" (330)  
For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa. 
Spans are based on minimum design properties for No. 2 Grade lumber of Douglas fir-larch, hem-fir, and spruce-pine-fir for repetitive (three or more) members. No. 1 or better grade lumber shall be used for southern pine. 
b. ;hg;Ratio of backspan to cantilever span shall be at least 2:1. 
c. ;hg;Connections capable of resisting the indicated uplift force shall be provided at the backspan support. 
d. ;hg;Uplift force is for a backspan to cantilever span ratio of 2:1. Tabulated uplift values are permitted to be reduced by multiplying by a factor equal to 2 divided by the actual backspan ratio provided (2/backspan ratio). 
e. ;hg;A full-depth rim joist shall be provided at the unsupported end of the cantilever joists. Solid blocking shall be provided at the supported end. 
f. ;hg;Linear interpolation shall be permitted for ground snow loads other than shown. 
Section 502.5 Allowable Girder spans; amend tables as follows: 
TABLE R502.5(1) 
GIRDER SPANS a, b AND HEADER SPANS a, b FOR EXTERIOR BEARING WALLS 
(Maximum spans for Douglas fir-larch, hem-fir, southern pine and spruce-pine-fir b and required number of jack studs) 
GIRDERS AND HEADERS
SUPPORTING SIZE GROUND SNOW LOAD (psf) e 30 50 70 Building width c (feet) 20 28 36 20 28 36 20 28 36 Span NJ d Span NJ d Span NJ d Span NJ d Span NJ d Span NJ d Span NJ d Span NJ d Span NJ d Roof and ceiling 2-2×4 3-6 1 3-2 1 2-10 1 3-2 1 2-9 1 2-6 1 2-10 1 2-6 1 2-3 1 2-2×6 5-5 1 4-8 1 4-2 1 4-8 1 4-1 1 3-8 2 4-2 1 3-8 2 3-3 2 2-2×8 6-10 1 5-11 2 5-4 2 5-11 2 5-2 2 4-7 2 5-4 2 4-7 2 4-1 2 2-2×10 8-5 2 7-3 2 6-6 2 7-3 2 6-3 2 5-7 2 6-6 2 5-7 2 5-0 2 2-2×12 9-9 2 8-5 2 7-6 2 8-5 2 7-3 2 6-6 2 7-6 2 6-6 2 5-10 3 3-2×8 8-4 1 7-5 1 6-8 1 7-5 1 6-5 2 5-9 2 6-8 1 5-9 2 5-2 2 3-2×10 10-6 1 9-1 2 8-2 2 9-1 2 7-10 2 7-0 2 8-2 2 7-0 2 6-4 2 3-2×12 12-2 2 10-7 2 9-5 2 10-7 2 9-2 2 8-2 2 9-5 2 8-2 2 7-4 2 4-2×8 9-2 1 8-4 1 7-8 1 8-4 1 7-5 1 6-8 1 7-8 1 6-8 1 5-11 2 4-2×10 11-8 1 10-6 1 9-5 2 10-6 1 9-1 2 8-2 2 9-5 2 8-2 2 7-3 2 4-2×12 14-1 1 12-2 2 10-11 2 12-2 2 10-7 2 9-5 2 10-11 2 9-5 2 8-5 2 Roof, ceiling and one center-bearing floor 2-2×4 3-1 1 2-9 1 2-5 1 2-9 1 2-5 1 2-2 1 2-7 1 2-3 1 2-0 1 2-2×6 4-6 1 4-0 1 3-7 2 4-1 1 3-7 2 3-3 2 3-9 2 3-3 2 2-11 2 2-2×8 5-9 2 5-0 2 4-6 2 5-2 2 4-6 2 4-1 2 4-9 2 4-2 2 3-9 2 2-2×10 7-0 2 6-2 2 5-6 2 6-4 2 5-6 2 5-0 2 5-9 2 5-1 2 4-7 3 2-2×12 8-1 2 7-1 2 6-5 2 7-4 2 6-5 2 5-9 3 6-8 2 5-10 3 5-3 3 3-2×8 7-2 1 6-3 2 5-8 2 6-5 2 5-8 2 5-1 2 5-11 2 5-2 2 4-8 2 3-2×10 8-9 2 7-8 2 6-11 2 7-11 2 6-11 2 6-3 2 7-3 2 6-4 2 5-8 2 3-2×12 10-2 2 8-11 2 8-0 2 9-2 2 8-0 2 7-3 2 8-5 2 7-4 2 6-7 2 4-2×8 8-1 1 7-3 1 6-7 1 7-5 1 6-6 1 5-11 2 6-10 1 6-0 2 5-5 2 4-2×10 10-1 1 8-10 2 8-0 2 9-1 2 8-0 2 7-2 2 8-4 2 7-4 2 6-7 2 4-2×12 11-9 2 10-3 2 9-3 2 10-7 2 9-3 2 8-4 2 9-8 2 8-6 2 7-7 2 Roof, ceiling and one clear span floor 2-2×4 2-8 1 2-4 1 2-1 1 2-7 1 2-3 1 2-0 1 2-5 1 2-1 1 1-10 1 2-2×6 3-11 1 3-5 2 3-0 2 3-10 2 3-4 2 3-0 2 3-6 2 3-1 2 2-9 2 2-2×8 5-0 2 4-4 2 3-10 2 4-10 2 4-2 2 3-9 2 4-6 2 3-11 2 3-6 2 2-2×10 6-1 2 5-3 2 4-8 2 5-11 2 5-1 2 4-7 3 5-6 2 4-9 2 4-3 3 2-2×12 7-1 2 6-1 3 5-5 3 6-10 2 5-11 3 5-4 3 6-4 2 5-6 3 5-0 3 3-2×8 6-3 2 5-5 2 4-10 2 6-1 2 5-3 2 4-8 2 5-7 2 4-11 2 4-5 2 3-2×10 7-7 2 6-7 2 5-11 2 7-5 2 6-5 2 5-9 2 6-10 2 6-0 2 5-4 2 3-2×12 8-10 2 7-8 2 6-10 2 8-7 2 7-5 2 6-8 2 7-11 2 6-11 2 6-3 2 4-2×8 7-2 1 6-3 2 5-7 2 7-0 1 6-1 2 5-5 2 6-6 1 5-8 2 5-1 2 4-2×10 8-9 2 7-7 2 6-10 2 8-7 2 7-5 2 6-7 2 7-11 2 6-11 2 6-2 2 4-2×12 10-2 2 8-10 2 7-11 2 9-11 2 8-7 2 7-8 2 9-2 2 8-0 2 7-2 2 Roof, ceiling and two center-bearing floors 2-2×4 2-7 1 2-3 1 2-0 1 2-6 1 2-2 1 1-11 1 2-4 1 2-0 1 1-9 1 2-2×6 3-9 2 3-3 2 2-11 2 3-8 2 3-2 2 2-10 2 3-5 2 3-0 2 2-8 2 2-2×8 4-9 2 4-2 2 3-9 2 4-7 2 4-0 2 3-8 2 4-4 2 3-9 2 3-5 2 2-2×10 5-9 2 5-1 2 4-7 3 5-8 2 4-11 2 4-5 3 5-3 2 4-7 3 4-2 3 2-2×12 6-8 2 5-10 3 5-3 3 6-6 2 5-9 3 5-2 3 6-1 3 5-4 3 4-10 3 3-2×8 5-11 2 5-2 2 4-8 2 5-9 2 5-1 2 4-7 2 5-5 2 4-9 2 4-3 2 3-2×10 7-3 2 6-4 2 5-8 2 7-1 2 6-2 2 5-7 2 6-7 2 5-9 2 5-3 2 3-2×12 8-5 2 7-4 2 6-7 2 8-2 2 7-2 2 6-5 3 7-8 2 6-9 2 6-1 3 4-2×8 6-10 1 6-0 2 5-5 2 6-8 1 5-10 2 5-3 2 6-3 2 5-6 2 4-11 2 4-2×10 8-4 2 7-4 2 6-7 2 8-2 2 7-2 2 6-5 2 7-7 2 6-8 2 6-0 2 4-2×12 9-8 2 8-6 2 7-8 2 9-5 2 8-3 2 7-5 2 8-10 2 7-9 2 7-0 2 Roof, ceiling, and two clear span floors 2-2×4 2-1 1 1-8 1 1-6 2 2-0 1 1-8 1 1-5 2 2-0 1 1-8 1 1-5 2 2-2×6 3-1 2 2-8 2 2-4 2 3-0 2 2-7 2 2-3 2 2-11 2 2-7 2 2-3 2 2-2×8 3-10 2 3-4 2 3-0 3 3-10 2 3-4 2 2-11 3 3-9 2 3-3 2 2-11 3 2-2×10 4-9 2 4-1 3 3-8 3 4-8 2 4-0 3 3-7 3 4-7 3 4-0 3 3-6 3 2-2×12 5-6 3 4-9 3 4-3 3 5-5 3 4-8 3 4-2 3 5-4 3 4-7 3 4-1 4 3-2×8 4-10 2 4-2 2 3-9 2 4-9 2 4-1 2 3-8 2 4-8 2 4-1 2 3-8 2 3-2×10 5-11 2 5-1 2 4-7 3 5-10 2 5-0 2 4-6 3 5-9 2 4-11 2 4-5 3 3-2×12 6-10 2 5-11 3 5-4 3 6-9 2 5-10 3 5-3 3 6-8 2 5-9 3 5-2 3 4-2×8 5-7 2 4-10 2 4-4 2 5-6 2 4-9 2 4-3 2 5-5 2 4-8 2 4-2 2 4-2×10 6-10 2 5-11 2 5-3 2 6-9 2 5-10 2 5-2 2 6-7 2 5-9 2 5-1 2 4-2×12 7-11 2 6-10 2 6-2 3 7-9 2 6-9 2 6-0 3 7-8 2 6-8 2 5-11 3  
For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa. 
Spans are given in feet and inches. 
b. ;hg;Spans are based on minimum design properties for No. 2 Grade lumber of Douglas fir-larch, hem-fir, and spruce-pine-fir, No. 1 or better grade lumber shall be used for southern pine. 
c. ;hg;Building width is measured perpendicular to the ridge. For widths between those shown, spans are permitted to be interpolated. 
d. ;hg;NJ - Number of jack studs required to support each end. Where the number of required jack studs equals one, the header is permitted to be supported by an approved framing anchor attached to the full-height wall stud and to the header. 
e. ;hg;Use 30 psf ground snow load for cases in which ground snow load is less than 30 psf and the roof live load is equal to or less than 20 psf. 
TABLE R502.5(2) 
GIRDER SPANS a, b AND HEADER SPANS a, b FOR INTERIOR BEARING WALLS 
(Maximum spans for Douglas fir-larch, hem-fir, southern pine and spruce-pine-fir b and required number of jack studs) 
HEADERS AND
GIRDERS
SUPPORTING SIZE BUILDING Width c (feet) 20 28 36 Span NJ d Span NJ d Span NJ d One floor only 2-2×4 3-1 1 2-8 1 2-5 1 2-2×6 4-6 1 3-11 1 3-6 1 2-2×8 5-9 1 5-0 2 4-5 2 2-2×10 7-0 2 6-1 2 5-5 2 2-2×12 8-1 2 7-0 2 6-3 2 3-2×8 7-2 1 6-3 1 5-7 2 3-2×10 8-9 1 7-7 2 6-9 2 3-2×12 10-2 2 8-10 2 7-10 2 4-2×8 9-0 1 7-8 1 6-9 1 4-2×10 10-1 1 8-9 1 7-10 2 4-2×12 11-9 1 10-2 2 9-1 2 Two floors 2-2×4 2-2 1 1-10 1 1-7 1 2-2×6 3-2 2 2-9 2 2-5 2 2-2×8 4-1 2 3-6 2 3-2 2 2-2×10 4-11 2 4-3 2 3-10 3 2-2×12 5-9 2 5-0 3 4-5 3 3-2×8 5-1 2 4-5 2 3-11 2 3-2×10 6-2 2 5-4 2 4-10 2 3-2×12 7-2 2 6-3 2 5-7 3 4-2×8 6-1 1 5-3 2 4-8 2 4-2×10 7-2 2 6-2 2 5-6 2 4-2×12 8-4 2 7-2 2 6-5 2  
For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm. 
Spans are based on minimum design properties for No. 2 Grade lumber of Douglas fir-larch, hem-fir, and spruce-pine-fir, No. 1 or better grade lumber shall be used for southern pine. 
c. ;hg; Building width is measured perpendicular to the ridge. For widths between those shown, spans are permitted to be interpolated. 
d. ;hg; NJ - Number of jack studs required to support each end. Where the number of required jack studs equals one, the header is permitted to be supported by an approved framing anchor attached to the full-height wall stud and to the header. 
Section 602.6.1; amend the following: 
R602.6.1 Drilling and notching of top plate. When piping or ductwork is placed in or partly in an exterior wall or interior load-bearing wall, necessitating cutting, drilling or notching of the top plate by more than 50 percent of its width, a galvanized metal tie not less than 0.054 inch thick (1.37 mm) (16 Ga) and 5 inches (127 mm) wide shall be fastened across and to the plate at each side of the opening with not less than eight 10d (0.148 inch diameter) having a minimum length of 1 1/2 inches (38 mm) at each side or equivalent. Fasteners will be offset to prevent splitting of the top plate material. The metal tie must extend a minimum of 6 inches past the opening. See figure R602.6.1. (remainder unchanged) 
Figure R602.6.1; delete the figure and insert the following figure: 

Section 602.7.1 Single member headers; amend Table 602.7.1 as follows: 
TABLE R602.7.1 
SPANS FOR MINIMUM NO.2 GRADE SINGLE HEADER a, b, c, f 
SINGLE
HEADERS
SUPPORTING SIZE WOOD SPECIES GROUND SNOW LOAD (psf) = 20 d 30 50 Building Width (feet) e 20 28 36 20 28 36 20 26 36 Roof and ceiling 2 x 8 Spruce-Pine-Fir 4-10 4-2 3-8 4-3 3-8 3-3 3-7 3-0 2-8 Hem-Fir 5-1 4-4 3-10 4-6 3-10 3-5 3-9 3-2 2-10 Douglas-Fir or No. 1 Grade Southern Pine 5-3 4-6 4-0 4-7 3-11 3-6 3-10 3-3 2-11 2 x 10 Spruce-Fine-Fir 6-2 5-3 4-8 5-5 4-8 4-2 4-6 3-11 3-1 Hem-Fir 6-6 5-6 4-11 5-8 4-11 4-4 4-9 4-1 3-7 Douglas-Fir or No. 1 Grade Southern Pine 6-8 5-8 5-1 5-10 5-0 4-6 4-11 4-2 3-9 2 x 12 Spruce-Pine-Fir 7-6 6-5 5-9 6-7 5-8 4-5 5-4 3-11 3-1 Hem-Fir 7-10 6-9 6-0 6-11 5-11 5-3 5-9 4-8 3-8 Douglas-Fir or No. 1 Grade Southern Pine 8-1 6-11 6-2 7-2 6-1 5-5 5-11 5-1 4-6 Roof, ceiling and one center-bearing floor 2 x 8 Spruce-Pine-Fir 3-10 3-3 2-11 3-9 3-3 2-11 3-5 2-11 2-7 Hem-Fir 4-0 3-5 3-1 3-11 3-5 3-0 3-7 3-0 2-8 Douglas-Fir or No. 1 Grade Southern Pine 4-1 3-7 3-2 4-1 3-6 3-1 3-8 3-2 2-9 2 x 10 Spruce-Pine-Fir 4-11 4-2 3-8 4-10 4-1 3-6 4-4 3-7 2-10 Hem-Fir 5-1 4-5 3-11 5-0 4-4 3-10 4-6 3-11 3-4 Douglas-Fir or No. 1 Grade Southern Pine 5-3 4-6 4-1 5-2 4-5 4-0 4-8 4-0 3-7 2 x 12 Spruce-Pine-Fir 5-8 4-2 3-4 5-5 4-0 3-6 4-9 3-6 2-10 Hem-Fir 5-11 4-11 3-11 5-10 4-9 4-2 5-5 4-2 3-4 Douglas-Fir or No. 1 Grade Southern Pine 6-1 5-3 4-8 6-0 5-2 4-10 5-7 4-10 4-3 Roof, ceiling and one clear span floor 2 x 8 Spruce-Pine-Fir 3-5 2-11 2-7 3-4 2-11 2-7 3-3 2-10 2-6 Hem-Fir 3-7 3-1 2-9 3-6 3-0 2-8 3-5 2-11 2-7 Douglas-Fir or No. 1 Grade Southern Pine 3-8 3-2 2-10 3-7 3-1 2-9 3-6 3-0 2-9 2 x 10 Spruce-Pine-Fir 4-4 3-7 2-10 4-3 3-6 2-9 4-2 3-4 2-7 Hem-Fir 4-7 3-11 3-5 4-6 3-10 3-3 4-4 3-9 3-1 Douglas-Fir or No. 1 Grade Southern Pine 4-8 4-0 3-7 4-7 4-0 3-6 4-6 3-10 3-5 2 x 12 Spruce-Pine-Fir 4-11 3-7 2-10 4-9 3-6 2-9 4-6 3-4 2-7 Hem-Fir 5-6 4-3 3-5 5-6 4-2 3-3 5-4 3-11 3-1 Douglas-Fir or No. 1 Grade Southern Pine 5-8 4-11 4-4 5-7 4-10 4-3 5-6 4-8 4-2  
For S1: 1 inch=25.4 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa 
Spans are given in feet and inches. 
b. ;hg;Table is based on a maximum roof-ceiling dead load of 15 psf. 
c. ;hg;The header is permitted to be supported by an approved framing anchor attached to the full-height wall stud and to the header in lieu of the required jack stud. 
d. ;hg;The 20 psf ground snow load condition shall apply only when the roof pitch is 9:12 or greater. In conditions where the ground snow load is 30 psf or less and the roof pitch is less than 9:12, use the 30 psf ground snow load condition. 
e. ;hg;Building width is measured perpendicular to the ridge. For widths between those shown, spans are permitted to be interpolated. 
f. ;hg;The header shall bear on a minimum of one jack stud at each end. 
Section R703.7.4.1; add a second paragraph to read as follows: 
In stud framed exterior walls, all ties shall be anchored to studs as follows: 
1.  When studs are 16 in. (407 mm) o.c., stud ties shall be spaced no further apart than 24 in. (737 mm) vertically starting approximately 12 in. (381 mm) from the foundation; or 
2.  When studs are 24 in. (610 mm) o.c., stud ties shall be spaced no further apart than 16 in. (483 mm) vertically starting approximately 8 in. (254 mm) from the foundation. 
Section 802.4 Allowable ceiling joist spans; Amend tables as follows: 
TABLE R802.4(1) 
CEILING JOIST SPANS FOR COMMON LUMBER SPECIES 
(Uninhabitable attics without storage, live load = 10 psf, L/? = 240) 
CEILING
JOIST
SPACING
(inches) SPECIES AND GRADE DEAD LOAD = 5 psf 2 x 4 2 x 6 2 x 8 2 x 10 Maximum ceiling joist spans (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) 12 Douglas fir-larch SS 13-2 20-8 Note a Note a Douglas fir-larch #1 12-8 19-11 Note a Note a Douglas fir-larch #2 12-5 19-6 25-8 Note a Douglas fir-lanch #3 10-10 15-10 20-1 24-6 Hem-fir SS 12-5 19-6 25-8 Note a Hem-fir #1 12-2 19-1 25-2 Note a Hem-fir #2 11-7 18-2 24-0 Note a Hem-fir #3 10-10 15-10 20-1 24-6 Southern pine SS 12-11 20-3 Note a Note a Southern pine #1 12-5 19-6 25-8 Note a Southern pine #2 11-10 18-8 24-7 Note a Southern pine #3 10-1 14-11 18-9 22-9 Spruce-pine-fir SS 12-2 19-1 25-2 Note a Spruce-pine-fir #1 11-10 18-8 24-7 Note a Spruce-pine-fir #2 11-10 18-8 24-7 Note a Spruce-pine-fir #3 10-10 15-10 20-1 24-6 16 Doulas fir-larch SS 11-11 18-9 24-8 Note a Douglas fir-larch #1 11-6 18-1 23-10 Note a Douglas fir-larch #2 11-3 17-8 23-0 Note a Douglas fir-larch #3 9-5 13-9 17-5 21-3 Hem-fir SS 11-3 17-8 23-4 Note a Hem-fir #1 11-0 17-4 22-10 Note a Hem-fir #2 10-6 16-6 21-9 Note a Hem-fir #3 9-5 13-9 17-5 21-3 Southern pine SS 11-9 18-5 24-3 Note a Southern pine #1 11-3 17-8 23-4 Note a Southern pine #2 10-9 16-11 21-7 25-7 Southern pine #3 8-9 12-11 16-3 19-9 Spruce-pine-fir SS 11-0 17-4 22-10 Note a Spruce-pine-fir #1 10-9 16-11 22-4 Note a Spruce-pine-fir #2 10-9 16-11 22-4 Note a Spruce-pine-fir #3 9-5 13-9 17-5 21-3 19.2 Douglas fir-larch SS 11-3 17-8 23-3 Note a Douglas fir-larch #1 10-10 17-0 22-5 Note a Douglas fir-larch #2 10-7 16-7 21-0 25-8 Douglas fir-larch #3 8-7 12-6 15-10 19-5 Hem-fir SS 10-7 16-8 21-11 Note a Hem-fir #1 10-4 16-4 21-6 Note a Hem-fir #2 9-11 15-7 20-6 25-3 Hem-fir #3 8-7 12-6 15-10 19-5 Southern-pine SS 11-0 17-4 22-10 Note a Southern pine #1 10-7 16-8 22-0 Note a Southern pine #2 10-2 15-7 19-8 23-5 Southern pine #3 8-0 11-9 14-10 18-0 Spruce-pine-fir SS 10-4 16-4 21-6 Note a Spruce-pine-fir #1 10-2 15-11 21-0 25-8 Spruce-pine-fir #2 10-2 15-11 21-0 25-8 Spruce-pine-fir #3 8-7 12-6 15-10 19-5 24 Douglas fir-larch SS 10-5 16-4 21-7 Note a Douglas fir-larch #1 10-0 15-9 20-1 24-6 Douglas fir-larch #2 9-10 14-10 18-9 22-11 Douglas fir-larch #3 7-8 11-2 14-2 17-4 Hem-fir SS 9-10 15-6 20-5 Note a Hem-fir #1 9-8 15-2 19-7 23-11 Hem-fir #2 9-2 14-5 18-6 22-7 Hem-fir #3 7-8 11-2 14-2 17-4 Southern pine SS 10-3 16-1 21-2 Note a Southern pine #1 9-10 15-6 20-5 24-0 Southern pine #2 9-3 13-11 17-7 20-11 Southern pine #3 7-2 10-6 13-3 16-1 Spruce-pine-fir SS 9-8 15-2 19-11 25-5 Spruce-pine-fir #1 9-5 14-9 18-9 22-11 Spruce-pine-fir #2 9-5 14-9 18-9 22-11 Spruce-pine-fir #3 7-8 11-2 14-2 17-4  
Check sources for availability of lumber in lengths greater than 20 feet. 
For S1: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0478kPa. 
a. Span exceeds 26 feet in length. 
TABLE R802.4(2) 
CEILING JOIST SPANS FOR COMMON LUMBER SPECIES 
(Uninhabitable attics with limited storage, live load = 20 psf, L/? = 240) 
CEILING
JOIST
SPACING
(inches) SPECIES AND GRADE DEAD LOAD = 10 psf 2 x 4 2 x 6 2 x 8 2 x 10 Maximum ceiling joist spans (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) 12 Douglas fir-larch SS 10-5 16-4 21-7 Note a Douglas fir-larch #1 10-0 15-9 20-1 24-6 Douglas fir-larch #2 9-10 14-10 18-9 22-11 Douglas fir-larch #3 7-8 11-2 14-2 17-4 Hem-fir SS 9-10 15-6 20-5 Note a Hem-fir #1 9-8 15-2 19-7 23-11 Hem-fir #2 9-2 14-5 18-6 22-7 Hem-fir #3 7-8 11-2 14-2 17-4 Southern pine SS 10-3 16-1 21-2 Note a Southern pine #1 9-10 15-6 20-5 24-0 Southern pine #2 9-3 13-11 17-7 20-11 Southern pine #3 7-2 10-6 13-3 16-1 Spruce-pine-fir SS 9-8 15-2 19-11 25-5 Spruce-pine-fir #1 9-5 14-9 18-9 22-11 Spruce-pine-fir #2 9-5 14-9 18-9 22-11 Spruce-pine-fir #3 7-8 11-2 14-2 17-4 16 Douglas fir-larch SS 9-6 14-11 19-7 25-0 Douglas fir-larch #1 9-1 13-9 17-5 21-3 Douglas fir-larch #2 8-9 12-10 16-3 19-10 Douglas fir-larch #3 6-8 9-8 12-4 15-0 Hem-fir SS 8-11 14-1 18-6 23-8 Hem-fir #1 8-9 13-5 16-10 20-8 Hem-fir #2 8-4 12-8 16-0 19-7 Hem-fir #3 6-8 9-8 12-4 15-0 Southern pine SS 9-4 14-7 19-3 24-7 Southern pine #1 8-11 14-0 17-9 20-9 Southern pine #2 8-0 12-0 15-3 18-1 Southern pine #3 6-2 9-2 11-6 14-0 Spruce-pine-fir SS 8-9 13-9 18-1 23-1 Spruce-pine-fir #1 8-7 12-10 16-3 19-10 Spruce-pine-fir #2 8-7 12-10 16-3 19-10 Spruce-pine-fir #3 6-8 9-8 12-4 15-0 19.2 Douglas fir-larch SS 8-11 14-0 18-5 23-4 Douglas fir-larch #1 8-7 12-6 15-10 19-5 Douglas fir-larch #2 8-0 11-9 14-10 18-2 Douglas fir-larch #3 6-1 8-10 11-3 13-8 Hem-fir SS 8-5 13-3 17-5 22-3 Hem-fir #1 8-3 12-3 15-6 18-11 Hem-fir #2 7-10 11-7 14-8 17-10 Hem-fir #3 6-1 8-10 11-3 13-8 Southern pine SS 8-9 13-9 18-2 23-1 Southern pine #1 8-5 12-9 16-2 18-11 Southern pine #2 7-4 11-0 13-11 16-6 Southern pine #3 5-8 8-4 10-6 12-9 Spruce-pine-fir SS 8-3 12-11 17-1 21-8 Spruce-pine-fir #1 8-0 11-9 14-10 18-2 Spruce-pine-fir #2 8-0 11-9 14-10 18-2 Spruce-pine-fir #3 6-1 8-10 11-3 13-8 24 Douglas fir-larch SS 8-3 13-0 17-1 20-11 Douglas fir-larch #1 7-8 11-2 14-2 17-4 Douglas fir-larch #2 7-2 10-6 13-3 16-3 Douglas fir-larch #3 5-5 7-11 10-0 12-3 Hem-fir SS 7-10 12-3 16-2 20-6 Hem-fir #1 7-6 10-11 13-10 16-11 Hem-fir #2 7-1 10-4 13-1 16-0 Hem-fir #3 5-5 7-11 10-0 12-3 Southern pine SS 8-1 12-9 16-10 21-6 Southern pine #1 7-8 11-5 14-6 16-11 Southern pine #2 6-7 9-10 12-6 14-9 Southern pine #3 5-1 7-5 9-5 11-5 Spruce-pine-fir SS 7-8 12-0 15-10 19-5 Spruce-pine-fir #1 7-2 10-6 13-3 16-3 Spruce-pine-fir #2 7-2 10-6 13-3 16-3 Spruce-pine-fir #3 5-5 7-11 10-0 12-3  
Check sources for availability of lumber in lengths greater than 20 feet. 
For S1: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound per square foot = 0.0478kPa. 
a. Span exceeds 26 feet in length. 
Section 802.5 Allowable rafter spans; Amend tables as follows: 
TABLE R802.5.1(1) 
RAFTER SPANS FOR COMMON LUMBER SPECIES 
(Roof live load=20 psf, ceiling not attached to rafters, L/? = 180) 
RAFTER
SPACING
(inches) SPECIES
AND
GRADE DEAD LOAD = 10 psf DEAD LOAD = 20 psf 2 x 4 2 x 6 2 x 8 2 x 10 2 x 12 2 x 4 2 x 6 2 x 8 2 x 10 2 x 12 Maximum rafter spans a (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) 12 Douglas fir-larch       SS 11-6 18-0 23-9 Note b Note b 11-6 18-0 23-5 Note b Note b Douglas fir-larch       #1 11-1 17-4 22-5 Note b Note b 10-6 15-4 19-5 23-9 Note b Douglas fir-larch       #2 10-10 16-7 21-0 25-8 Note b 9-10 14-4 18-2 22-3 25-9 Douglas fir-larch       #3 8-7 12-6 15-10 19-5 22-6 7-5 10-10 13-9 16-9 19-6 Hem fir       SS 10-10 17-0 22-5 Note b Note b 10-10 17-0 22-5 Note b Note b Hem fir       #1 10-7 16-8 21-10 Note b Note b 10-3 14-11 18-11 23-2 Note b Hem fir       #2 10-1 15-11 20-8 25-3 Note b 9-8 14-2 17-11 21-11 25-5 Hem fir       #3 8-7 12-6 15-10 19-5 22-6 7-5 10-10 13-9 16-9 19-6 Southern pine       SS 11-3 17-8 23-4 Note b Note b 11-3 17-8 23-4 Note b Note b Southern pine       #1 10-10 17-0 22-5 Note b Note b 10-6 15-8 19-10 23-2 Note b Southern pine       #2 10-4 15-7 19-8 23-5 Note b 9-0 13-6 17-1 20-3 23-10 Southern pine       #3 8-0 11-9 14-10 18-0 21-4 6-11 10-2 12-10 15-7 18-6 Spruce-pine-fir       SS 10-7 16-8 21-11 Note b Note b 10-7 16-8 21-9 Note b Note b Spruce-pine-fir       #1 10-4 16-3 21-0 25-8 Note b 9-10 14-4 18-2 22-3 25-9 Spruce-pine-fir       #2 10-4 16-3 21-0 25-8 Note b 9-10 14-4 18-2 22-3 25-9 Spruce-pine-fir       #3 8-7 12-6 15-10 19-5 22-6 7-5 10-10 13-9 16-9 19-6 16 Douglas fir-larch       SS 10-5 16-4 21-7 Note b Note b 10-5 16-0 20-3 24-9 Note b Douglas fir-larch       #1 10-0 15-4 19-5 23-9 Note b 9-1 13-3 16-10 20-7 23-10 Douglas fir-larch       #2 9-10 14-4 18-2 22-3 25-9 8-6 12-5 15-9 19-3 22-4 Douglas fir-larch       #3 7-5 10-10 13-9 16-9 19-6 6-5 9-5 11-11 14-6 16-10 Hem-fir       SS 9-10 15-6 20-5 Note b Note b 9-10 15-6 19-11 24-4 Note b Hem-fir       #1 9-8 14-11 18-11 23-2 Note b 8-10 12-11 16-5 20-0 23-3 Hem-fir       #2 9-2 14-2 17-11 21-11 25-5 8-5 12-3 15-6 18-11 22-0 Hem-fir       #3 7-5 10-10 13-9 16-9 19-6 6-5 9-5 11-11 14-6 16-10 Southern pine       SS 10-3 16-1 21-2 Note b Note b 10-3 16-1 21-2 25-7 Note b Southern pine       #1 9-10 15-6 19-10 23-2 Note b 9-1 13-7 17-2 20-1 23-10 Southern pine       #3 9-0 13-6 17-1 20-3 23-10 7-9 11-8 14-9 17-6 20-8 Southern pine       #3 6-11 10-2 12-10 15-7 18-6 6-0 8-10 11-2 13-6 16-0 Spruce-pine~fir       SS 9-8 15-2 19-11 25-5 Note b 9-8 14-10 18-10 23-0 Note b Spruce-pine-fir       #1 9-5 14-4 18-2 22-3 25-9 8-6 12-5 15-9 19-3 22-4 Spruce-pine-fir       #2 9-5 14-4 18-2 22-3 25-9 8-6 12-5 15-9 19-3 22-4 Spruce-pine-fir       #3 7-5 10-10 13-9 16-9 19-6 6-5 9-5 11-11 14-6 16-10 19.2 Douglas fir-larch       SS 9-10 15-5 20-4 25-11 Note b 9-10 14-7 18-6 22-7 Note b Douglas fir-larch       #1 9-5 14-0 17-9 21-8 25-2 8-4 12-2 15-4 18-9 21-9 Douglas fir-larch       #2 8-11 13-1 16-7 20-3 23-6 7-9 11-4 14-4 17-7 20-4 Douglas fir-larch       #3 6-9 9-11 12-7 15-4 17-9 5-10 8-7 10-10 13-3 15-5 Hem-fir       SS 9-3 14-7 19-2 24-6 Note b 9-3 14-4 18-2 22-3 25-9 Hem-fir       #1 9-1 13-8 17-4 21-1 24-6 8-1 11-10 15-0 18-4 21-3 Hem-fir       #2 8-8 12-11 16-4 20-0 23-2 7-8 11-2 14-2 17-4 20-1 Hem-fir       #3 6-9 9-11 12-7 15-4 17-9 5-10 8-7 10-10 13-3 15-5 Southern pine       SS 9-8 15-2 19-11 25-5 Note b 9-8 15-2 19-7 23-4 Note b Southern pine       #1 9-3 14-3 18-1 21-2 25-2 8-4 12-4 15-8 18-4 21-9 Southern pine       #2 8-2 12-3 15-7 18-6 21-9 7-1 10-8 13-6 16-0 18-10 Southern pine       #3 6-4 9-4 11-9 14-3 16-10 5-6 8-1 10-2 12-4 14-7 Spruce-pine-fir       SS 9-1 14-3 18-9 23-11 Note b 9-1 13-7 17-2 21-0 24-4 Spruce-pine-fir       #1 8-10 13-1 16-7 20-3 23-6 7-9 11-4 14-4 17-7 20-4 Spruce-pine-fir       #2 8-10 13-1 16-7 20-3 23-6 7-9 11-4 14-4 17-7 20-4 Spruce-pine-fir       #3 6-9 9-11 12-7 15-4 17-9 5-10 8-7 10-10 13-3 15-5 24 Douglas fir-larch       SS 9-1 14-4 18-10 23-4 Note b 8-11 13-1 16-7 20-3 23-5 Douglas fir-larch       #1 8-7 12-6 15-10 19-5 22-6 7-5 10-10 13-9 16-9 19-6 Douglas fir-larch       #2 8-0 11-9 14-10 18-2 21-0 6-11 10-2 12-10 15-8 18-3 Douglas fir-larch       #3 6-1 8-10 11-3 13-8 15-11 5-3 7-8 9-9 11-10 13-9 Hem-fir       SS 8-7 13-6 17-10 22-9 Note b 8-7 12-10 16-3 19-10 23-0 Hem-fir       #1 8-4 12-3 15-6 18-11 21-11 7-3 10-7 13-5 16-4 19-0 Hem-fir       #2 7-11 11-7 14-8 17-10 20-9 6-10 10-0 12-8 15-6 17-11 Hem-fir       #3 6-1 8-10 11-3 13-8 15-11 5-3 7-8 9-9 11-10 13-9 Southern pine       SS 8-11 14-1 18-6 23-8 Note b 8-11 13-10 17-6 20-10 24-8 Southern pine       #1 8-7 12-9 16-2 18-11 22-6 7-5 11-1 14-0 16-5 19-6 Southern pine       #2 7-4 11-0 13-11 16-6 19-6 6-4 9-6 12-1 14-4 16-10 Southern pine       #3 5-8 8-4 10-6 12-9 15-1 4-11 7-3 9-1 11-0 13-1 Spruce-pine-fir       SS 8-5 13-3 17-5 21-8 25-2 8-4 12-2 15-4 18-9 21-9 Spruce-pine-fir       #1 8-0 11-9 14-10 18-2 21-0 6-11 10-2 12-10 15-8 18-3 Spruce-pine-fir       #2 8-0 11-9 14-10 18-2 21-0 6-11 10-2 12-10 15-8 18-3 Spruce-pine-fir       #3 6-1 8-10 11-3 13-8 15-11 5-3 7-8 9-9 11-10 13-9  
Check sources for availability of lumber in lengths greater than 20 feet. 
The tabulated rafter spans assume that ceiling joists are located at the bottom of the attic space or that some other method of resisting the outward push of the rafters on the bearing walls, such as rafter ties, is provided at that location. When ceiling joists or rafter ties are located higher in the attic space, the rafter spans shall be multiplied by the factors given below: 
H O /H R Rafter Span Adjustment Factor 1/30.67 1/4 0.76 1/50.83 1/60.90 1/7 .5 or less 1.00  
where: 
H O = Height of ceiling joists or rafter ties measured vertically above the top of the rafter support walls. 
H R = Height of roof ridge measured vertically above the top of the rafter support walls. 
b. Span exceeds 26 feet in length. 
TABLE R802.5.1(2) 
RAFTER SPANS FOR COMMON LUMBER SPECIES 
(Roof live load=20 psf, ceiling not attached to rafters, L/? = 240) 
RAFTER
SPACING
(inches) SPECIES
AND
GRADE DEAD LOAD = 10 psf DEAD LOAD = 20 psf 2 x 4 2 x 6 2 x 8 2 x 10 2 x 12 2 x 4 2 x 6 2 x 8 2 x 10 2 x 12 Maximum rafter spans a (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) 12 Douglas fir-larch       SS 10-5 16-4 21-7 Note b Note b 10-5 16-4 21-7 Note b Note b Douglas fir-larch       #1 10-0 15-9 20-10 Note b Note b 10-0 15-4 19-5 23-9 Note b Douglas fir-larch       #2 9-10 15-6 20-5 25-8 Note b 9-10 14-4 18-2 22-3 25-9 Douglas fir-larch       #3 8-7 12-6 15-10 19-5 22-6 7-5 10-10 13-9 16-9 19-6 Hem-fir       SS 9-10 15-6 20-5 Note b Note b 9-10 15-6 20-5 Note b Note b Hem-fir       #1 9-8 15-2 19-11 25-5 Note b 9-8 14-11 18-11 23-2 Note b Hem-fir       #2 9-2 14-5 19-0 24-3 Note b 9-2 14-2 17-11 21-11 25-5 Hem-fir       #3 8-7 12-6 15-10 19-5 22-6 7-5 10-10 13-9 16-9 19-6 Southern pine       SS 10-3 16-1 21-2 Note b Note b 10-3 16-1 21-2 Note b Note b Southern pine       #1 9-10 15-6 20-5 Note b Note b 9-10 15-6 19-10 23-2 Note b Southern pine       #2 9-5 14-9 19-6 23-5 Note b 9-0 13-6 17-1 20-3 23-10 Southern pine       #3 8-0 11-9 14-10 18-0 21-4 6-11 10-2 12-10 15-7 18-6 Spruce-pine-fir       SS 9-8 15-2 19-11 25-5 Note b 9-8 15-2 19-11 25-5 Note b Spruce-pine-fir       #1 9-5 14-9 19-6 24-10 Note b 9-5 14-4 18-2 22-3 25-9 Spruce-pine-fir       #2 9-5 14-9 19-6 24-10 Note b 9-5 14-4 18-2 22-3 25-9 Spruce-pine-fir       #3 8-7 12-6 15-10 19-5 22-6 7-5 10-10 13-9 16-9 19-6 16 Douglas fir-larch       SS 9-6 14-11 19-7 25-0 Note b 9-6 14-11 19-7 24-9 Note b Douglas fir-larch       #1 9-1 14-4 18-11 23-9 Note b 9-1 13-3 16-10 20-7 23-10 Douglas fir-larch       #2 8-11 14-1 18-2 22-3 25-9 8-6 12-5 15-9 19-3 22-4 Douglas fir-larch       #3 7-5 10-10 13-9 16-9 19-6 6-5 9-5 11-11 14-6 16-10 Hem-fir       SS 8-11 14-1 18-6 23-8 Note b 8-11 14-1 18-6 23-8 Note b Hem-fir       #1 8-9 13-9 18-1 23-1 Note b 8-9 12-11 16-5 20-0 23-3 Hem-fir       #2 8-4 13-1 17-3 21-11 25-5 8-4 12-3 15-6 18-11 22-0 Hem-fir       #3 7-5 10-10 13-9 16-9 19-6 6-5 9-5 11-11 14-6 16-10 Southern pine       SS 9-4 14-7 19-3 24-7 Note b 9-4 14-7 19-3 24-7 Note b Southern pine       #1 8-11 14-1 18-6 23-2 Note b 8-11 13-7 17-2 20-1 23-10 Southern pine       #2 8-7 13-5 17-1 20-3 23-10 7-9 11-8 14-9 17-6 20-8 Southern pine       #3 6-11 10-2 12-10 15-7 18-6 6-0 8-10 11-2 13-6 16-0 Spruce-pine-fir       SS 8-9 13-9 18-1 23-1 Note b 8-9 13-9 18-1 23-0 Note b Spruce-pine-fir       #1 8-7 13-5 17-9 22-3 25-9 8-6 12-5 15-9 19-3 22-4 Spruce-pine-fir       #2 8-7 13-5 17-9 22-3 25-9 8-6 12-5 15-9 19-3 22-4 Spruce-pine-fir       #3 7-5 10-10 13-9 16-9 19-6 6-5 9-5 11-11 14-6 16-10 19.2 Douglas fir-larch       SS 8-11 14-0 18-5 23-7 Note b 8-11 14-0 18-5 22-7 Note b Douglas fir-larch       #1 8-7 13-6 17-9 21-8 25-2 8-4 12-2 15-4 18-9 21-9 Douglas fir-larch       #2 8-5 13-1 16-7 20-3 23-6 7-9 11-4 14-4 17-7 20-4 Douglas fir-larch       #3 6-9 9-11 12-7 15-4 17-9 5-10 8-7 10-10 13-3 15-5 Hem-fir       SS 8-5 13-3 17-5 22-3 Note b 8-5 13-3 17-5 22-3 25-9 Hem-fir       #1 8-3 12-11 17-1 21-1 24-6 8-1 11-10 15-0 18-4 21-3 Hem-fir       #2 7-10 12-4 16-3 20-0 23-2 7-8 11-2 14-2 17-4 20-1 Hem-fir       #3 6-9 9-11 12-7 15-4 17-9 5-10 8-7 10-10 13-3 15-5 Southern pine       SS 8-9 13-9 18-2 23-1 Note b 8-9 13-9 18-2 23-1 Note b Southern pine       #1 8-5 13-3 17-5 21-2 25-2 8-4 12-4 15-8 18-4 21-9 Southern pine       #2 8-1 12-3 15-7 18-6 21-9 7-1 10-8 13-6 16-0 18-10 Southern pine       #3 6-4 9-4 11-9 14-3 16-10 5-6 8-1 10-2 12-4 14-7 Spruce-pine-fir       SS 8-3 12-11 17-1 21-9 Note b 8-3 12-11 17-1 21-0 24-4 Spruce-pine-fir       #1 8-1 12-8 16-7 20-3 23-6 7-9 11-4 14-4 17-7 20-4 Spruce-pine-fir       #2 8-1 12-8 16-7 20-3 23-6 7-9 11-4 14-4 17-7 20-4 Spruce-pine-fir       #3 6-9 9-11 12-7 15-4 17-9 5-10 8-7 10-10 13-3 15-5 24 Douglas fir-larch       SS 8-3 13-0 17-2 21-10 Note b 8-3 13-0 16-7 20-3 23-5 Douglas fir-larch       #1 8-0 12-6 15-10 19-5 22-6 7-5 10-10 13-9 16-9 19-6 Douglas fir-larch       #2 7-10 11-9 14-10 18-2 21-0 6-11 10-2 12-10 15-8 18-3 Douglas fir-larch       #3 6-1 8-10 11-3 13-8 15-11 5-3 7-8 9-9 11-10 13-9 >Hem-fir       SS 7-10 12-3 16-2 20-8 25-1 7-10 12-3 16-2 19-10 23-0 Hem-fir       #1 7-8 12-0 15-6 18-11 21-11 7-3 10-7 13-5 16-4 19-0 Hem-fir       #2 7-3 11-5 14-8 17-10 20-9 6-10 10-0 12-8 15-6 17-11 Hem-fir       #3 6-1 8-10 11-3 13-8 15-11 5-3 7-8 9-9 11-10 13-9 Southern pine       SS 8-1 12-9 16-10 21-6 Note b 8-1 12-9 16-10 20-10 24-8 Southern pine       #1 7-10 12-3 16-2 18-11 22-6 7-5 11-1 14-0 16-5 19-6 Southern pine       #2 7-4 11-0 13-11 16-6 19-6 6-4 9-6 12-1 14-4 16-10 Southern pine       #3 5-8 8-4 10-6 12-9 15-1 4-11 7-3 9-1 11-0 13-1 Spruce-pine-fir       SS 7-8 12-0 15-10 20-2 24-7 7-8 12-0 15-4 18-9 21-9 Spruce-pine-fir       #1 7-6 11-9 14-10 18-2 21-0 6-11 10-2 12-10 15-8 18-3 Spruce-pine-fir       #2 7-6 11-9 14-10 18-2 21-0 6-11 10-2 12-10 15-8 18-3 Spruce-pine-fir       #3 6-1 8-10 11-3 13-8 15-11 5-3 7-8 9-9 11-10 13-9  
Check sources for availability of lumber in lengths greater than 20 feet. 
The tabulated rafter spans assume that ceiling joists are located at the bottom of the attic space or that some other method of resisting the outward push of the rafters on the bearing walls, such as rafter ties, is provided at that location. When ceiling joists or rafter ties are located higher in the attic space, the rafter spans shall be multiplied by the factors given below: 
H O /H R Rafter Span Adjustment Factor 1/30.67 1/4 0.76 1/50.83 1/60.90 1/7 .5 or less 1.00  
where: 
H O = Height of ceiling joists or rafter ties measured vertically above the top of the rafter support walls. 
H R = Height of roof ridge measured vertically above the top of the rafter support walls. 
b. Span exceeds 26 feet in length. 
TABLE R802.5.1(3) 
RAFTER SPANS FOR COMMON LUMBER SPECIES 
(Roof live load=30 psf, ceiling not attached to rafters, L/? = 180) 
RAFTER
SPACING
(inches) SPECIES
AND
GRADE DEAD LOAD = 10 psf DEAD LOAD = 20 psf 2 x 4 2 x 6 2 x 8 2 x 10 2 x 12 2 x 4 2 x 6 2 x 8 2 x 10 2 x 12 Maximum rafter spans a (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) 12 Douglas fir-larch       SS 10-0 15-9 20-9 Note b Note b 10-0 15-9 20-1 24-6 Note b Douglas fir-larch       #1 9-8 14-9 18-8 22-9 Note b 9-0 13-2 16-8 20-4 23-7 Douglas fir-larch       #2 9-5 13-9 17-5 21-4 24-8 8-5 12-4 15-7 19-1 22-1 Douglas fir-larch       #3 7-1 10-5 13-2 16-1 18-8 6-4 9-4 11-9 14-5 16-8 Hem-fir       SS 9-6 14-10 19-7 25-0 Note b 9-6 14-10 19-7 24-1 Note b Hem-fir       #1 9-3 14-4 18-2 22-2 25-9 8-9 12-10 16-3 19-10 23-0 Hem-fir       #2 8-10 13-7 17-2 21-0 24-4 8-4 12-2 15-4 18-9 21-9 Hem-fir       #3 7-1 10-5 13-2 16-1 18-8 6-4 9-4 11-9 14-5 16-8 Southern pine       SS 9-10 15-6 20-5 Note b Note b 9-10 15-6 20-5 25-4 Note b Southern pine       #1 9-6 14-10 19-0 22-3 Note b 9-0 13-5 17-0 19-11 23-7 Southern pine       #2 8-7 12-11 16-4 19-5 22-10 7-8 11-7 14-8 17-4 20-5 Southern pine       #3 6-7 9-9 12-4 15-0 17-9 5-11 8-9 11-0 13-5 15-10 Spruce-pine-fir       SS 9-3 14-7 19-2 24-6 Note b 9-3 14-7 18-8 22-9 Note b Spruce-pine-fir       #1 9-1 13-9 17-5 21-4 24-8 8-5 12-4 15-7 19-1 22-1 Spruce-pine-fir       #2 9-1 13-9 17-5 21-4 24-8 8-5 12-4 15-7 19-1 22-1 Spruce-pine-fir       #3 7-1 10-5 13-2 16-1 18-8 6-4 9-4 11-9 14-5 16-8 16 Douglas fir-larch       SS 9-1 14-4 18-10 23-9 Note b 9-1 13-9 17-5 21-3 24-8 Douglas fir-larch       #1 8-9 12-9 16-2 19-9 22-10 7-10 11-5 14-5 17-8 20-5 Douglas fir-larch       #2 8-2 11-11 15-1 18-5 21-5 7-3 10-8 13-6 16-6 19-2 Douglas fir-larch       #3 6-2 9-0 11-5 13-11 16-2 5-6 8-1 10-3 12-6 14-6 Hem-fir       SS 8-7 13-6 17-10 22-9 Note b 8-7 13-6 17-1 20-10 24-2 Hem-fir       #1 8-5 12-5 15-9 19-3 22-3 7-7 11-1 14-1 17-2 19-11 Hem-fir       #2 8-0 11-9 14-11 18-2 21-1 7-2 10-6 13-4 16-3 18-10 Hem-fir       #3 6-2 9-0 11-5 13-11 16-2 5-6 8-1 10-3 12-6 14-6 Southern pint       SS 8-11 14-1 18-6 23-8 Note b 8-11 14-1 18-5 21-11 25-11 Southern pine       #1 8-7 13-0 16-6 19-3 22-10 7-10 11-7 14-9 17-3 20-5 Southern pine       #2 7-6 11-2 14-2 16-10 19-10 6-8 10-0 12-8 15-1 17-9 Southern pine       #3 5-9 8-6 10-8 13-0 15-4 5-2 7-7 9-7 11-7 13-9 Spruce-pine-fir       SS 8-5 13-3 17-5 22-1 25-7 8-5 12-9 16-2 19-9 22-10 Spruce-pine-fir       #1 8-2 11-11 15-1 18-5 21-5 7-3 10-8 13-6 16-6 19-2 Spruce-pine-fir       #2 8-2 11-11 15-1 18-5 21-5 7-3 10-8 13-6 16-6 19-2 Spruce-pine-fir       #3 6-2 9-0 11-5 13-11 16-2 5-6 8-1 10-3 12-6 14-6 19.2 Douglas fir-larch       SS 8-7 13-6 17-9 21-8 25-2 8-7 12-6 15-10 19-5 22-6 Douglas fir-larch       #1 7-11 11-8 14-9 18-0 20-11 7-1 10-5 13-2 16-1 18-8 Douglas fir-larch       #2 7-5 10-11 13-9 16-10 19-6 6-8 9-9 12-4 15-1 17-6 Douglas fir-larch       #3 5-7 8-3 10-5 12-9 14-9 5-0 7-4 9-4 11-5 13-2 Hem-fir       SS 8-1 12-9 16-9 21-4 24-8 8-1 12-4 15-7 19-1 22-1 Hem-fir       #1 7-9 11-4 14-4 17-7 20-4 6-11 10-2 12-10 15-8 18-2 Hem-fir       #2 7-4 10-9 13-7 16-7 19-3 6-7 9-7 12-2 14-10 17-3 Hem-fir       #3 5-7 8-3 10-5 12-9 14-9 5-0 7-4 9-4 11-5 13-2 Southern pine       SS 8-5 13-3 17-5 22-3 Note b 8-5 13-3 16-10 20-0 23-7 Southern pine       #1 8-0 11-10 15-1 17-7 20-11 7-1 10-7 13-5 15-9 18-8 Southern pine       #2 6-10 10-2 12-11 15-4 18-1 6-1 9-2 11-7 13-9 16-2 Southern pine       #3 5-3 7-9 9-9 11-10 14-0 4-8 6-11 8-9 10-7 12-6 Spruce-pine-fir       SS 7-11 12-5 16-5 20-2 23-4 7-11 11-8 14-9 18-0 20-11 Spruce-pine-fir       #1 7-5 10-11 13-9 16-10 19-6 6-8 9-9 12-4 15-1 17-6 Spruce-pine-fir       #2 7-5 10-11 13-9 16-10 19-6 6-8 9-9 12-4 15-1 17-6 Spruce-pine-fir       #3 5-7 8-3 10-5 12-9 14-9 5-0 7-4 9-4 11-5 13-2 24 Douglas fir-larch       SS 7-11 12-6 15-10 19-5 22-6 7-8 11-3 14-2 17-4 20-1 Douglas fir-larch       #1 7-1 10-5 13-2 16-1 18-8 6-4 9-4 11-9 14-5 16-8 Douglas fir-1arch       #2 6-8 9-9 12-4 15-1 17-6 5-11 8-8 11-0 13-6 15-7 Douglas fir-larch       #3 5-0 7-4 9-4 11-5 13-2 4-6 6-7 8-4 10-2 11-10 Hem-fir       SS 7-6 11-10 15-7 19-1 22-1 7-6 11-0 13-11 17-0 19-9 Hem-fir       #1 6-11 10-2 12-10 15-8 18-2 6-2 9-1 11-6 14-0 16-3 Hem-fir       #2 6-7 9-7 12-2 14-10 17-3 5-10 8-7 10-10 13-3 15-5 Hem-fir       #3 5-0 7-4 9-4 11-5 13-2 4-6 6-7 8-4 10-2 11-10 Southern pine       SS 7-10 12-3 16-2 20-0 23-7 7-10 11-10 15-0 17-11 21-2 Southern pine       #1 7-1 10-7 13-5 15-9 18-8 6-4 9-6 12-10 14-1 16-8 Southern pine       #2 6-1 9-2 11-7 13-9 16-2 5-5 8-2 10-4 12-3 14-6 Southern pine       #3 4-8 6-11 8-9 10-7 12-6 4-2 6-2 7-10 9-6 11-2 Spruce-pine-fir       SS 7-4 11-7 14-9 18-0 20-11 7-1 10-5 13-2 16-1 18-8 Spruce-pine-fir       #1 6-8 9-9 12-4 15-1 17-6 5-11 8-8 11-0 13-6 15-7 Spruce-pine-fir       #2 6-8 9-9 12-4 15-1 17-6 5-11 8-8 11-0 13-6 15-7 Spruce-pine-fir       #3 5-0 7-4 9-4 11-5 13-2 4-6 6-7 8-4 10-2 11-10  
Check sources for availability of lumber in lengths greater than 20 feet. 
The tabulated rafter spans assume that ceiling joists are located at the bottom of the attic space or that some other method of resisting the outward push of the rafters on the bearing walls, such as rafter ties, is provided at that location. When ceiling joists or rafter ties are located higher in the attic space, the rafter spans shall be multiplied by the factors given below: 
H O /H R Rafter Span Adjustment Factor 1/30.67 1/4 0.76 1/50.83 1/60.90 1/7 .5 or less 1.00  
where: 
H O = Height of ceiling joists or rafter ties measured vertically above the top of the rafter support walls. 
H R = Height of roof ridge measured vertically above the top of the rafter support walls. 
b. Span exceeds 26 feet in length. 
TABLE R802.5.1(4) 
RAFTER SPANS FOR COMMON LUMBER SPECIES 
(Ground snow load=50 psf, ceiling not attached to rafters, L/? = 180) 
RAFTER
SPACING
(inches) SPECIES
AND
GRADE DEAD LOAD = 10 psf DEAD LOAD = 20 psf 2 x 4 2 x 6 2 x 8 2 x 10 2 x 12 2 x 4 2 x 6 2 x 8 2 x 10 2 x 12 Maximum rafter spans a (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) 12 Douglas fir-larch       SS 8-5 13-3 17-6 22-4 26-0 8-5 13-3 17-0 20-9 24-0 Douglas fir-larch       #1 8-2 12-0 15-3 18-7 21-7 7-7 11-2 14-1 17-3 20-0 Douglas fir-larch       #2 7-8 11-3 14-3 17-5 20-2 7-1 10-5 13-2 16-1 18-8 Douglas fir-larch       #3 5-10 8-6 10-9 13-2 15-3 5-5 7-10 10-0 12-2 14-1 Hem-fir       SS 8-0 12-6 16-6 21-1 25-6 8-0 12-6 16-6 20-4 23-7 Hem-fir       #1 7-10 11-9 14-10 18-1 21-0 7-5 10-10 13-9 16-9 19-5 Hem-fir       #2 7-5 11-1 14-0 17-2 19-11 7-0 10-3 13-0 15-10 18-5 Hem-fir       #3 5-10 8-6 10-9 13-2 15-3 5-5 7-10 10-0 12-2 14-1 Southern pine       SS 8-4 13-1 17-2 21-11 Note b 8-4 13-1 17-2 21-5 25-3 Southern pine       #1 8-0 12-3 15-6 18-2 21-7 7-7 11-4 14-5 16-10 20-0 Southern pine       #2 7-0 10-6 13-4 15-10 18-8 6-6 9-9 12-4 14-8 17-3 Southern pine       #3 5-5 8-0 10-1 12-3 14-6 5-0 7-5 9-4 11-4 13-5 Spruce-pine-fir       SS 7-10 12-3 16-2 20-8 24-1 7-10 12-3 15-9 19-3 22-4 Spruce-pine-fir       #1 7-8 11-3 14-3 17-5 20-2 7-1 10-5 13-2 16-1 18-8 Spruce-pine-fir       #2 7-8 11-3 14-3 17-5 20-2 7-1 10-5 13-2 16-1 18-8 Spruce-pine-fir       #3 5-10 8-6 10-9 13-2 15-3 5-5 7-10 10-0 12-2 14-1 16 Douglas fir-larch       SS 7-8 12-1 15-10 19-5 22-6 7-8 11-7 14-8 17-11 20-10 Douglas fir-larch       #1 7-1 10-5 13-2 16-1 18-8 6-7 9-8 12-2 14-11 17-3 Douglas fir-larch       #2 6-8 9-9 12-4 15-1 17-6 6-2 9-0 11-5 13-11 16-2 Douglas fir-larch       #3 5-0 7-4 9-4 11-5 13-2 4-8 6-10 8-8 10-6 12-3 Hem-fir       SS 7-3 11-5 15-0 19-1 22-1 7-3 11-5 14-5 17-8 20-5 Hem-fir       #1 6-11 10-2 12-10 15-8 18-2 6-5 9-5 11-11 14-6 16-10 Hem-fir       #2 6-7 9-7 12-2 14-10 17-3 6-1 8-11 11-3 13-9 15-11 Hem-fir       #3 5-0 7-4 9-4 11-5 13-2 4-8 6-10 8-8 10-6 12-3 Southern pine       SS 7-6 11-10 15-7 19-11 23-7 7-6 11-10 15-7 18-6 21-10 Southern pine       #1 7-1 10-7 13-5 15-9 18-8 6-7 9-10 12-5 14-7 17-3 Southern pine       #2 6-1 9-2 11-7 13-9 16-2 5-8 8-5 10-9 12-9 15-0 Southern pine       #3 4-8 6-11 8-9 10-7 12-6 4-4 6-5 8-1 9-10 11-7 Spruce-pine-fir       SS 7-1 11-2 14-8 18-0 20-11 7-1 10-9 13-8 15-11 19-4 Spruce-pine-fir       #1 6-8 9-9 12-4 15-1 17-6 6-2 9-0 11-5 13-11 16-2 Spruce-pine-fir       #2 6-8 9-9 12-4 15-1 17-6 6-2 9-0 11-5 13-11 16-2 Spruce-pine-fir       #3 5-0 7-4 9-4 11-5 13-2 4-8 6-10 8-8 10-6 12-3 19.2 Douglas fir-larch       SS 7-3 11-4 14-6 17-8 20-6 7-3 10-7 13-5 16-5 19-0 Douglas fir-larch       #1 6-6 9-6 12-0 14-8 17-1 6-0 8-10 11-2 13-7 15-9 Douglas fir-larch       #2 6-1 8-11 11-3 13-9 15-11 5-7 8-3 10-5 12-9 14-9 Douglas fir-larch       #3 4-7 6-9 8-6 10-5 12-1 4-3 6-3 7-11 9-7 11-2 Hem-fir       SS 6-10 10-9 14-2 17-5 20-2 6-10 10-5 13-2 16-1 18-8 Hem-fir       #1 6-4 9-3 11-9 14-4 16-7 5-10 8-7 10-10 13-3 15-5 Hem-fir       #2 6-0 8-9 11-1 13-7 15-9 5-7 8-1 10-3 12-7 14-7 Hem-fir       #3 4-7 6-9 8-6 10-5 12-1 4-3 6-3 7-11 9-7 11-2 Southern pine       SS 7-1 11-2 14-8 18-3 21-7 7-1 11-2 14-2 16-11 20-0 Southern pine       #1 6-6 9-8 12-3 14-4 17-1 6-0 9-0 11-4 13-4 15-9 Southern pine       #2 5-7 8-4 10-7 12-6 14-9 5-2 7-9 9-9 11-7 13-8 Southern pine       #3 4-3 6-4 8-0 9-8 11-5 4-0 5-10 7-4 8-11 10-7 Spruce-pine-fir       SS 6-8 10-6 13-5 16-5 19-1 6-8 9-10 12-5 15-3 17-8 Spruce-pine-fir       #1 6-1 8-11 11-3 13-9 15-11 5-7 8-3 10-5 12-9 14-9 Spruce-pine-fir       #2 6-1 8-11 11-3 13-9 15-11 5-7 8-3 10-5 12-9 14-9 Spruce-pine-fir       #3 4-7 6-9 8-6 10-5 12-1 4-3 6-3 7-11 9-7 11-2 24 Douglas fir-larch       SS 6-8 10-0 13-0 15-10 18-4 6-6 9-6 12-0 14-8 17-0 Douglas fir-larch       #1 5-10 8-6 10-9 13-2 15-3 5-5 7-10 10-0 12-2 14-1 Douglas fir-larch       #2 5-5 7-11 10-1 12-4 14-3 5-0 7-4 9-4 11-5 13-2 Douglas fir-larch       #3 4-1 6-0 7-7 9-4 10-9 3-10 5-7 7-1 8-7 10-0 Hem-fir       SS 6-4 9-11 12-9 15-7 18-0 6-4 9-4 11-9 14-5 16-8 Hem-fir       #1 5-8 8-3 10-6 12-10 14-10 5-3 7-8 9-9 11-10 13-9 Hem-fir       #2 5-4 7-10 9-11 12-1 14-1 4-11 7-3 9-2 11-3 13-0 Hem-fir       #3 4-1 6-0 7-7 9-4 10-9 3-10 5-7 7-1 8-7 10-0 Southern pine       SS 6-7 10-4 13-8 16-4 19-3 6-7 10-0 12-8 15-2 17-10 Southern pine       #1 5-10 8-8 11-0 12-10 15-3 5-5 8-0 10-2 11-11 14-1 Southern pine       #2 5-0 7-5 9-5 11-3 13-2 4-7 6-11 8-9 10-5 12-3 Southern pine       #3 3-10 5-8 7-1 8-8 10-3 3-6 5-3 6-7 8-0 9-6 Spruce-pine-fir       SS 6-2 9-6 12-0 14-8 17-1 6-0 8-10 11-2 13-7 15-9 Spruce-pine-fir       #1 5-5 7-11 10-1 12-4 14-3 5-0 7-4 9-4 11-5 13-2 Spruce-pine-fir       #2 5-5 7-11 10-1 12-4 14-3 5-0 7-4 9-4 11-5 13-2 Spruce-pine-fir       #3 4-1 6-0 7-7 9-4 10-9 3-10 5-7 7-1 8-7 10-0  
Check sources for availability of lumber in lengths greater than 20 feet. 
The tabulated rafter spans assume that ceiling joists are located at the bottom of the attic space or that some other method of resisting the outward push of the rafters on the bearing walls, such as rafter ties, is provided at that location. When ceiling joists or rafter ties are located higher in the attic space, the rafter spans shall be multiplied by the factors given below: 
H O /H R Rafter Span Adjustment Factor 1/30.67 1/4 0.76 1/50.83 1/60.90 1/7 .5 or less 1.00  
where: 
H O = Height of ceiling joists or rafter ties measured vertically above the top of the rafter support walls. 
H R = Height of roof ridge measured vertically above the top of the rafter support walls. 
b. Span exceeds 26 feet in length. 
TABLE R802.5.1(5) 
RAFTER SPANS FOR COMMON LUMBER SPECIES 
(Ground snow load=30 psf, ceiling attached to rafters, L/? = 240) 
RAFTER
SPACING
(inches) SPECIES
AND
GRADE DEAD LOAD = 10 psf DEAD LOAD = 20 psf 2 x 4 2 x 6 2 x 8 2 x 10 2 x 12 2 x 4 2 x 6 2 x 8 2 x 10 2 x 12 Maximum rafter spans a (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) 12 Douglas fir-larch       SS 9-1 14-4 18-10 24-1 Note b 9-1 14-4 18-10 24-1 Note b Douglas fir-larch       #1 8-9 13-9 18-2 22-9 Note b 8-9 13-2 16-8 20-4 23-7 Douglas fir-larch       #2 8-7 13-6 17-5 21-4 24-8 8-5 12-4 15-7 19-1 22-1 Douglas fir-larch       #3 7-1 10-5 13-2 16-1 18-8 6-4 9-4 11-9 14-5 16-8 Hem-fir       SS 8-7 13-6 17-10 22-9 Note b 8-7 13-6 17-10 22-9 Note b Hem-fir       #1 8-5 13-3 17-5 22-2 25-9 8-5 12-10 16-3 19-10 23-0 Hem-fir       #2 8-0 12-7 16-7 21-0 24-4 8-0 12-2 15-4 18-9 21-9 Hem-fir       #3 7-1 10-5 13-2 16-1 18-8 6-4 9-4 11-9 14-5 16-8 Southern pine       SS 8-11 14-1 18-6 23-8 Note b 8-11 14-1 18-6 23-8 Note b Southern pine       #1 8-7 13-6 17-10 22-3 Note b 8-7 13-5 17-0 19-11 23-7 Southern pine       #2 8-3 12-11 16-4 19-5 22-10 7-8 11-7 14-8 17-4 20-5 Southern pine       #3 6-7 9-9 12-4 15-0 17-9 5-11 8-9 11-0 13-5 15-10 Spruce-pine-fir       SS 8-5 13-3 17-5 22-3 Note b 8-5 13-3 17-5 22-3 Note b Spruce-pine-fir       #1 8-3 12-11 17-0 21-4 24-8 8-3 12-4 15-7 19-1 22-1 Spruce-pine-fir       #2 8-3 12-11 17-0 21-4 24-8 8-3 12-4 15-7 19-1 22-1 Spruce-pine-fir       #3 7-1 10-5 13-2 16-1 18-8 6-4 9-4 11-9 14-5 16-8 16 Douglas fir-larch       SS 8-3 13-0 17-2 21-10 Note b 8-3 13-0 17-2 21-3 24-8 Douglas fir-larch       #1 8-0 12-6 16-2 19-9 22-10 7-10 11-5 14-5 17-8 20-5 Douglas fir-larch       #2 7-10 11-11 15-1 18-5 21-5 7-3 10-8 13-6 16-6 19-2 Douglas fir-larch       #3 6-2 9-0 11-5 13-11 16-2 5-6 8-1 10-3 12-6 14-6 Hem-fir       SS 7-10 12-3 16-2 20-8 25-1 7-10 12-3 16-2 20-8 24-2 Hem-fir       #1 7-8 12-0 15-9 19-3 22-3 7-7 11-1 14-1 17-2 19-11 Hem-fir       #2 7-3 11-5 14-11 18-2 21-1 7-2 10-6 13-4 16-3 18-10 Hem-fir       #3 6-2 9-0 11-5 13-11 16-2 5-6 8-1 10-3 12-6 14-6 Southern pine       SS 8-1 12-9 16-10 21-6 Note b 8-1 12-9 16-10 21-6 25-11 Southern pine       #1 7-10 12-3 16-2 19-3 22-10 7-10 11-7 14-9 17-3 20-5 Southern pine       #2 7-6 11-2 14-2 16-10 19-10 6-8 10-0 12-8 15-1 17-9 Southern pine       #3 5-9 8-6 10-8 13-0 15-4 5-2 7-7 9-7 11-7 13-9 Spruce-pine-fir       SS 7-8 12-0 15-10 20-2 24-7 7-8 12-0 15-10 19-9 22-10 Spruce-pine-fir       #1 7-6 11-9 15-1 18-5 21-5 7-3 10-8 13-6 16-6 19-2 Spruce-pine-fir       #2 7-6 11-9 15-1 18-5 21-5 7-3 10-8 13-6 16-6 19-2 Spruce-pine-fir       #3 6-2 9-0 11-5 13-11 16-2 5-6 8-1 10-3 12-6 14-6 19.2 Douglas fir-larch       SS 7-9 12-3 16-1 20-7 25-0 7-9 12-3 15-10 19-5 22-6 Douglas fir-larch       #1 7-6 11-8 14-9 18-0 20-11 7-1 10-5 13-2 16-1 18-8 Douglas fir-larch       #2 7-4 10-11 13-9 16-10 19-6 6-8 9-9 12-4 15-1 17-6 Douglas fir-larch       #3 5-7 8-3 10-5 12-9 14-9 5-0 7-4 9-4 11-5 13-2 Hem-fir       SS 7-4 11-7 15-3 19-5 23-7 7-4 11-7 15-3 19-1 22-1 Hem-fir       #1 7-2 11-4 14-4 17-7 20-4 6-11 10-2 12-10 15-8 18-2 Hem-fir       #2 6-10 10-9 13-7 16-7 19-3 6-7 9-7 12-2 14-10 17-3 Hem-fir       #3 5-7 8-3 10-5 12-9 14-9 5-0 7-4 9-4 11-5 13-2 Southern pine       SS 7-8 12-0 15-10 20-2 24-7 7-8 12-0 15-10 20-0 23-7 Southern pine       #1 7-4 11-7 15-1 17-7 20-11 7-1 10-7 13-5 15-9 18-8 Southern pine       #2 6-10 10-2 12-11 15-4 18-1 6-1 9-2 11-7 13-9 16-2 Southern pine       #3 5-3 7-9 9-9 11-10 14-0 4-8 6-11 8-9 10-7 12-6 Spruce-pine-fir       SS 7-2 11-4 14-11 19-0 23-1 7-2 11-4 14-9 18-0 20-11 Spruce-pine-fir       #1 7-0 10-11 13-9 16-10 19-6 6-8 9-9 12-4 15-1 17-6 Spruce-pine-fir       #2 7-0 10-11 13-9 16-10 19-6 6-8 9-9 12-4 15-1 17-6 Spruce-pine-fir       #3 5-7 8-3 10-5 12-9 14-9 5-0 7-4 9-4 11-5 13-2 24 Douglas fir-larch       SS 7-3 11-4 15-0 19-1 22-6 7-3 11-3 14-2 17-4 20-1 Douglas fir-larch       #1 7-0 10-5 13-2 16-1 18-8 6-4 9-4 11-9 14-5 16-8 Douglas fir-larch       #2 6-8 9-9 12-4 15-1 17-6 5-11 8-8 11-0 13-6 15-7 Douglas fir-larch       #3 5-0 7-4 9-4 11-5 13-2 4-6 6-7 8-4 10-2 11-10 Hem-fir       SS 6-10 10-9 14-2 18-0 21-11 6-10 10-9 13-11 17-0 19-9 Hem-fir       #1 6-8 10-2 12-10 15-8 18-2 6-2 9-1 11-6 14-0 16-3 Hem-fir       #2 6-4 9-7 12-2 14-10 17-3 5-10 8-7 10-10 13-3 15-5 Hem-fir       #3 5-0 7-4 9-4 11-5 13-2 4-6 6-7 8-4 10-2 11-10 Southern pine       SS 7-1 11-2 14-8 18-9 22-10 7-1 11-2 14-8 17-11 21-2 Southern pine       #1 6-10 10-7 13-5 15-9 18-8 6-4 9-6 12-0 14-1 16-8 Southern pine       #2 6-1 9-2 11-7 13-9 16-2 5-5 8-2 10-4 12-3 14-6 Southern pine       #3 4-8 6-11 8-9 10-7 12-6 4-2 6-2 7-10 9-6 11-2 Spruce-pine-fir       SS 6-8 10-6 13-10 17-8 20-11 6-8 10-5 13-2 16-1 18-8 Spruce-pine-fir       #1 6-6 9-9 12-4 15-1 17-6 5-11 8-8 11-0 13-6 15-7 Spruce-pine-fir       #2 6-6 9-9 12-4 15-1 17-6 5-11 8-8 11-0 13-6 15-7 Spruce-pine-fir       3 5-0 7-4 9-4 11-5 13-2 4-6 6-7 8-4 10-2 11-10  
Check sources for availability of lumber in lengths greater than 20 feet. 
The tabulated rafter spans assume that ceiling joists are located at the bottom of the attic space or that some other method of resisting the outward push of the rafters on the bearing walls, such as rafter ties, is provided at that location. When ceiling joists or rafter ties are located higher in the attic space, the rafter spans shall be multiplied by the factors given below: 
H O /H R Rafter Span Adjustment Factor 1/30.67 1/4 0.76 1/50.83 1/60.90 1/7 .5 or less 1.00  
where: 
H O = Height of ceiling joists or rafter ties measured vertically above the top of the rafter support walls. 
H R = Height of roof ridge measured vertically above the top of the rafter support walls. 
b. Span exceeds 26 feet in length. 
TABLE R802.5.1(6) 
RAFTER SPANS FOR COMMON LUMBER SPECIES 
(Ground snow load=50 psf, ceiling attached to rafters, L/? = 240) 
RAFTER
SPACING
(inches) SPECIES
AND
GRADE DEAD LOAD = 10 psf DEAD LOAD = 20 psf 2 x 4 2 x 6 2 x 8 2 x 10 2 x 12 2 x 4 2 x 6 2 x 8 2 x 10 2 x 12 Maximum rafter spans a (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) 12 Douglas fir-larch       SS 7-8 12-1 15-11 20-3 24-8 7-8 12-1 15-11 20-3 24-0 Douglas fir-larch       #1 7-5 11-7 15-3 18-7 21-7 7-5 11-2 14-1 17-3 20-0 Douglas fir-larch       #2 7-3 11-3 14-3 17-5 20-2 7-1 10-5 13-2 16-1 18-8 Douglas fir-larch       #3 5-10 8-6 10-9 13-2 15-3 5-5 7-10 10-0 12-2 14-1 Hem-fir       SS 7-3 11-5 15-0 19-2 23-4 7-3 11-5 15-0 19-2 23-4 Hem-fir       #1 7-1 11-2 14-8 18-1 21-0 7-1 10-10 13-9 16-9 19-5 Hem-fir       #2 6-9 10-8 14-0 17-2 19-11 6-9 10-3 13-0 15-10 18-5 Hem-fir       #3 5-10 8-6 10-9 13-2 15-3 5-5 7-10 10-0 12-2 14-1 Southern pine       SS 7-6 11-10 15-7 19-11 24-3 7-6 11-10 15-7 19-11 24-3 Southern pine       #1 7-3 11-5 15-0 18-2 21-7 7-3 11-4 14-5 16-10 20-0 Southern pine       #2 6-11 10-6 13-4 15-10 18-8 6-6 9-9 12-4 14-8 17-3 Southern pine       #3 5-5 8-0 10-1 12-3 14-6 5-0 7-5 9-4 11-4 13-5 Spruce-pine-fir       SS 7-1 11-2 14-8 18-9 22-10 7-1 11-2 14-8 18-9 22-4 Spruce-pine-fir       #1 6-11 10-11 14-3 17-5 20-2 6-11 10-5 13-2 16-1 18-8 Spruce-pine-fir       #2 6-11 10-11 14-3 17-5 20-2 6-11 10-5 13-2 16-1 18-8 Spruce-pine-fir       #3 5-10 8-6 10-9 13-2 15-3 5-5 7-10 10-0 12-2 14-1 16 Douglas fir-larch       SS 7-0 11-0 14-5 18-5 22-5 7-0 11-0 14-5 17-11 20-10 Douglas fir-larch       #1 6-9 10-5 13-2 16-1 18-8 6-7 9-8 12-2 14-11 17-3 Douglas fir-larch       #2 6-7 9-9 12-4 15-1 17-6 6-2 9-0 11-5 13-11 16-2 Douglas fir-larch       #3 5-0 7-4 9-4 11-5 13-2 4-8 6-10 8-8 10-6 12-3 Hem-fir       SS 6-7 10-4 13-8 17-5 21-2 6-7 10-4 13-8 17-5 20-5 Hem-fir       #1 6-5 10-2 12-10 15-8 18-2 6-5 9-5 11-11 14-6 16-10 Hem-fir       #2 6-2 9-7 12-2 14-10 17-3 6-1 8-11 11-3 13-9 15-11 Hem-fir       #3 5-0 7-4 9-4 11-5 13-2 4-8 6-10 8-8 10-6 12-3 Southern pine       SS 6-10 10-9 14-2 18-1 22-0 6-10 10-9 14-2 18-1 21-10 Southern pine       #1 6-7 10-4 13-5 15-9 18-8 6-7 9-10 12-5 14-7 17-3 Southern pine       #2 6-1 9-2 11-7 13-9 16-2 5-8 8-5 10-9 12-9 15-0 Southern pine       #3 4-8 6-11 8-9 10-7 12-6 4-4 6-5 8-1 9-10 11-7 Spruce-pine-fir       SS 6-5 10-2 13-4 17-0 20-9 6-5 10-2 13-4 16-8 19-4 Spruce-pine-fir       #1 6-4 9-9 12-4 15-1 17-6 6-2 9-0 11-5 13-11 16-2 Spruce-pine-fir       #2 6-4 9-9 12-4 15-1 17-6 6-2 9-0 11-5 13-11 16-2 Spruce-pine-fir       #3 5-0 7-4 9-4 11-5 13-2 4-8 6-10 8-8 10-6 12-3 19.2 Douglas fir-larch       SS 6-7 10-4 13-7 17-4 20-6 6-7 10-4 13-5 16-5 19-0 Douglas fir-larch       #1 6-4 9-6 12-0 14-8 17-1 6-0 8-10 11-2 13-7 15-9 Douglas fir-larch       #2 6-1 8-11 11-3 13-9 15-11 5-7 8-3 10-5 12-9 14-9 Douglas fir-larch       #3 4-7 6-9 8-6 10-5 12-1 4-3 6-3 7-11 9-7 11-2 Hem-fir       SS 6-2 9-9 12-10 16-5 19-11 6-2 9-9 12-10 16-1 18-8 Hem-fir       #1 6-1 9-3 11-9 14-4 16-7 5-10 8-7 10-10 13-3 15-5 Hem-fir       #2 5-9 8-9 11-1 13-7 15-9 5-7 8-1 10-3 12-7 14-7 Hem-fir       #3 4-7 6-9 8-6 10-5 12-1 4-3 6-3 7-11 9-7 11-2 Southern pine       SS 6-5 10-2 13-4 17-0 20-9 6-5 10-2 13-4 16-11 20-0 Southern pine       #1 6-2 9-8 12-3 14-4 17-1 6-0 9-0 11-4 13-4 15-9 Southern pine       #2 5-7 8-4 10-7 12-6 14-9 5-2 7-9 9-9 11-7 13-8 Southern pine       #3 4-3 6-4 8-0 9-8 11-5 4-0 5-10 7-4 8-11 10-7 Spruce-pine-fir       SS 6-1 9-6 12-7 16-0 19-1 6-1 9-6 12-5 15-3 17-8 Spruce-pine-fir       #1 5-11 8-11 11-3 13-9 15-11 5-7 8-3 10-5 12-9 14-9 Spruce-pine-fir       #2 5-11 8-11 11-3 13-9 15-11 5-7 8-3 10-5 12-9 14-9 Spruce-pine-fir       #3 4-7 6-9 8-6 10-5 12-1 4-3 6-3 7-11 9-7 11-2 24 Douglas fir-larch       SS 6-1 9-7 12-7 15-10 18-4 6-1 9-6 12-0 14-8 17-0 Douglas fir-larch       #1 5-10 8-6 10-9 13-2 15-3 5-5 7-10 10-0 12-2 14-1 Douglas fir-larch       #2 5-5 7-11 10-1 12-4 14-3 5-0 7-4 9-4 11-5 13-2 Douglas fir-larch       #3 4-1 6-0 7-7 9-4 10-9 3-10 5-7 7-1 8-7 10-0 Hem-fir       SS 5-9 9-1 11-11 15-2 18-0 5-9 9-1 11-9 14-5 15-11 Hem-fir       #1 5-8 8-3 10-6 12-10 14-10 5-3 7-8 9-9 11-10 13-9 Hem-fir       #2 5-4 7-10 9-11 12-1 14-1 4-11 7-3 9-2 11-3 13-0 Hem-fir       #3 4-1 6-0 7-7 9-4 10-9 3-10 5-7 7-1 8-7 10-0 Southern pine       SS 6-0 9-5 12-5 15-10 19-3 6-0 9-5 12-5 15-2 17-10 Southern pine       #1 5-9 8-8 11-0 12-10 15-3 5-5 8-0 10-2 11-11 14-1 Southern pine       #2 5-0 7-5 9-5 11-3 13-2 4-7 6-11 8-9 10-5 12-3 Southern pine       #3 3-10 5-8 7-1 8-8 10-3 3-6 5-3 6-7 8-0 9-6 Spruce-pine-fir       SS 5-8 8-10 11-8 14-8 17-1 5-8 8-10 11-2 13-7 15-9 Spruce-pine-fir       #1 5-5 7-11 10-1 12-4 14-3 5-0 7-4 9-4 11-5 13-2 Spruce-pine-fir       #2 5-5 7-11 10-1 12-4 14-3 5-0 7-4 9-4 11-5 13-2 Spruce-pine-fir       #3 4-1 6-0 7-7 9-4 10-9 3-10 5-7 7-1 8-7 10-0  
Check sources for availability of lumber in lengths greater than 20 feet. 
The tabulated rafter spans assume that ceiling joists are located at the bottom of the attic space or that some other method of resisting the outward push of the rafters on the bearing walls, such as rafter ties, is provided at that location. When ceiling joists or rafter ties are located higher in the attic space, the rafter spans shall be multiplied by the factors given below: 
H O /H R Rafter Span Adjustment Factor 1/30.67 1/4 0.76 1/50.83 1/60.90 1/7 .5 or less 1.00  
where: 
H O = Height of ceiling joists or rafter ties measured vertically above the top of the rafter support walls. 
H R = Height of roof ridge measured vertically above the top of the rafter support walls. 
TABLE R802.5.1(7) 
RAFTER SPANS FOR 70 PSF GROUND SNOW LOAD 
(Ceiling not attached to rafters, L/? = 180) 
RAFTER
SPACING
(inches) SPECIES
AND
GRADE DEAD LOAD = 10 psf DEAD LOAD = 20 psf 2 x 4 2 x 6 2 x 8 2 x 10 2 x 12 2 x 4 2 x 6 2 x 8 2 x 10 2 x 12 Maximum rafter spans a (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) 12 Douglas fir-larch       SS 7-7 11-10 15-8 19-5 22-6 7-7 11-10 15-0 18-3 21-2 Douglas fir-larch       #1 7-1 10-5 13-2 16-1 18-8 6-8 9-10 12-5 15-2 17-7 Douglas fir-larch       #2 6-8 9-9 12-4 15-1 17-6 6-3 9-2 11-8 14-2 16-6 Douglas fir-larch       #3 5-0 7-4 9-4 11-5 13-2 4-9 6-11 8-9 10-9 12-5 Hem-fir       SS 7-2 11-3 14-9 18-10 22-1 7-2 11-3 14-8 18-0 20-10 Hem-fir       #1 6-11 10-2 12-10 15-8 18-2 6-6 9-7 12-1 14-10 17-2 Hem-fir       #2 6-7 9-7 12-2 14-10 17-3 6-2 9-1 11-5 14-0 16-3 Hem-fir       #3 5-0 7-4 9-4 11-5 13-2 4-9 6-11 8-9 10-9 12-5 Southern pine       SS 7-5 11-8 15-4 19-7 23-7 7-5 11-8 15-4 18-10 22-3 Southern pine       #1 7-1 10-7 13-5 15-9 18-8 6-9 10-0 12-8 14-10 17-7 Southern pine       #2 6-1 9-2 11-7 13-9 16-2 5-9 8-7 10-11 12-11 15-3 Southern pine       #3 4-8 6-11 8-9 10-7 12-6 4-5 6-6 8-3 10-0 11-10 Spruce-pine-fir       SS 7-0 11-0 14-6 18-0 20-11 7-0 11-0 13-11 17-0 19-8 Spruce-pine-fir       #1 6-8 9-9 12-4 15-1 17-6 6-3 9-2 11-8 14-2 16-6 Spruce-pine-fir       #2 6-8 9-9 12-4 15-1 17-6 6-3 9-2 11-8 14-2 16-6 Spruce-pine-fir       #3 5-0 7-4 9-4 11-5 13-2 4-9 6-11 8-9 10-9 12-5 16 Douglas fir-larch       SS 6-10 10-9 13-9 16-10 19-6 6-10 10-3 13-0 15-10 18-4 Douglas fir-larch       #1 6-2 9-0 11-5 13-11 16-2 5-10 8-6 10-9 13-2 15-3 Douglas fir-larch       #2 5-9 8-5 10-8 13-1 15-2 5-5 7-11 10-1 12-4 14-3 Douglas fir-larch       #3 4-4 6-4 8-1 9-10 11-5 4-1 6-0 7-7 9-4 10-9 Hem-fir       SS 6-6 10-2 13-5 16-6 19-2 6-6 10-1 12-9 15-7 18-0 Hem-fir       #1 6-0 8-9 11-2 13-7 15-9 5-8 8-3 10-6 12-10 14-10 Hem-fir       #2 5-8 8-4 10-6 12-10 14-11 5-4 7-10 9-11 12-1 14-1 Hem-fir       #3 4-4 6-4 8-1 9-10 11-5 4-1 6-0 7-7 9-4 10-9 Southern pine       SS 6-9 10-7 14-0 17-4 20-5 6-9 10-7 13-9 16-4 19-3 Southern pine       #1 6-2 9-2 11-8 13-8 16-2 5-10 8-8 11-0 12-10 15-3 Southern pine       #2 5-3 7-11 10-0 11-11 14-0 5-0 7-5 9-5 11-3 13-2 Southern pine       #3 4-1 6-0 7-7 9-2 10-10 3-10 5-8 7-1 8-8 10-3 Spruce-pine-fir       SS 6-4 10-0 12-9 15-7 18-1 6-4 9-6 12-0 14-8 17-1 Spruce-pine-fir       #1 5-9 8-5 10-8 13-1 15-2 5-5 7-11 10-1 12-4 14-3 Spruce-pine-fir       #2 5-9 8-5 10-8 13-1 15-2 5-5 7-11 10-1 12-4 14-3 Spruce-pine-fir       #3 4-4 6-4 8-1 9-10 11-5 4-1 6-0 7-7 9-4 10-9 19.2 Douglas fir-larch       SS 6-5 9-11 12-7 15-4 17-9 6-5 9-4 11-10 14-5 16-9 Douglas fir-larch       #1 5-7 8-3 10-5 12-9 14-9 5-4 7-9 9-10 12-0 13-11 Douglas fir-larch       #2 5-3 7-8 9-9 11-11 13-10 5-0 7-3 9-2 11-3 13-0 Douglas fir-larch       #3 4-0 5-10 7-4 9-0 10-5 3-9 5-6 6-11 8-6 9-10 Hem-fir       SS 6-1 9-7 12-4 15-1 17-4 6-1 9-2 11-8 14-2 15-5 Hem-fir       #1 5-6 8-0 10-2 12-5 14-5 5-2 7-7 9-7 11-8 13-7 Hem-fir       #2 5-2 7-7 9-7 11-9 13-7 4-11 7-2 9-1 11-1 12-10 Hem-fir       #3 4-0 5-10 7-4 9-0 10-5 3-9 5-6 6-11 8-6 9-10 Southern pine       SS 6-4 10-0 13-2 15-10 18-8 6-4 9-10 12-6 14-11 17-7 Southern pine       #1 5-8 8-5 10-8 12-5 14-9 5-4 7-11 10-0 11-9 13-11 Southern pine       #2 4-10 7-3 9-2 10-10 12-9 4-6 6-10 8-8 10-3 12-1 Southern pine       #3 3-8 5-6 6-11 8-4 9-11 3-6 5-2 6-6 7-11 9-4 Spruce-pine-fir       SS 6-0 9-2 11-8 14-3 16-6 5-11 8-8 11-0 13-5 15-7 Spruce-pine-fir       #1 5-3 7-8 9-9 11-11 13-10 5-0 7-3 9-2 11-3 13-0 Spruce-pine-fir       #2 5-3 7-8 9-9 11-11 13-10 5-0 7-3 9-2 11-3 13-0 Spruce-pine-fir       #3 4-0 5-10 7-4 9-0 10-5 3-9 5-6 6-11 8-6 9-10 24 Douglas fir-larch       SS 6-0 8-10 11-3 13-9 15-11 5-9 8-4 10-7 12-11 15-0 Douglas fir-larch       #1 5-0 7-4 9-4 11-5 13-2 4-9 6-11 8-9 10-9 12-5 Douglas fir-larch       #2 4-8 6-11 8-9 10-8 12-4 4-5 6-6 8-3 10-0 11-8 Douglas fir-larch       #3 3-7 5-2 6-7 8-1 9-4 3-4 4-11 6-3 7-7 8-10 Hem-fir       SS 5-8 8-8 11-0 13-6 13-11 5-7 8-3 10-5 12-4 12-4 Hem-fir       #1 4-11 7-2 9-1 11-1 12-10 4-7 6-9 8-7 10-6 12-2 Hem-fir       #2 4-8 6-9 8-7 10-6 12-2 4-4 6-5 8-1 9-11 11-6 Hem-fir       #3 3-7 5-2 6-7 8-1 9-4 3-4 4-11 6-3 7-7 8-10 Southern pine       SS 5-11 9-3 11-11 14-2 16-8 5-11 8-10 11-2 13-4 15-9 Southern pine       #1 5-0 7-6 9-6 11-1 13-2 4-9 7-1 9-0 10-6 12-5 Southern pine       #2 4-4 6-5 8-2 9-9 11-5 4-1 6-1 7-9 9-2 10-9 Southern pine       #3 3-4 4-11 6-2 7-6 8-10 3-1 4-7 5-10 7-1 8-4 Spruce-pine-fir       SS 5-6 8-3 10-5 12-9 14-9 5-4 7-9 9-10 12-0 12-11 Spruce-pine-fir       #1 4-8 6-11 8-9 10-8 12-4 4-5 6-6 8-3 10-0 11-8 Spruce-pine-fir       #2 4-8 6-11 8-9 10-8 12-4 4-5 6-6 8-3 10-0 11-8 Spruce-pine-fir       #3 3-7 5-2 6-7 8-1 9-4 3-4 4-11 6-3 7-7 8-10  
Check sources for availability of lumber in lengths greater than 20 feet. 
The tabulated rafter spans assume that ceiling joists are located at the bottom of the attic space or that some other method of resisting the outward push of the rafters on the bearing walls, such as rafter ties, is provided at that location. When ceiling joists or rafter ties are located higher in the attic space, the rafter spans shall be multiplied by the factors given below: 
H O /H R Rafter Span Adjustment Factor 1/30.67 1/4 0.76 1/50.83 1/60.90 1/7 .5 or less 1.00  
where: 
H O = Height of ceiling joists or rafter ties measured vertically above the top of the rafter support walls. 
H R = Height of roof ridge measured vertically above the top of the rafter support walls. 
TABLE R802.5.1(8) 
RAFTER SPANS FOR 70 PSF GROUND SNOW LOAD 
(Ceiling attached to rafters, L/? = 240) 
RAFTER
SPACING
(inches) SPECIES
AND
GRADE DEAD LOAD = 10 psf DEAD LOAD = 20 psf 2 x 4 2 x 6 2 x 8 2 x 10 2 x 12 2 x 4 2 x 6 2 x 8 2 x 10 2 x 12 Maximum rafter spans a (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) (feet - inches) 12 Douglas fir-larch       SS 6-10 10-9 14-3 18-2 22-1 6-10 10-9 14-3 18-2 21-2 Douglas fir-larch       #1 6-7 10-5 13-2 16-1 18-8 6-7 9-10 12-5 15-2 17-7 Douglas fir-larch       #2 6-6 9-9 12-4 15-1 17-6 6-3 9-2 11-8 14-2 16-6 Douglas fir-larch       #3 5-0 7-4 9-4 11-5 13-2 4-9 6-11 8-9 10-9 12-5 Hem-fir       SS 6-6 10-2 13-5 17-2 20-10 6-6 10-2 13-5 17-2 20-10 Hem-fir       #1 6-4 10-0 12-10 15-8 18-2 6-4 9-7 12-1 14-10 17-2 Hem-fir       #2 6-1 9-6 12-2 14-10 17-3 6-1 9-1 11-5 14-0 16-3 Hem-fir       #3 5-0 7-4 9-4 11-5 13-2 4-9 6-11 8-9 10-9 12-5 Southern pine       SS 6-9 10-7 14-0 17-10 21-8 6-9 10-7 14-0 17-10 21-8 Southern pine       #1 6-6 10-2 13-5 15-9 18-8 6-6 10-0 12-8 14-10 17-7 Southern pine       #2 6-1 9-2 11-7 13-9 16-2 5-9 8-7 10-11 12-11 15-3 Southern pine       #3 4-8 6-11 8-9 10-7 12-6 4-5 6-6 8-3 10-0 11-10 Spruce-pine-fir       SS 6-4 10-0 13-2 16-9 20-5 6-4 10-0 13-2 16-9 19-8 Spruce-pine-fir       #1 6-2 9-9 12-4 15-1 17-6 6-2 9-2 11-8 14-2 16-6 Spruce-pine-fir       #2 6-2 9-9 12-4 15-1 17-6 6-2 9-2 11-8 14-2 16-6 Spruce-pine-fir       #3 5-0 7-4 9-4 11-5 13-2 4-9 6-11 8-9 10-9 12-5 16 Douglas fir-larch       SS 6-3 9-10 12-11 16-6 19-6 6-3 9-10 12-11 15-10 18-4 Douglas fir-larch       #1 6-0 9-0 11-5 13-11 16-2 5-10 8-6 10-9 13-2 15-3 Douglas fir-larch       #2 5-9 8-5 10-8 13-1 15-2 5-5 7-11 10-1 12-4 14-3 Douglas fir-larch       #3 4-4 6-4 8-1 9-10 11-5 4-1 6-0 7-7 9-4 10-9 Hem-fir       SS 5-11 9-3 12-2 15-7 18-11 5-11 9-3 12-2 15-7 18-0 Hem-fir       #1 5-9 8-9 11-2 13-7 15-9 5-8 8-3 10-6 12-10 14-10 Hem-fir       #2 5-6 8-4 10-6 12-10 14-11 5-4 7-10 9-11 12-1 14-1 Hem-fir       #3 4-4 6-4 8-1 9-10 11-5 4-1 6-0 7-7 9-4 10-9 Southern pine       SS 6-1 9-7 12-8 16-2 19-8 6-1 9-7 12-8 16-2 19-3 Southern pine       #1 5-11 9-2 11-8 13-8 16-2 5-10 8-8 11-0 12-10 15-3 Southern pine       #2 5-3 7-11 10-0 11-11 14-0 5-0 7-5 9-5 11-3 13-2 Southern pine       #3 4-1 6-0 7-7 9-2 10-10 3-10 5-8 7-1 8-8 10-3 Spruce-pine-fir       SS 5-9 9-1 11-11 15-3 18-1 5-9 9-1 11-11 14-8 17-1 Spruce-pine-fir       #1 5-8 8-5 10-8 13-1 15-2 5-5 7-11 10-1 12-4 14-3 Spruce-pine-fir       #2 5-8 8-5 10-8 13-1 15-2 5-5 7-11 10-1 12-4 14-3 Spruce-pine-fir       #3 4-4 6-4 8-1 9-10 11-5 4-1 6-0 7-7 9-4 10-9 19.2 Douglas fir-larch       SS 5-10 9-3 12-2 15-4 17-9 5-10 9-3 11-10 14-5 16-9 Douglas fir-larch       #1 5-7 8-3 10-5 12-9 14-9 5-4 7-9 9-10 12-0 13-11 Douglas fir-larch       #2 5-3 7-8 9-9 11-11 13-10 5-0 7-3 9-2 11-3 13-0 Douglas fir-larch       #3 4-0 5-10 7-4 9-0 10-5 3-9 5-6 6-11 8-6 9-10 Hem-fir       SS 5-6 8-8 11-6 14-8 17-4 5-6 8-8 11-6 14-2 15-5 Hem-fir       #1 5-5 8-0 10-2 12-5 14-5 5-2 7-7 9-7 11-8 13-7 Hem-fir       #2 5-2 7-7 9-7 11-9 13-7 4-11 7-2 9-1 11-1 12-10 Hem-fir       #3 4-0 5-10 7-4 9-0 10-5 3-9 5-6 6-11 8-6 9-10 Southern pine       SS 5-9 9-1 11-11 15-3 18-6 5-9 9-1 11-11 14-11 17-7 Southern pine       #1 5-6 8-5 10-8 12-5 14-9 5-4 7-11 10-0 11-9 13-11 Southern pine       #2 4-10 7-3 9-2 10-10 12-9 4-6 6-10 8-8 10-3 12-1 Southern pine       #3 3-8 5-6 6-11 8-4 9-11 3-6 5-2 6-6 7-11 9-4 Spruce-pine-fir       SS 5-5 8-6 11-3 14-3 16-6 5-5 8-6 11-0 13-5 15-7 Spruce-pine-fir       #1 5-3 7-8 9-9 11-11 13-10 5-0 7-3 9-2 11-3 13-0 Spruce-pine-fir       #2 5-3 7-8 9-9 11-11 13-10 5-0 7-3 9-2 11-3 13-0 Spruce-pine-fir       #3 4-0 5-10 7-4 9-0 10-5 3-9 5-6 6-11 8-6 9-10 24 Douglas fir-larch       SS 5-5 8-7 11-3 13-9 15-11 5-5 8-4 10-7 12-11 15-0 Douglas fir-larch       #1 5-0 7-4 9-4 11-5 13-2 4-9 6-11 8-9 10-9 12-5 Douglas fir-larch       #2 4-8 6-11 8-9 10-8 12-4 4-5 6-6 8-3 10-0 11-8 Douglas fir-larch       #3 3-7 5-2 6-7 8-1 9-4 3-4 4-11 6-3 7-7 8-10 Hem-fir       SS 5-2 8-1 10-8 13-6 13-11 5-2 8-1 10-5 12-4 12-4 Hem-fir       #1 4-11 7-2 9-1 11-1 12-10 4-7 6-9 8-7 10-6 12-2 Hem-fir       #2 4-8 6-9 8-7 10-6 12-2 4-4 6-5 8-1 9-11 11-6 Hem-fir       #3 3-7 5-2 6-7 8-1 9-4 3-4 4-11 6-3 7-7 8-10 Southern pine       SS 5-4 8-5 11-1 14-2 16-8 5-4 8-5 11-1 13-4 15-9 Southern pine       #1 5-0 7-6 9-6 11-1 13-2 4-9 7-1 9-0 10-6 12-5 Southern pine       #2 4-4 6-5 8-2 9-9 11-5 4-1 6-1 7-9 9-2 10-9 Southern pine       #3 3-4 4-11 6-2 7-6 8-10 3-1 4-7 5-10 7-1 8-4 Spruce-pine-fir       SS 5-0 7-11 10-5 12-9 14-9 5-0 7-9 9-10 12-0 12-11 Spruce-pine-fir       #1 4-8 6-11 8-9 10-8 12-4 4-5 6-6 8-3 10-0 11-8 Spruce-pine-fir       #2 4-8 6-11 8-9 10-8 12-4 4-5 6-6 8-3 10-0 11-8 Spruce-pine-fir       #3 3-7 5-2 6-7 8-1 9-4 3-4 4-11 6-3 7-7 8-10  
Check sources for availability of lumber in lengths greater than 20 feet. 
The tabulated rafter spans assume that ceiling joists are located at the bottom of the attic space or that some other method of resisting the outward push of the rafters on the bearing walls, such as rafter ties, is provided at that location. When ceiling joists or rafter ties are located higher in the attic space, the rafter spans shall be multiplied by the factors given below: 
H O /H R Rafter Span Adjustment Factor 1/30.67 1/4 0.76 1/50.83 1/60.90 1/10 or less 1.00  
where: 
H O = Height of ceiling joists or rafter ties measured vertically above the top of the rafter support walls. 
H R = Height of roof ridge measured vertically above the top of the rafter support walls. 
Section R902.1; Amend and add exception #4 to read as follows: 
R902.1 Roofing covering materials. Roofs shall be covered with materials as set forth in Sections R904 and R905. Class A, B, or C roofing shall be installed (Remainder unchanged). 
Exceptions: 
1.  (Text unchanged.) 
2.  (Text unchanged.) 
3.  (Text unchanged.) 
4.  Non-classified roof coverings shall be permitted on one-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed (area defined by jurisdiction). 
Part IV - Energy Conservation - Chapter 11 [RE) *** insert text to read as follows: 
Residential Provisions for Energy Efficiency 
Section M1305.1.3; change to read as follows: 
M1305.1.3 Appliances in attics. Attics containing appliances requiring access shall be provided . . . (bulk of paragraph unchanged) . . . sides of the appliance where access is required. The clear access opening dimensions shall be a minimum of 20 inches by 30 inches (508 mm by 762 mm), or larger and large enough to allow removal of the largest appliance. A walkway to an appliance shall be rated as a floor as approved by the building official. As a minimum, for access to the attic space, provide one of the following: 
1.  A permanent stair. 
2.  A pull down stair with a minimum 300 lb. (136 kg) capacity. 
3.  An access door from an upper floor level. 
Exceptions: 
1.  The passageway and level service space are not required where the appliance can be serviced and removed through the required opening. 
2.  Where the passageway is unobstructed...(remaining text unchanged). 
Section M1411.3; change to read as follows: 
M1411.3 Condensate disposal. Condensate from all cooling coils or evaporators shall be conveyed from the drain pan outlet to a sanitary sewer through a trap, by means of a direct or indirect drain (Remaining text unchanged). 
Section M1411.3.1, Items 3 and 4; add text to read as follows: 
M1411.3.1 Auxiliary and secondary drain systems. (bulk of paragraph unchanged) 
1.  (text unchanged) 
2.  (text unchanged) 
3.  An auxiliary drain pan... (bulk of text unchanged)... with Item 1 of this section. A water level detection device may be installed only with prior approval of the building official. 
4.  A water level detection device... (bulk of text unchanged)... overflow rim of such pan. A water level detection device may be installed only with prior approval of the building official. 
Section M1411.3.1.1; add text to read as follows: 
M1411.3.1.1 Water-level monitoring devices. On down-flow units ...(bulk of text unchanged)... installed in the drain line. A water level detection device may be installed only with prior approval of the building official. 
Section M1411.6; change to read as follows: 
M1411.6 Locking access port caps. Refrigerant circuit access ports located outdoors shall be fitted with locking-type, tamper-resistant caps. 
Section M1503.4 Makeup Air Required; Delete. 
Section M2005.2; change to read as follows: 
M2005.2 Prohibited locations. Fuel-fired water heaters shall not be installed in a room used as a storage closet. Water heaters located in a bedroom or bathroom shall be installed in a sealed enclosure so that combustion air will not be taken from the living space. Access to such enclosure may be from the bedroom or bathroom when through a solid door, weather-stripped in accordance with the exterior door air leakage requirements of the International Energy Conservation Code and equipped with an approved self-closing device. Installation of direct-vent water heaters within an enclosure is not required. 
Section G2408.3 (305.5); Delete. 
Section G2415.2 (404.2); add a second paragraph to read as follows: 
Both ends of each section of medium pressure gas piping shall identify its operating gas pressure with an approved tag. The tags are to be composed of aluminum or stainless steel and the following wording shall be stamped into the tag: 
"WARNING 
1/2 to 5 psi gas pressure 
Do Not Remove" 
Section G2415.2 (404.2); add an exception to read as follows: 
Exception: Corrugated stainless steel tubing (CSST) shall be a minimum of 1/2" (18 EDH). 
Section G2415.12.1 (404.12.1); change to read as follows: 
G2415.12.1 (404.12.1) Individual outside appliances. Individual lines to outside lights, grills or other appliances shall be installed a minimum of 12 inches (203 mm) below finished grade.... Rest unchanged. 
Section G2417.1 (406.1); change to read as follows: 
G2417.1 (406.1) General. Prior to acceptance and initial operation, all piping installations shall be inspected and pressure tested to determine that the materials, design, fabrication, and installation practices comply with the requirements of this code. The permit holder shall make the applicable tests prescribed in Sections 2417.1.1 through 2417.1.5 to determine compliance with the provisions of this code. The permit holder shall give reasonable advance notice to the building official when the piping system is ready for testing. The equipment, material, power and labor necessary for the inspections and test shall be furnished by the permit holder and the permit holder shall be responsible for determining that the work will withstand the test pressure prescribed in the following tests. 
Section G2417.4; change to read as follows: 
G2417.4 (406.4) Test pressure measurement. Test pressure shall be measured with a manometer or with a pressure-measuring device designed and calibrated to read, record, or indicate a pressure loss caused by leakage during the pressure test period. The source of pressure shall be isolated before the pressure tests are made. Gauges used to measure... (remainder unchanged). 
Section G2417.4.1; change to read as follows: 
G2417.4.1 (406.4.1) Test pressure. The test pressure to be used shall be not less than 3 psig (20 kPa gauge), or at the discretion of the Building Official, the piping and valves may be tested at a pressure of at least six (6) inches (152 mm) of mercury, measured with a manometer or slope gauge. For tests requiring a pressure of 3 psig, gauges shall utilize a dial with a minimum diaphragm diameter of three and one half inches (31/2"), a set hand, 1/10 pound incrementation and pressure range not to exceed 6 psi for tests requiring a pressure of 3 psig. For tests requiring a pressure of 10 psig, diaphragm gauges shall utilize a dial with a minimum diameter of three and one-half inches (31/2"), a set hand, a minimum of 2/10 pound incrementation and a pressure range not to exceed 20 psi. 
For welded piping, and for piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48 kPa) (1/2 psi) and less than 200 inches of water column pressure (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall not be less than ten (10) pounds per square inch (69.6 kPa). For piping carrying gas at a pressure that exceeds 200 inches of water column (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall be not less than one and one-half times the proposed maximum working pressure. 
Section G2417.4.2; change to read as follows: 
G2417.4.2 (406.4.2) Test duration. The test duration shall be held for a length of time satisfactory to the Building Official, but in no case for less than fifteen (15) minutes. For welded piping, and for piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48 kPa), the test duration shall be held for a length of time satisfactory to the Building Official, but in no case for less than thirty (30) minutes. 
Section G2420.1 (406.1); add Section G2420.1.4 to read as follows: 
G2420.1.4 Valves in CSST installations. Shutoff valves installed with corrugated stainless steel (CSST) piping systems shall be supported with an approved termination fitting, or equivalent support, suitable for the size of the valves, of adequate strength and quality, and located at intervals so as to prevent or damp out excessive vibration but in no case greater than 12-inches from the center of the valve. Supports shall be installed so as not to interfere with the free expansion and contraction of the system's piping, fittings, and valves between anchors. All valves and supports shall be designed and installed so they will not be disengaged by movement of the supporting piping. 
Section G2420.5.1 (409.5.1); add text to read as follows: 
G2420.5.1 (409.5.1) Located within the same room. The shutoff valve (bulk of paragraph unchanged)... in accordance with the appliance manufacturer's instructions. A secondary shutoff valve must be installed within 3 feet (914 mm) of the firebox if appliance shutoff is located in the firebox. 
Section G2421.1 (410.1); add text and Exception to read as follows: 
G2421.1 (410.1) Pressure regulators. A line pressure regulator shall be ... (bulk of paragraph unchanged)... approved for outdoor installation. Access to regulators shall comply with the requirements for access to appliances as specified in Section M1305. 
Exception: A passageway or level service space is not required when the regulator is capable of being serviced and removed through the required attic opening. 
Section G2422.1.2.3 (411.1.3.3); delete Exception 1 and Exception 4. 
Section G2445.2 (621.2); add Exception to read as follows: 
G2445.2 (621.2) Prohibited use. One or more unvented room heaters shall not be used as the sole source of comfort heating in a dwelling unit. 
Exception: Existing approved unvented room heaters may continue to be used in dwelling units, in accordance with the code provisions in effect when installed, when approved by the Building Official unless an unsafe condition is determined to exist as described in International Fuel Gas Code Section 108.7 of the Fuel Gas Code. 
Section G2448.1.1 (624.1.1); change to read as follows: 
G2448.1.1 (624.1.1) Installation requirements. The requirements for water heaters relative to access, sizing, relief valves, drain pans and scald protection shall be in accordance with this code. 
Section P2801.6; add Exception to read as follows: 
Exceptions: 
2.  Electric Water Heater. 
Section P2902.5.3; change to read as follows: 
P2902.5.3 Lawn irrigation systems. The potable water supply to lawn irrigation systems shall be protected against backflow by an atmospheric-type vacuum breaker, a pressure-type vacuum breaker, a double-check assembly or a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. A valve shall not be installed downstream from an atmospheric vacuum breaker. Where chemicals are introduced into the system, the potable water supply shall be protected against backflow by a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. 
Section P3111; delete. 
Section P3112.2; delete and replace with the following: 
P3112.2 Installation. Traps for island sinks and similar equipment shall be roughed in above the floor and may be vented by extending the vent as high as possible, but not less than the drain board height and then returning it downward and connecting it to the horizontal sink drain immediately downstream from the vertical fixture drain. The return vent shall be connected to the horizontal drain through a wye-branch fitting and shall, in addition, be provided with a foot vent taken off the vertical fixture vent by means of a wye-branch immediately below the floor and extending to the nearest partition and then through the roof to the open air or may be connected to other vents at a point not less than six (6) inches (152 mm) above the flood level rim of the fixtures served. Drainage fittings shall be used on all parts of the vent below the floor level and a minimum slope of one-quarter (1/4) inch per foot (20.9 mm/m) back to the drain shall be maintained. The return bend used under the drain board shall be a one (1) piece fitting or an assembly of a forty-five (45) degree (0.79 radius), a ninety (90) degree (1.6 radius) and a forty-five (45) degree (0.79 radius) elbow in the order named. Pipe sizing shall be as elsewhere required in this Code. The island sink drain, upstream of the return vent, shall serve no other fixtures. An accessible cleanout shall be installed in the vertical portion of the foot vent. 
(Ord. No. 1043, § 1, 3-15-2011; Ord. No. 1264, § 2, 2-3-2015) 
Sec. 22-22. - International Energy Conservation Code amendments. 
The following noted portions of the International Energy Conservation Code are hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section C102/R102; add Section C102.1.2 and R102.1.2 to read as follows: 
C102.1.2 Alternative compliance. A building certified by a national, state, or local accredited energy efficiency program and determined by the Energy Systems Laboratory to be in compliance with the energy efficiency requirements of this section may, at the option of the Code Official, be considered in compliance. The United States Environmental Protection Agency's Energy Star Program certification of energy code equivalency shall be considered in compliance. 
R102.1.2 Alternative compliance. A building certified by a national, state, or local accredited energy efficiency program and determined by the Energy Systems Laboratory to be in compliance with the energy efficiency requirements of this section may, at the option of the Code Official, be considered in compliance. The United States Environmental Protection Agency's Energy Star Program certification of energy code equivalency shall be considered in compliance. Regardless of the program or the path to compliance, each 1- and 2-family dwelling shall be tested for air and duct leakage as prescribed in Section R402.4 and R403.3.3 respectively. 
Section C202 and R202; add the following definition: 
PROJECTION FACTOR. The ratio of the horizontal depth of the overhang, eave or permanently attached shading device, divided by the distance measured vertically from the bottom of the fenestration glazing to the underside of the overhang, eave or permanently attached shading device. 
Section R202; add the following definition: 
DYNAMIC GLAZING. Any fenestration product that has the fully reversible ability to change it performance properties, including U-factor, solar heat gain coefficient (SHGC), or visible transmittance (VT). 
Section R402.3.2 Glazed fenestration SHGC; amend by adding a paragraph and table following the exception to read as follows: 
Where vertical fenestration is shaded by an overhang, eave, or permanently attached shading device, the SHGC required in Table R402.1.2 shall be reduced by using the multipliers in Table R402.3.2 SHGC Multipliers for Permanent Projections. 
Table R402.3.2 SHGC Multipliers for Permanent Projections a 
Projection
Factor SHGC Multiplier
(all Other Orientation) SHGC Multiplier
(North Oriented) 0-0.10 1.00 1.00 >0.10-0.20 0.91 0.95 >0.20-0.30 0.82 0.91 >0.30-0.40 0.74 0.87 >0.40-0.50 0.67 0.84 >0.50-0.60 0.61 0.81 >0.60-0.70 0.56 0.78 >0.70-0.80 0.51 0.76 >0.80-0.90 0.47 0.75 >0.90-1.00 0.44 0.73  
;adv=1p: a North oriented means within 45 degrees of true north. 
R402.4.1.2 Testing; Add a last paragraph to read as follows: 
Mandatory testing shall only be performed by individuals that are certified to perform air infiltration testing certified by national or state organizations as approved by the building official. The certified individuals must be an independent third-party entity, and may not be employed; or have any financial interest in the company that constructs the structure. 
R403.3.3 Duct Testing (Mandatory) Add a last paragraph to read as follows: 
Mandatory testing shall only be performed by individuals that are certified to perform duct testing leakage testing certified by national or state organizations as approved by the building official. The certified individuals must be an independent third-party entity, and may not be employed; or have any financial interest in the company that constructs the structure. 
Section C402.2.7/R402.2; Add Section C402.2.9 and R402.2.14 to read as follows: 
Section C402.2.7/R402.2.14 Insulation installed in walls. To insure that insulation remains in place, insulation installed in walls shall be totally enclosed on all sides consisting of framing lumber, gypsum, sheathing, wood structural panel sheathing, netting or other equivalent material approved by the building official. 
Section R405.6.2; add the following sentence to the end of paragraph: 
Acceptable performance software simulation tools may include, but are not limited to, REM Rate TM , Energy Gauge and IC3. Other performance software programs accredited by RESNET BESTEST and having the ability to provide a report as outlined in R405.4.2 may also be deemed acceptable performance simulation programs and may be considered by the building official. 
TABLE R406.4 MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX; amend to read as follows: 
TABLE R406.4 1 
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX 
CLIMATE ZONE ENERGY RATING INDEX 3 65  
1 This table is effective until August 31, 2019. 
TABLE R406.4 2 
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX 
CLIMATE ZONE ENERGY RATING INDEX 3 63  
2 The table is effective from September 1, 2019 to August 31, 2022. 
TABLE R406.4 3 
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX 
CLIMATE ZONE ENERGY RATING INDEX 3 59  
3 This table is effective on or after September 1, 2022. 
(Ord. No. 1043, § 1, 3-15-2011; Ord. No. 1264, § 2, 2-3-2015; Ord. No. 1340, § 3, 8-2-2016) 
Sec. 22-23. - International Mechanical Code amendments. 
The following noted portions of the International Mechanical Code are hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 102.8; change to read as follows: 
102.8 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced herein shall be those that are listed in Chapter 15 and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the ICC Electrical Code shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted. 
Section 304.6; delete. 
Section 306.3; change to read as follows: 
306.3 Appliances in attics. Attics containing appliances requiring access shall be provided ... (bulk of paragraph unchanged)... side of the appliance. The clear access opening dimensions shall be a minimum of 20 inches by 30 inches (508 mm by 762 mm), or larger where such dimensions are not large enough to allow removal of the largest appliance. A walkway to an appliance shall be rated as a floor as approved by the building official. As a minimum, for access to the attic space, provide one of the following: 
1.  A permanent stair. 
2.  A pull down stair with a minimum 300 lb. (136 kg) capacity. 
3.  An access door from an upper floor level. 
4.  Access Panel may be used in lieu of items 1, 2, and 3 with prior approval of the code official due to building conditions. 
Exceptions: 
1.  The passageway and level service space are not required where the appliance is capable of being serviced and removed... (remainder of section unchanged). 
Section 306.5; change to read as follows: 
306.5 Equipment and appliances on roofs or elevated structures. Where equipment requiring access or appliances are located on an elevated structure or the roof of a building such that personnel will have to climb higher than 16 feet (4,877 mm) above grade to access, a permanent interior or exterior means of access shall be provided. Permanent exterior ladders providing roof access need not extend closer than 12 feet (2,438 mm) to the finish grade or floor level below and shall extend to the equipment and appliances' level service space. Such access shall . . . (bulk of section to read the same) . . . on roofs having a slope greater than 4 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33 percent slope). ... (Bulk of section to read the same). 
Section 306.5.1; change to read as follows: 
306.5.1 Sloped roofs. Where appliances, equipment, fans or other components that require service are installed on roofs having slopes greater than 4 units vertical in 12 units horizontal and having an edge more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade at such edge, a catwalk at least 16 inches in width with substantial cleats spaced not more than 16 inches apart shall be provided from the roof access to a level platform at the appliance. The level platform shall be provided on each side of the appliance to which access is required for service, repair or maintenance. The platform shall be not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in any dimension and shall be provided with guards. The guards shall extend not less than 42 inches (1,067 mm) above the platform, shall be constructed so as to prevent the passage of a 21-inch-diameter (533 mm) sphere and shall comply with the loading requirements for guards specified in the International Building Code. 
Section 306; add Section 306.6 to read as follows: 
306.6 Water heaters above ground or floor. When the mezzanine or platform in which a water heater is installed is more than eight (8) feet (2,438 mm) above the ground or floor level, it shall be made accessible by a stairway or permanent ladder fastened to the building. 
Exception: A max 10 gallon water heater (or larger with approval) is capable of being accessed through a lay-in ceiling and a water heater is installed is not more than ten (10) feet (3,048 mm) above the ground or floor level and may be reached with a portable ladder. 
306.6.1 Whenever the mezzanine or platform is not adequately lighted or access to a receptacle outlet is not obtainable from the main level, lighting and a receptacle outlet shall be provided in accordance with Section 306.3.1. 
Section 307.2.2; change to read as follows: 
307.2.2 Drain pipe materials and sizes. Components of the condensate disposal system shall be cast iron, galvanized steel, copper, cross-linked polyethylene, polybutylene, polyethylene, ABS, CPVC or schedule 80 PVC pipe or tubing when exposed to ultra violet light. All components shall be selected for the pressure, temperature, and exposure rating of the installation (Remaining language unchanged). 
Section 307.2.3; amend item 2 to read as follows: 
2. A separate overflow drain line shall be connected to the drain pan provided with the equipment. Such overflow drain shall discharge to a conspicuous point of disposal to alert occupants in the event of a stoppage of the primary drain. The overflow drain line shall connect to the drain pan at a higher level than the primary drain connection. However, the conspicuous point shall not create a hazard such as dripping over a walking surface or other areas so as to create a nuisance. 
Section 403.2.1; add an item 5 to read as follows: 
5. Toilet rooms within private dwellings that contain only a water closet, lavatory or combination thereof may be ventilated with an approved mechanical recirculating fan or similar device designed to remove odors from the air. 
Section 501.2; add an exception to read as follows: 
501.2 Exhaust discharge. The air removed by every mechanical exhaust system shall be discharged outdoors at a point where it will not cause a nuisance and not less than the distances specified in Section 501.2.1. The air shall be discharged to a location from which it cannot again be readily drawn in by a ventilating system. Air shall not be exhausted into an attic or crawl space. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Whole-house ventilation-type attic fans shall be permitted to discharge into the attic space of dwelling units having private attics. 
2.  Commercial cooking recirculating systems. 
3.  Toilet room exhaust ducts may terminate in a warehouse or shop area when infiltration of outside air is present. 
Section 607.5.1; change to read as follows: 
607.5.1 Fire Walls. Ducts and air transfer openings permitted in fire walls in accordance with Section 706.11 of the International Building Code shall be protected with listed fire dampers installed in accordance with their listing. For hazardous exhaust systems see Section 510.1-510.9 IMC. 
(Ord. No. 1043, § 1, 3-15-2011; Ord. No. 1264, § 2, 2-3-2015) 
Sec. 22-24. - International Plumbing Code amendments. 
The following noted portions of the International Plumbing Code are hereby amended to read as follows: 
Table of Contents, Chapter 7, Section 714; change to read as follows: 
714  Engineered Drainage Design....................67 
Section 102.8; change to read as follows: 
102.8 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 13 and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be considered as part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where the differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall be the minimum requirements. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the ICC Electrical Code shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted. 
Sections 106.6.2 and 106.6.3; change to read as follows: 
106.6.2 Fee schedule. The fees for all plumbing work shall be as adopted by resolution of the governing body of the jurisdiction. 
106.6.3 Fee Refunds. The code official shall establish a policy for-authorizing the refunding of fees.. (Delete balance of section) 
Section 109; Delete entire section and insert the following: 
SECTION 109 
MEANS OF APPEAL 
109.1 Application for appeal. Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the code official to the board of appeals established by ordinance. The board shall be governed by the enabling ordinance. 
Section 305.4.1; change to read as follows: 
305.4.1 Sewer depth. Building sewers that connect to private sewage disposal systems shall be a minimum of 12 inches (304 mm) below finished grade at the point of septic tank connection. Building sewers shall be a minimum of 12 inches (304 mm) below grade. 
Section 305.7; change to read as follows: 
305.7 Protection of components of plumbing system. Components of a plumbing system installed within 3 feet along alleyways, driveways, parking garages or other locations in a manner in which they would be exposed to damage shall be recessed into the wall or otherwise protected in an approved manner. 
Section 314.2.1; change to read as follows: 
314.2.1 Condensate disposal. Condensate from all cooling coils and evaporators shall be conveyed from the drain pan outlet to an approved place of disposal. ... (text unchanged) ... Condensate shall not discharge into a street, alley, sidewalk, rooftop, or other areas so as to cause a nuisance. 
Section 314.2.2; change to read as follows: 
314.2.2 Drain pipe materials and sizes. Components of the condensate disposal system shall be cast iron, galvanized steel, copper, cross-linked polyethylene, polyethylene, ABS, CPVC, or schedule 80 PVC pipe or tubing when exposed to ultra violet light. All components shall be selected for the pressure, temperature and exposure rating of the installation. Joints and connections shall be made in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 7 relative to the material type. Condensate waste and drain line size shall not be less than 3/4-inch (19 mm) internal diameter and shall not decrease in size from the drain pan connection to the place of condensate disposal. Where the drain pipes from more than one unit are manifolded together for condensate drainage, the pipe or tubing shall be sized in accordance with Table 314.2.2. All horizontal sections of drain piping shall be installed in uniform alignment at a uniform slope. 
Section 401.1; add a sentence to read as follows: 
401.1 Scope. This chapter shall govern the materials, design and installation of plumbing fixtures, faucets and fixture fittings in accordance with the type of occupancy, and shall provide for the minimum number of fixtures for various types of occupancies. The provisions of this Chapter coordinate with the provisions of the Building Code. Should any conflicts arise between the two chapters, the Code Official shall determine which provision applies. 
Section 405.6; delete. 
Section 409.2; change to read as follows: 
409.2 Water connection. The water supply to a commercial dishwashing machine shall be protected against backflow by an air gap or backflow preventer in accordance with Section 608. 
Section 412.4; change to read as follows: 
412.4 Required location - Floor drains shall be installed in the following areas: 
1.  In public coin-operated laundries and in the central washing facilities of multiple family dwellings, the rooms containing automatic clothes washers shall be provided with floor drains located to readily drain the entire floor area. Such drains shall have a minimum outlet of not less than 3 inches (76 mm) in diameter. 
2.  Commercial kitchens. In lieu of floor drains in commercial kitchens, the code official may accept floor sinks. 
3.  Public restrooms. 
Section 419.3; change to read as follows: 
419.3 Surrounding material. Wall and floor space to a point 2 feet (610 mm) in front of a urinal lip and 4 feet (1,219 mm) above the floor and at least 2 feet (610 mm) to each side of the urinal shall be waterproofed with a smooth, readily cleanable, hard, nonabsorbent material. 
Section 502.6; Add Section 502.6 to read as follows: 
502.6 Water heaters above ground or floor. When the attic, roof, mezzanine or platform in which a water heater is installed is more than eight (8) feet (2,438 mm) above the ground or floor level, it shall be made accessible by a stairway or permanent ladder fastened to the building. 
Exception: A max 10 gallon water heater (or larger with approval) is capable of being accessed through a lay-in ceiling and a water heater is installed is not more than ten (10) feet (3,048 mm) above the ground or floor level and may be reached with a portable ladder. 
502.6.1 Illumination and convenience outlet. Whenever the mezzanine or platform is not adequately lighted or access to a receptacle outlet is not obtainable from the main level, lighting and a receptacle outlet shall be provided in accordance with Section 502.1. 
Section 504.6; change to read as follows: 
504.6 Requirements for discharge piping. The discharge piping serving a pressure relief valve, temperature relief valve or combination thereof shall: 
1.  Not be directly connected to the drainage system. 
2.  Discharge through an air gap. 
3.  Not be smaller than the diameter of the outlet of the valve served and shall discharge full size to the air gap. 
4.  Serve a single relief device and shall not connect to piping serving any other relief device or equipment. 
5.  Discharge to an indirect waste receptor or to the outdoors. Where discharging to the outdoors in areas subject to freezing, discharge piping shall be first piped to an indirect waste receptor through an air gap located in a conditioned area. 
6.  Discharge in a manner that does not cause personal injury or structural damage. 
7.  Discharge to a termination point that is readily observable by the building occupants. 
8.  Not be trapped. 
9.  Be installed so as to flow by gravity. 
10.  Not terminate less than 6 inches or more than 24 inches (152 mm) above grade nor more than 6 inches above the waste receptor. 
11.  Not have a threaded connection at the end of such piping. 
12.  Not have valves or tee fittings. 
13.  Be constructed of those materials listed in Section 605.4 or materials tested, rated and approved for such use in accordance with ASME A112.4.1. 
Section 604.4; add Section 604.4.1 to read as follows: 
604.4.1 State maximum flow rate. Where the State mandated maximum flow rate is more restrictive than those of this section, the State flow rate shall take precedence. 
Section 604.8; add Section 604.8.3 to read as follows: 
604.8.3 Thermal expansion control. An expansion tank or approved device shall be installed for the water heater with the addition of a pressure reducing valve or regulator creating a closed system. 
Section 606.1; delete items #4 and #5. 
Section 606.2; change to read as follows: 
606.2 Location of shutoff valves. Shutoff valves shall be installed in the following locations: 
1.  On the fixture supply to each plumbing fixture other than bathtubs and showers in one- and two-family residential occupancies, and other than in individual sleeping units that are provided with unit shutoff valves in hotels, motels, boarding houses and similar occupancies. 
2.  On the water supply pipe to each appliance or mechanical equipment. 
Section 608.1; change to read as follows: 
608.1 General. A potable water supply system shall be designed, installed and maintained in such a manner so as to prevent contamination from non-potable liquids, solids or gases being introduced into the potable water supply through cross-connections or any other piping connections to the system. Backflow preventer applications shall conform to applicable local regulations, Table 608.1, and as specifically stated in Sections 608.2 through 608.16.10. 
Section 608.16.5; change to read as follows: 
608.16.5 Connections to lawn irrigation systems. The potable water supply to lawn irrigation systems shall be protected against backflow by an atmospheric-type vacuum breaker, a pressure-type vacuum breaker, a double-check assembly or a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. A valve shall not be installed downstream from an atmospheric vacuum breaker. Where chemicals are introduced into the system, the potable water supply shall be protected against backflow by a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. 
Section 608.17; change to read as follows: 
608.17 Protection of individual water supplies. An individual water supply shall be located and constructed so as to be safeguarded against contamination in accordance with applicable local regulations. Installation shall be in accordance with Sections 608.17.1 through 608.17.8. 
Section 610.1; add exception to read as follows: 
610.1 General. New or repaired potable water systems shall be purged of deleterious matter and disinfected prior to utilization. The method to be followed shall be that prescribed by the health authority or water purveyor having jurisdiction or, in the absence of a prescribed method, the procedure described in either AWWA C651 or AWWA C652, or as described in this section. This requirement shall apply to "on-site" or "in plant" fabrication of a system or to a modular portion of a system. 
1.  The pipe system shall be flushed with clean, potable water until dirty water does not appear at the points of outlet. 
2.  The system or part thereof shall be filled with a water/chlorine solution containing at least 50 parts per million (50 mg/L) of chlorine, and the system or part thereof shall be valved off and allowed to stand for 24 hours; or the system or part thereof shall be filled with a water/chlorine solution containing at least 200 parts per million (200 mg/L) of chlorine and allowed to stand for 3 hours. 
3.  Following the required standing time, the system shall be flushed with clean potable water until the chlorine is purged from the system. 
4.  The procedure shall be repeated where shown by a bacteriological examination that contamination remains present in the system. 
Exception: With prior approval the Code Official may wave this requirement when deemed un-necessary. 
Section 712; change to read as follows: 
712.3.3.1 Materials. Pipe and fitting materials shall be constructed of brass, copper, CPVC, ductile iron, stainless steel, galvanized iron, PE, or PVC. 
Section 712.5; add Section 712.5 to read as follows: 
712.5 Dual Pump System. All sumps shall be automatically discharged and, when in any "public use" occupancy where the sump serves more than 10 fixture units, shall be provided with dual pumps or ejectors arranged to function independently in case of overload or mechanical failure. For storm drainage sumps and pumping systems, see Section 1113. 
Section 714, 714.1; change to read as follows: 
SECTION 714 
ENGINEERED DRAINAGE DESIGN 
714.1 Design of drainage system. The sizing, design and layout of the drainage system shall be permitted to be designed by approved design methods. 
Section 802.4; add a sentence to the end of the paragraph to read as follows: 
802.4 Standpipes. Standpipes shall be... (Text unchanged) ...drains for rodding. No standpipe shall be installed below the ground. 
Section 903.1; change to read as follows: 
903.1 Roof extension. All open vent pipes that extend through a roof shall be terminated at least six (6) inches (152 mm) above the roof, except that where a roof is to be used for any purpose other than weather protection, the vent extensions shall be run at least 7 feet (2,134 mm) above the roof. 
Section 917 Single stack vent system. Delete entire section. 
Section 1002.10; delete. 
Section 1101.8; change to read as follows: 
1101.8 Cleanouts required. Cleanouts or manholes shall be installed in the storm drainage system and shall comply with the provisions of this code for sanitary drainage pipe cleanouts. 
Section 1106.1; change to read as follows: 
1106.1 General. The size of the vertical conductors and leaders, building storm drains, building storm sewers, and any horizontal branches of such drains or sewers shall be based on six (6) inches per hour rainfall rate. 
Section 1107.3; change to read as follows: 
1107.3 Sizing of secondary drains. Secondary (emergency) roof drain systems shall be sized in accordance with Section 1106 Scuppers shall be sized to prevent the depth of ponding water from exceeding that for which the roof was designed as determined by Section 1101.7. Scuppers shall not have an opening dimension of less than 4 inches (102 mm). The flow through the primary system shall not be considered when sizing the secondary roof drain system. 
Section 1202.1; delete Exception 2. 
(Ord. No. 1043, § 1, 3-15-2011; Ord. No. 1264, § 2, 2-3-2015) 
Sec. 22-25. - National Electrical Code amendments. 
The following noted portions of the National Electrical Code are hereby amended to read as follows: 
Article 100; add the following to definitions: 
Engineering Supervision: Supervision by a Qualified State of Texas Licensed Professional Engineer engaged primarily in the design or maintenance of electrical installations. 
Article 100; amend the following definition: 
Intersystem Bonding Termination. A device that provides a means for connecting intersystem bonding conductors for communication systems and other systems to the grounding electrode system. Bonding conductors for other systems shall not be larger than 6 AWG. 
Article 110.2; change the following to read as follows: 
110.2 Approval. The conductors and equipment required or permitted by this Code shall be acceptable only if approved. Approval of equipment may be evident by listing and labeling of equipment by a Nationally Recognized Testing Lab (NRTL) with a certification mark of that laboratory or a qualified third party inspection agency approved by the AHJ. 
Exception: Unlisted equipment that is relocated to another location within a jurisdiction or is field modified is subject to the approval by the AHJ. This approval may be by a field evaluation by a NRTL or qualified third party inspection agency approved by the AHJ. 
Informational Note No. 1: See 90.7, Examination of Equipment for Safety, and 110.3, Examination, Identification, Installation, and Use of Equipment. See definitions of Approved, Identified, Labeled, and Listed. 
Informational Note No. 2: Manufacturer's self-certification of equipment may not necessarily comply with US product safety standards as certified by a Nationally Recognized Testing Lab. 
Informational Note No. 3: NFPA 790 and 791 provide an example of an approved method for qualifying a third party inspection agency. 
Article 210.52(G)(1) Garages: change the following to read as follows: 
(1) Garages. In each attached garage and in each detached garage with electric power. At least one receptacle outlet shall be installed for each car space. 
Article 230.71(A); add the following exception: 
Exception: Multi-occupant buildings. Individual service disconnecting means is limited to six for each occupant. The number of individual disconnects at one location may exceed six. 
Article 240.91; delete the Article. 
Article 300.11; add the following exception: 
Exception: Ceiling grid support wires may be used for structural supports when the associated wiring is located in that area, not more than two raceways or cables supported per wire, with a maximum nominal metric designation 16 (trade size 1/2"). 
Article 310.15(B)(7); change to read as follows: 
(7) This Article shall not be used in conjunction with 220.82. 
Article 500.8(A)(3) changed to read as follows: 
500.8 Equipment. 
Articles 500 through 504 require equipment construction and installation that ensure safe performance under conditions of proper use and maintenance. 
Informational Note No. 1: It is important that inspection authorities and users exercise more than ordinary care with regard to installation and maintenance. 
Informational Note No. 2: Since there is no consistent relationship between explosion properties and ignition temperature, the two are independent requirements. 
Informational Note No. 3: Low ambient conditions require special consideration. Explosion proof or dust-ignition proof equipment may not be suitable for use at temperatures lower than -25°C (-13°F) unless they are identified for low-temperature service. However, at low ambient temperatures, flammable concentrations of vapors may not exist in a location classified as Class I, Division 1 at normal ambient temperature. 
(A)  Suitability. Suitability of identified equipment shall be determined by one of the following: 
(1)  Equipment listing or labeling. 
(2)  Evidence of equipment evaluation from a qualified testing laboratory or inspection agency concerned with product evaluation. 
(3)  Evidence acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction such as a manufacturer's self-evaluation or an engineering judgment signed and sealed by a qualified licensed Professional Engineer in the State of Texas. 
Informational Note: Additional documentation for equipment may include certificates demonstrating compliance with applicable equipment standards, indicating special conditions of use, and other pertinent information. 
Article 505.7(A) changed to read as follows: 
505.7 Special Precaution. 
Article 505 requires equipment construction and installation that ensures safe performance under conditions of proper use and maintenance. 
Informational Note No. 1: It is important that inspection authorities and users exercise more than ordinary care with regard to the installation and maintenance of electrical equipment in hazardous (classified) locations. 
Informational Note No. 2: Low ambient conditions require special consideration. Electrical equipment depending on the protection techniques described by 505.8(A) may not be suitable for use at temperatures lower than -20°C (-4°F) unless they are identified for use at lower temperatures. However, at low ambient temperatures, flammable concentrations of vapors may not exist in a location classified Class I, Zones 0, 1, or 2 at normal ambient temperature. 
(A)  Implementation of Zone Classification System. Classification of areas, engineering and design, selection of equipment and wiring methods, installation, and inspection shall be performed by a qualified licensed Professional Engineer in the State of Texas. 
Article 517.30 Essential Electrical Systems for Hospitals; create a new (H) and add the following language: 
(G) Coordination. Overcurrent protective devices serving the equipment branch of the essential electrical system shall be coordinated for the period of time that a fault's duration extends beyond 0.1 second. 
Exception No. 1: Between transformer primary and secondary overcurrent protective devices, where only one overcurrent protective device or set of overcurrent protective devices exists on the transformer secondary. 
Exception No. 2: Between overcurrent protective devices of the same size (ampere rating) in series. 
Informational Note: The terms coordination and coordinated as used in this section do not cover the full range of overcurrent conditions. 
(H) Selective Coordination. Overcurrent protective devices serving the life safety, and critical branches of the essential electrical system shall be selectively coordinated with all supply-side overcurrent protective devices. 
Exception No. 1: Between transformer primary and secondary overcurrent protective devices, where only one overcurrent protective device or set of overcurrent protective devices exists on the transformer secondary. 
Exception No. 2: Between overcurrent protective devices of the same size (ampere rating) in series. 
Informational Note: The terms coordination and coordinated as used in this section do not cover the full range of overcurrent conditions. 
Article 680.25(A) changed to read as follows; delete the exception. 
680.25 Feeders. These provisions shall apply to any feeder on the supply side of panel boards supplying branch circuits for pool equipment covered in Part II of this article and on the load side of the service equipment or the source of a separately derived system. 
(A)  Wiring Methods. 
(1)  Feeders. Feeders shall be installed in rigid metal conduit, intermediate metal conduit. The following wiring methods shall be permitted if not subject to physical damage: 
(1)  Liquid tight flexible nonmetallic conduit; 
(2)  Rigid polyvinyl chloride conduit; 
(3)  Reinforced thermosetting resin conduit; 
(4)  Electrical metallic tubing where installed on or in a building; 
(5)  Electrical nonmetallic tubing where installed within a building; 
(6)  Type MC Cable where installed within a building and if not subject to corrosive environment; 
(7)  Nonmetallic-sheathed cable; 
(8)  Type SE cable. 
(Ord. No. 1043, § 1, 3-15-2011; Ord. No. 1264, § 2, 2-3-2015) 
Sec. 22-26. - International Fuel Gas Code amendments. 
The following noted portions of the International Fuel Gas Code are hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 102.2; add an exception to read as follows: 
Exception: Existing dwelling units shall comply with Section 621.2. 
Section 102.8; change to read as follows: 
102.8 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 8 and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the ICC Electrical Code shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted. 
Section 304.10; change to read as follows: 
304.10 Louvers and grilles. The required size of openings for combustion, ventilation and dilution air shall be based on the net free area of each opening. Where the free area through a design of louver, grille or screen is known, it shall be used in calculating the size opening required to provide the free area specified. Where the design and free area of louvers and grilles are not known, it shall be assumed that wood louvers will have 25-percent free area and metal louvers and grilles will have 50-percent free area. Screens shall have a mesh size not smaller than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm). Non-motorized louvers and grilles shall be fixed in the open position. Motorized louvers shall be interlocked with the appliance so that they are proven to be in the full open position prior to main burner ignition and during main burner operation. Means shall be provided to prevent the main burner from igniting if the louvers fail to open during burner start-up and to shut down the main burner if the louvers close during operation. 
Section 304.11; change #8 to read as follows: 
304.11 Combustion air ducts. Combustion air ducts shall comply with all of the following: 
1.  Ducts shall be constructed of galvanized steel complying with Chapter 6 of the International Mechanical Code or of a material having equivalent corrosion resistance, strength and rigidity. 
Exception: Within dwellings units, unobstructed stud and joist spaces shall not be prohibited from conveying combustion air, provided that not more than one required fire block is removed. 
2.  Ducts shall terminate in an unobstructed space allowing free movement of combustion air to the appliances. 
3.  Ducts shall serve a single enclosure. 
4.  Ducts shall not serve both upper and lower combustion air openings where both such openings are used. The separation between ducts serving upper and lower combustion air openings shall be maintained to the source of combustion air. 
5.  Ducts shall not be screened where terminating in an attic space. 
6.  Horizontal upper combustion air ducts shall not slope downward toward the source of combustion air. 
7.  The remaining space surrounding a chimney liner, gas vent, special gas vent or plastic piping installed within a masonry, metal or factory-built chimney shall not be used to supply combustion air. 
Exception: Direct-vent gas-fired appliances designed for installation in a solid fuel-burning fireplace where installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
8.  Combustion air intake openings located on the exterior of a building shall have the lowest side of such openings located not less than 12 inches (305 mm) vertically from the adjoining ground level or the manufacturer's recommendation, whichever is more restrictive. 
Section 305.5; delete the section. 
Section 306.3; change to read as follows: 
[M] 306.3 Appliances in attics. Attics containing appliances requiring access shall be provided . . . (bulk of paragraph unchanged) . . . side of the appliance. The clear access opening dimensions shall be a minimum of 20 inches by 30 inches (508 mm by 762 mm), or larger where such dimensions are not large enough to allow removal of the largest appliance. A walkway to an appliance shall be rated as a floor as approved by the building official. As a minimum, for access to the attic space, provide one of the following: 
4.  A permanent stair. 
5.  A pull down stair with a minimum 300 lb. (136 kg) capacity. 
6.  An access door from an upper floor level. 
7.  Access Panel may be used in lieu of items 1, 2, and 3 with prior approval of the code official due to building conditions. 
Exceptions: 
1.  The passageway and level service space are not required where the appliance is capable of being serviced and removed through the required opening. 
2.  Where the passageway is not less than (bulk of section to read the same). 
Section 306.5; change to read as follows: 
[M] 306.5 Equipment and appliances on roofs or elevated structures. Where equipment requiring access or appliances are located on an elevated structure or the roof of a building such that personnel will have to climb higher than 16 feet (4,877 mm) above grade to access, a permanent interior or exterior means of access shall be provided. Permanent exterior ladders providing roof access need not extend closer than 12 feet (2,438 mm) to the finish grade or floor level below and shall extend to the equipment and appliances' level service space. Such access shall . . . (bulk of section to read the same) . . . on roofs having a slope greater than 4 unit's vertical in 12 unit's horizontal (33-percent slope). ... (Bulk of section to read the same). 
Section 306.5.1; change to read as follows: 
[M] 306.5.1 Sloped roofs. Where appliances, equipment, fans or other components that require service are installed on roofs having slopes greater than 4 units vertical in 12 units horizontal and having an edge more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade at such edge, a catwalk at least 16 inches in width with substantial cleats spaced not more than 16 inches apart shall be provided from the roof access to a level platform at the appliance. The level platform shall be provided on each side of the appliance to which access is required for service, repair or maintenance. The platform shall be not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in any dimension and shall be provided with guards. The guards shall extend not less than 42 inches (1,067 mm) above the platform, shall be constructed so as to prevent the passage of a 21-inch-diameter (533 mm) sphere and shall comply with the loading requirements for guards specified in the International Building Code. 
Section 306; add Section 306.7 with exception and subsection 306.7.1 to read as follows: 
306.7 Water heaters above ground or floor. When the attic, roof, mezzanine or platform in which a water heater is installed is more than eight (8) feet (2,438 mm) above the ground or floor level, it shall be made accessible by a stairway or permanent ladder fastened to the building. 
Exception: A max 10-gallon water heater (or larger when approved by the code official) is capable of being accessed through a lay-in ceiling and a water heater is installed is not more than ten (10) feet (3,048 mm) above the ground or floor level and may be reached with a portable ladder. 
306.7.1. Illumination and convenience outlet. Whenever the mezzanine or platform is not adequately lighted or access to a receptacle outlet is not obtainable from the main level, lighting and a receptacle outlet shall be provided in accordance with Section 306.3.1. 
Section 401.5; add a second paragraph to read as follows: 
Both ends of each section of medium pressure corrugated stainless steel tubing (CSST) shall identify its operating gas pressure with an approved tag. The tags are to be composed of aluminum or stainless steel and the following wording shall be stamped into the tag: 
"WARNING 
1/2 to 5 psi gas pressure 
Do Not Remove" 
Section 402.3; add an exception to read as follows: 
Exception: Corrugated stainless steel tubing (CSST) shall be a minimum of 1/2" (18 EHD). 
Section 404.12; change to read as follows: 
404.12 Minimum burial depth. Underground piping systems shall be installed a minimum depth of 18 inches (458 mm) top of pipe below grade. 
Section 404.12.1; change to read as follows: 
404.12.1 Individual outside appliances. Individual lines to outside lights, grills or other appliances shall be installed a minimum of 12 inches (203 mm) top of pipe below finished grade, provided that such installation is approved and is installed in locations not susceptible to physical damage. 
Section 406.1; change to read as follows: 
406.1 General. Prior to acceptance and initial operation, all piping installations shall be inspected and pressure tested to determine that the materials, design, fabrication, and installation practices comply with the requirements of this code. The permit holder shall make the applicable tests prescribed in Sections 406.1.1 through 406.1.5 to determine compliance with the provisions of this code. The permit holder shall give reasonable advance notice to the code official when the piping system is ready for testing. The equipment, material, power and labor necessary for the inspections and test shall be furnished by the permit holder and the permit holder shall be responsible for determining that the work will withstand the test pressure prescribed in the following tests. 
Section 406.4; change to read as follows: 
406.4 Test pressure measurement. Test pressure shall be measured with a monometer or with a pressure-measuring device designed and calibrated to read, record, or indicate a pressure loss caused by leakage during the pressure test period. The source of pressure shall be isolated before the pressure tests are made. 
Section 406.4.1; change to read as follows: 
406.4.1 Test pressure. The test pressure to be used shall be no less than 3 psig (20 kPa gauge), or at the discretion of the Code Official, the piping and valves may be tested at a pressure of at least six (6) inches (152 mm) of mercury, measured with a manometer or slope gauge. For tests requiring a pressure of 3 psig, diaphragm gauges shall utilize a dial with a minimum diameter of three and one half inches (31/2"), a set hand, 1/10 pound incrementation and pressure range not to exceed 6 psi for tests requiring a pressure of 3 psig. For tests requiring a pressure of 10 psig, diaphragm gauges shall utilize a dial with a minimum diameter of three and one-half inches (31/2"), a set hand, a minimum of 2/10 pound incrementation and a pressure range not to exceed 20 psi. For welded piping, and for piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48 kPa) (1/2 psi) and less than 200 inches of water column pressure (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall not be less than ten (10) pounds per square inch (69.6 kPa). For piping carrying gas at a pressure that exceeds 200 inches of water column (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall be not less than one and one-half times the proposed maximum working pressure. 
Section 406.4.2; change to read as follows: 
406.4.2 Test duration. Test duration shall be held for a length of time satisfactory to the Code Official, but in no case for less than fifteen (15) minutes. For welded piping, and for piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48 kPa), the test duration shall be held for a length of time satisfactory to the Code Official, but in no case for less than thirty (30) minutes. (Delete remainder of section.) 
Section 409.1; add Section 409.1.4 to read as follows: 
409.1.4 Valves in CSST installations. Shutoff valves installed with corrugated stainless steel (CSST) piping systems shall be supported with an approved termination fitting, or equivalent support, suitable for the size of the valves, of adequate strength and quality, and located at intervals so as to prevent or damp out excessive vibration but in no case greater than 12-inches from the center of the valve. Supports shall be installed so as not to interfere with the free expansion and contraction of the system's piping, fittings, and valves between anchors. All valves and supports shall be designed and installed so they will not be disengaged by movement of the supporting piping. 
Section 410.1; add a second paragraph and exception to read as follows: 
Access to regulators shall comply with the requirements for access to appliances as specified in Section 306. 
Exception: A passageway or level service space is not required when the regulator is capable of being serviced and removed through the required attic opening. 
Section 621.2; add exception as follows: 
621.2 Prohibited use. One or more unvented room heaters shall not be used as the sole source of comfort heating in a dwelling unit. 
Exception: Existing approved unvented heaters may continue to be used in dwelling units, in accordance with the code provisions in effect when installed, when approved by the Code Official unless an unsafe condition is determined to exist as described in Section 108.7. 
Section 624.1.1; change to read as follows: 
624.1.1 Installation requirements. The requirements for water heaters relative to access, sizing, relief valves, drain pans and scald protection shall be in accordance with the International Plumbing Code. 
(Ord. No. 1264, § 2, 2-3-2015) 
Secs. 22-27-22-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority concerning substandard building, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.001; additional authority to secure substandard building, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 214.0011, 214.0015. 

Sec. 22-56. - Attributes of dangerous buildings. 
    Any building or structure which has any or all of the conditions or defects described in this section shall be deemed to be a dangerous building, provided that such conditions or defects exist to the extent that the life, health, property, welfare, or safety of the public or its occupants are endangered or adversely affected: 
(1)  Whenever any door, aisle, passage, stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic. 
(2)  Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn, or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic. 
(3)  Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than 11/2 times the working stress allowed in the building code for new building of similar structure, purpose or location. 
(4)  Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the building code for new building of similar structure, purpose or location. 
(5)  Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property. 
(6)  Whenever any portion of a building or any member, appurtenance ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half of that specified in the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the building code for such buildings. 
(7)  Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new construction. 
(8)  Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because of: 
a.  Dilapidation, deterioration or decay; 
b.  Faulty construction; 
c.  The removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; 
d.  The deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or 
e.  Any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse. 
(9)  Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used. 
(10)  Whenever, the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of the base. 
(11)  Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows 33 percent or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or 50 percent damage or deterioration of its nonsupporting members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings. 
(12)  Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become: 
a.  An attractive nuisance to children; 
b.  A harbor for vagrants, vermin, criminals or immoral persons; or 
c.  As to enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing unlawful or immoral acts. 
(13)  Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists, or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building or structure provided by the building regulations of this jurisdiction, as specified in the building code or of any law or ordinance of state or jurisdiction relating to the condition, location or structure of buildings. 
(14)  Whenever, any building or structure which, whether or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any nonsupporting part, member or portion less than 66 percent of the strength; fire-resisting qualities or characteristics, or weather-resisting qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of a newly constructed building of like area, height and occupancy in the same location. 
(15)  Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease. 
(16)  Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined to be a fire hazard. 
(17)  Whenever any building or structure is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance known to the common law or in equity jurisprudence. 
(18)  Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public. 
(19)  The term "building code" as used in this section, refers to the building code as adopted by the town. 
(Ord. No. 620, § 1, 2-17-2004) 
Sec. 22-57. - Dangerous buildings as public nuisance. 
    All dangerous buildings and structures within the terms of section 22-56 are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be repaired, vacated or demolished as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 620, § 2, 2-17-2004) 
Sec. 22-58. - Minimum standards for continued use or occupancy of buildings. 
    The minimum standards for the continued use and occupancy of all buildings or structures, regardless of the date of their construction, are that buildings or structures shall not be in a condition or have a defect which constitutes a dangerous building or structure as defined in section 22-56. The following standards shall be followed by the building official and the town council in ordering repair, vacation or demolition. 
(1)  If the dangerous building or structure can reasonably be repaired so that it will no longer exists as a dangerous building or structure, it shall be ordered repaired. 
(2)  If the dangerous building or structure is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the health, safety, morals or general welfare of its occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated. 
(3)  In any case where a dangerous building or structure is 50 percent or more damaged, decayed or deteriorated from its original value or structure, it shall be demolished and in all cases where a building or structure cannot be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this section, is shall be demolished. In all cases where a dangerous building or structure is a fire hazard existing or erected in violation of the terms of this section or any ordinances of the town or statues of the state, is shall be demolished. Included in the terms "demolished" in this section is the cleaning of the property and removing all debris and trash, and sealing sewer service (belowground) to prevent infiltration into the town sanitary sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 620, § 3, 2-17-2004) 
Sec. 22-59. - Duties of building official. 
    It shall be the duty of the building official or his designee to: 
(1)  Inspections . Inspect or cause to be inspected, when deemed necessary, public buildings, schools, halls, churches, theatres, hotels, dwellings, tenements or apartments, other multifamily residences and commercial manufacturing building for the purpose of determining whether any condition exist which render such a place a dangerous building or structure within the terms of section 22-56. 
(2)  Investigations of complaints . Inspect any building, wall or structure about which complaints are filed by any person to the effect that the building, wall, or structure is or may be a dangerous building or structure as defined in this article. 
(3)  Procedure for inspection . Upon probable cause to suspect that any building or premises are in violation of this article, and if such building or premises are opened and clearly unoccupied, the building official may enter such building or premises for the purpose of inspecting the building or premises without prior notice to any person; or if such building or premises are closed, or if a reasonable prudent person would have reason to believe that such premises are occupied, the building official shall have recourse to every procedure, right or remedy provided by law to secure entry for the purpose of inspecting the building or premises. 
(4)  Commencement of proceedings . When the building official has inspected or caused to be inspected any building or structure, and has found and determined that such building is a dangerous building or structure, the building official shall commence proceedings to cause repair, vacation or demolition of the building or structure. The building official may commence criminal proceeding or civil proceedings, or both, as determined by the conditions existing on such premises. 
(5)  Written notice to owner. Notify in writing, by certified mail, the owner of the building or structure, as determined by using the records in the office of the county clerk in the county in which the building or structure is located, that the building is a dangerous building or structure as defined in this section. The notice to the owner shall further state their reason that the building does not meet the minimum standards for continued use and occupancy of a building and that unless the building is put in a condition so that the building is not a dangerous building or structure within a reasonable time not exceeding 60 days (as specified by the building official), then a hearing will be scheduled before the building commission to determine whether the building complies with the minimum standards set forth in this section. The building official, in his sole discretion, may elect not to send this notice to remedy and may instead proceed directly with notice of hearing as set forth in section 22-62. 
(6)  Appearance at hearings . Appear at all hearings conducted by the town council and testify as to the conditions of the dangerous building or structure. 
(7)  Placement of notice on dangerous buildings; contents of notice . Place a notice on all dangerous building or structures, upon a determination by the town council, reading as follows: 
"THIS BUILDING HAS BEEN FOUND TO BE A DANGEROUS BUILDING BY THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF LITTLE ELM. THIS NOTICE IS TO REMAIN ON THIS BUILDING UNTIL IT IS REPAIRED, VACATED OR DEMOLISHED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE NOTICE WHICH HAS BEEN GIVEN THE OWNER. IT IS UNLAWFUL TO REMOVE THIS NOTICE UNTIL SUCH NOTICE IS COMPLIED WITH." 
(Ord. No. 620, § 4, 2-17-2004) 
Sec. 22-60. - Criminal enforcement. 
(a)  The building official is hereby authorized to commence criminal proceedings whenever he finds that there has been a violation of any subsection of this section. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant or person in control to maintain a dangerous building or structure as defined in section 22-56. All buildings or structures which are determined to be dangerous buildings or structures are declared to be public nuisances. For purposes hereof, the term "maintain" shall mean keep, preserve, use, maintain status quo or permit to exist. 
(c)  After the notice described in section 22-59 is posed, it shall be unlawful for any person to use, enter, remain in or occupy such building or structure, or for the owner of such building to normally permit any person to use, enter, remain in or occupy such building. It shall be a defense to any prosecution occurring under this subsection that entry was made for the sole purpose of repairing, demolishing or removing such building or structure. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or deface the notice posted pursuant to section 22-59 until the required repairs, demolition or removal have been completed and a certificate of occupancy has been issued pursuant to the provisions of the building code. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish any building or structure without first obtaining the appropriate permits for each building or structure according to the applicable conditions prescribed in the building code. 
(Ord. No. 620, § 5, 2-17-2004) 
Sec. 22-61. - Civil enforcement. 
(a)  Assessment lien or civil penalty . If the dangerous building or structure is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed or demolished within the allotted time, the town may: 
(1)  Without further action by the town council, vacate, secure, remove or demolish the building at its own expense, by town personnel or its contractor. Any costs incurred by the town in securing, removing or demolishing the building or structures may be charged to the owner. The town may assess the expenses on, and the town shall have a lien against, the property on which the building was located, unless the property is a homestead as protected by the state Constitution. The lien arises and attaches to the property by the state Constitution. The lien arises and attaches to the property at the time the notice of the lien is recorded and indexed in the office of the county clerk in which the property is located. The notice of lien must contain the name and address of the owner if that information can be determined with a reasonable effort, a legal description of the real property on which the building is located, the amount of expenses incurred by the municipality and the balance then due; or 
(2)  Acting by and through the town council, assess a civil penalty under the applicable state law not exceeding $2,000.00 per day for failure to repair, remove or demolish the building or structure. Notice of the hearing in which the civil penalty will be considered shall be given to the owner by personally serving the owner with written notice; or by sending the notice in the United States mail by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner at the owner's post office address at least ten days prior to the administrative hearing. Before holding a hearing to consider a civil penalty, the board shall have evidence that the property owner was actually notified of the requirements of the order and his need to comply with such requirements. Any civil penalty assessed shall be imposed as a lien against the land on which the building stands or stood, unless it is a homestead as protected by the state Constitution, to secure the payment of such civil penalty. 
Promptly after the imposition of the lien, the town shall file for record, in recordable form in office of the county clerk of the county in which the land is situated, a written notice of the imposition of the lien. The notice must contain a legal description of the land. In addition to the filing of the lien, the town may seek a judgment against the owner for the civil penalty in accordance with applicable state law. 
(b)  Additional remedies . In addition to any remedy set forth in this section, the town may exercise any and all of its rights to abate any nuisance as defined in this section and seek appropriate relief as authorized by applicable state law. 
(Ord. No. 620, § 6, 2-17-2004) 
Sec. 22-62. - Notice of hearing to owner, lienholder or mortgagee. 
    Upon notification from the building official that he, or his designee, has determined that a building or structure is a dangerous building or structure as defined in this article, and does not meet the minimum standards for continued use and occupancy, the town council shall cause a notice of hearing to be issued to the owner, lienholder and mortgagee of the alleged dangerous building or structure. The notice of hearing must be sent by certified mail at least ten days prior to the hearing and must include a statement that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee will be required to submit at the hearing proof of the scope of any work that may be required so that the building or structure will not constitute a dangerous building or structure and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work. The building official or his designee shall make diligent effort to discover each mortgagee and lienholder for purposes of giving them notice and an opportunity to comment at the hearing. The records in the office of the county clerk in the county in which the building or structure is located shall be used to determine, if possible, the identity and address of any owner, lienholder or mortgagee of the building or structure. The town may file notice of the hearing in the official public records of real property in the county in which the property is located. The notice shall contain the name and address of the owner of the affected property if that information can be determined from a reasonable search of the instruments on file in the office of the county clerk, a legal description of the affected property and a description of the hearing. The filing of the notice is binding on subsequent grantees, lienholder or other transferees of an interest in the property who acquire such interest after the filing of the notice and constitutes notice of the hearing on any subsequent recipient of any interest in the property who acquired such interest after the filing of the notice. 
(Ord. No. 620, § 7, 2-17-2004) 
Sec. 22-63. - Hearing. 
    On the date set forth in the notice, the town council shall hold a hearing to determine whether the building is a dangerous building or structure as defined in section 22-56. If the town council determines that the building or structure is a dangerous building or structure, the town council may order that the building be vacated, secured, repaired, removed or demolished by the owner within a reasonable time as provided for by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 214. In addition, if there is a mortgagee or lienholder, the town council may provide in the order an additional reasonable time as provided by this section for the ordered action to be taken by any mortgagee or lienholder in the event the owner fails to comply with the order within the time provided for action by the owner. No notice to any mortgagee or lienholder shall be required other than a copy of the order in the event the owner fails to timely take the ordered action. The owner of the building or the lienholder or mortgagee may present proof at the hearing of the scope of any work that may be required so that the building or structure will not be dangerous building or structure and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work. 
(Ord. No. 620, § 8, 2-17-2004) 
Sec. 22-64. - Findings of fact. 
    The town council shall make written findings of facts from the testimony offered, as to whether or not the building in question is a dangerous building within the terms of section 22-56. 
(Ord. No. 620, § 9, 2-17-2004) 
Sec. 22-65. - Copy of order to owner. 
    After the hearing, a copy of the order issued by the town council, if any, shall be promptly mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of the building. 
(Ord. No. 620, § 10, 2-17-2004) 
Sec. 22-66. - Filing and publishing order. 
    Within ten days after the date that the order is issued, the town shall: 
(1)  File a copy of the order in the office of the town clerk; and 
(2)  Publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the town a notice containing the street address of legal description of the property, the date of the hearing, a brief statement indicating the results of the order and instruction stating where a complete copy of the order may be obtained. 
(Ord. No. 620, § 11, 2-17-2004) 
Sec. 22-67. - Copy of order to mortgagee and lienholder. 
    After the hearing, if the owner does not take the ordered action within the allotted time, a copy of the building commission order shall be promptly mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to each identified mortgagee and lienholder. 
(Ord. No. 620, § 12, 2-17-2004) 
Sec. 22-68. - Citation for violation. 
    At the conclusion of the hearing, the town council may order the building or structure repaired, demolished or removed as the council may deem necessary. In no event, however, shall the time fixed for such repair, demolition or removal be more than 90 days from the date of the council order, unless the council allows for additional time which shall be entered only if the council finds that the building is in violation of the standards set out herein and the applicable codes of the town. 
(Ord. No. 620, § 13, 2-17-2004) 
Sec. 22-69. - Demolition and assessment. 
    Should the owner or other person responsible for such building or structure fail or refuse to comply with the order of the town council, the town council may order the fire marshal, fire chief, or building official to close the building or structure or to demolish or remove the same and to assess the expenses incurred against the property owner. Notice of the amount of the assessment shall be given the owner and all lienholders by certified mail, return receipt requested to the addressee only, and upon the owner's failure to pay the same within 30 days after notice, the mayor may proceed to file a sworn affidavit of such expenses in the Office of the County Clerk, Denton County, Texas, to establish the town's lien for such removal expenses against the property to which the building was attached. The lien shall be extinguished if the property owner or other interested party reimburses the town for the removal expenses. 
(Ord. No. 620, § 14, 2-17-2004) 
Sec. 22-70. - Violation, penalty. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this article shall upon conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed the sum of $2,000.00 and that each day in violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 620, § 15, 2-17-2004) 
Secs. 22-71-22-98. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT IMPACT FEES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1041, § 2, adopted Mar. 15, 2011, amended art. IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. IV, §§ 22-99-22-110, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Ord. No. 327, §§ 1-12, adopted Sept. 19, 1994; Ord. No. 544, § 1, adopted Aug. 30, 2001; and Ord. No. 905, §§ 2A., 2B., adopted July 1, 2008. 
State Law reference- Financing capital improvements required by new development, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 395.001 et seq. 

Sec. 22-99. - Impact fee capital improvements plan. 
    The town council hereby adopts the "Roadway, Water, and Wastewater Impact Fee Update" dated October 11, 2017, and prepared by Freese and Nichols, Inc., the originals of which are maintained in the town secretary's office, as the town's current impact fee capital improvements plan. This study is incorporated by reference as if set forth herein its entirety and will be considered the town's currently imposed and in effect impact fee capital improvements plan. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 2, 3-15-2011; Ord. No. 1431, § 2.A, 12-19-2017) 
Sec. 22-100. - Purpose. 
(a)  This article, as well as the town's current and previously determined impact fees and impact fee studies, is adopted pursuant to the powers granted and limitations imposed by the constitution and laws of the state, specifically V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 395, as amended. The purpose of this article, as well as the town's current and previously determined impact fees and impact fee studies, is to ensure that adequate water, wastewater and roadway facilities are available to serve new growth and development within the town and to regulate the use and development of land so that new growth and development bear a constitutionally-allowed and statutorily-authorized proportionate share of the cost of such new water, wastewater and roadway capital improvements needed to serve such new development. 
(b)  It is not the purpose of this article, as well as the town's current and previously determined impact fees and impact fee studies, to assess or collect any charge or assessment against new development in excess of the constitutionally-allowed and statutorily-authorized amount necessary to offset the demand on the town's water, wastewater and roadway facilities generated by such new development activity. It is specifically acknowledged that this article, as well as the town's current and previously determined impact fees and impact fee studies, has approached the calculation of constitutionally-allowed and statutorily-authorized proportionate share impact fees in a conservative and reasonable manner. 
(c)  It is in the best interest of the public's health, safety and general welfare for the town to regulate development and ensure the adequacy of water, wastewater and roadway facilities by requiring payment of constitutionally-allowed and statutorily-authorized proportionate share impact fees. Accordingly, this article, as well as the town's current and previously determined impact fees and impact fee studies, have been adopted by the town council to fulfill such purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 2, 3-15-2011) 
Sec. 22-101. - Definitions. 
    Assessment means the determination of the amount of the maximum impact fee per service unit which can be imposed on new development pursuant to this article, as well as the town's current and previously determined impact fees and impact fee studies. The amount of the impact fee per service unit is a measure of the water, wastewater or roadway impact on system facilities created by new development. 
    Capital improvement means either a water facility, wastewater facility or roadway facility with a life expectancy of three or more years to be owned and operated by, or on behalf of, the town. For a water facility and/or wastewater facility, capital improvement applies to a newly constructed water facility and/or wastewater facility, or to the expansion of an existing water facility and/or wastewater facility necessary to serve new development. A roadway facility with a life expectancy of three or more years to be owned and operated by, or on behalf of, the town shall include the town's share of costs for roadways and associated improvements designated as a numbered highway on the official federal or Texas highway system. For a roadway facility, capital improvement applies to a newly constructed roadway facility or to the expansion of an existing roadway facility necessary to serve new development. 
    Capital improvements advisory committee means the capital improvements advisory committee appointed by the town council. 
Credit means: 
(1)  When used in the context of determining the maximum assessable impact fee per service unit, an amount equal to: 
a.  That portion of ad valorem tax and utility service revenues generated by new service units during the program period that is used for the payment of improvements, including the payment of debt, that are included in the town's impact fee capital improvements plan; or 
b.  In the alternative, a credit equal to 50 percent of the total projected cost of implementing the town's impact fee capital improvements plan; or 
(2)  When used in the context of determining the offset for a system facility, the amount of the reduction of an impact fee designed to fairly reflect the value of any construction of, contributions to, or dedications of a system facility agreed to or required by the town as a condition of development approval, pursuant to rules herein established or pursuant to town council-approved administrative guidelines, which value shall be credited against water and wastewater facilities impact fees, and credited on a vehicle mile basis against roadway facilities impact fees, otherwise due from the development and which credits are hereinafter referred to as an "offset" or "offsets" to avoid confusion. 
    Development unit is the expression of the magnitude of the transportation demand created by each land use planned within a particular development and is used to compute the number of service units consumed by each individual land use application for roadway facilities impact fees. 
    Facilities expansion means either a water facility expansion, wastewater facility expansion or roadway facility expansion. 
    Final plat approval or approval of a final plat means the point at which the applicant has complied with all conditions of approval and the plat (minor plat or record plat) has been released for filing with Denton County. 
    Final plat recordation or recordation of a final plat means the point at which the applicant has complied with all conditions precedent to recording an approved final plat (minor plat or record plat) in Denton County, including the final completion of and acceptance by the town of any infrastructure or other improvements required by the subdivision ordinance or any other ordinance and the plat is filed for record with the Denton County Clerk's Office. 
    Impact fee means a charge or assessment imposed by the town, pursuant to this article, as well as the town's current and previously determined impact fees and impact fee studies, against new development in order to generate revenue for funding or recouping the costs of a capital improvement or facilities expansion necessitated by and attributable to such new development. Impact fees include utility impact fees for water and wastewater facilities and roadway impact fees for roadway facilities. Utility impact fees do not, however, include pro rata payments for site-related facilities imposed under facility or development agreements in existence on the effective date of this article; front-footage charges for site-related facilities imposed pursuant to facility or development agreements; or on-site (including perimeter) or off-site water or wastewater improvements required by applicable subdivision or utility ordinances of the town. Utility impact fees further do not include dedication of rights-of-way or easements, or construction or dedication of water distribution, wastewater collection or drainage facilities if the dedication or construction is required by the subdivision ordinance and is necessitated by and attributable to the new development. Roadway impact fees do not, however, include road escrow payments for site-related facilities imposed under facility or development agreements in existence on the effective date of this article. Roadway impact fees further do not include dedication of rights-of-way or easements, or construction or dedication of drainage facilities, streets, sidewalks or curbs if the dedication or construction is required by the subdivision ordinance and is necessitated by and attributable to the new development. 
    Impact fee capital improvements plan means the adopted water, wastewater and roadway impact fee studies more particularly described in section 22-99 of this article, as well as any previously adopted impact fee studies that may be applicable, as such studies may be amended from time to time, which identify the capital improvements or facility expansions and associated costs for each service area that are necessitated by and which are attributable to new development within the service area, for a period not to exceed ten years, which capital improvements are to be financed in whole or in part through the imposition of the town's impact fees. The impact fee capital improvements plan may refer either to the plan for a particular service area or to the aggregation of capital improvements or facilities expansions and the associated costs programmed for all service areas for a particular category of capital improvements or facilities expansions. 
    Land use assumptions means and includes a description of the service areas and the projections of population and employment growth and associated changes in land uses, densities and intensities adopted by the town, as may be amended from time to time, in the service area over a ten-year period upon which the impact fee capital improvements plan is based. 
    Land use vehicle-mile equivalency tables or "LUVMET" are tables that provide the standardized measure of consumption or use of roadway facilities attributable to a new development based on the land use category of the development and historical data and trends applicable to the town. The LUVMET recognizes and expresses the magnitude of the transportation demand created by different land use categories within a particular development and allow different uses of land to more accurately bear the cost and expense of the impacts generated by such uses. The LUVMET expresses the number of service units consumed by each individual land use application as "vehicle miles (per development unit)." 
    New development means a project involving the subdivision of land and/or the construction, reconstruction, redevelopment, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure, or any use or extension of the use of land, which has the effect of increasing the requirements for capital improvements or facility expansions, measured by an increase in the number of service units to be generated by such activity, and which requires either the approval and filing with Denton County of a plat pursuant to the town's subdivision ordinance, the issuance of a building permit, or connection to the town's water or wastewater system. 
    Offset or offsets means the amount of the reduction of an impact fee designed to fairly reflect the value of any construction of, contributions to, or dedications of a system facility agreed to or required by the town as a condition of development approval, pursuant to rules herein established or pursuant to council-approved administrative guidelines, which value shall be credited against utility impact fees otherwise due from the development for water and wastewater facilities, and which value shall be credited against roadway impact fees on a vehicle mile basis against roadway facilities otherwise due from the new development. 
    Recoup means to reimburse the town for capital improvements which the town has previously installed or caused to be installed. 
    Roadway means any freeway, expressway or arterial or collector streets or roads designated in the town's adopted master thoroughfare plan, as may be amended from time to time. The term includes the town's share of costs for roadways designated as a numbered highway on the official federal or Texas highway system. 
    Roadway facility means an improvement or appurtenance to a roadway which includes, but is not limited to, rights-of-way, whether conveyed by deed or easement; intersection improvements; traffic signals; turn lanes; drainage facilities associated with the roadway; and street lighting or curbs. Roadway facility also includes any improvement or appurtenance to an intersection with a roadway official enumerated in the federal or Texas highway system. Roadway facility includes the town's share of costs for roadways and associated improvements designated as a numbered highway on the official federal or Texas highway system, including local matching funds and costs related to utility line relocation and the establishment of curbs, gutters, drainage appurtenances and rights-of-way. Roadway facility excludes those improvements or appurtenances to a roadway which are site-related facilities. 
    Service area means, for utility impact fees, either a water benefit area or wastewater benefit area within the town's corporate boundaries and/or its extraterritorial jurisdiction in which utility impact fees for capital improvements or facilities expansions will be collected for new development occurring within such area and within which the fees so collected will be expended for the types of improvements or expansions identified in the impact fee capital improvements plan for water and wastewater facilities. Service area means, for roadway impact fees, the geographic area(s) within the town's corporate limits which do not exceed six miles and within which geographic area(s) roadway impact fees for capital improvements will be collected for new development occurring within such area, and within which fees so collected will be expended for those capital improvements identified in the roadway improvements plan to be located within the roadway service area. Roadway service area does not include any land outside the town limits. 
    Service unit means, for utility impact fees, the applicable standard unit of measure that serves as the standardized measure of consumption, use or generation attributable to the new unit of development. The current service unit for water and wastewater is a 5/8 -inch water meter, which is the typical water meter used for a single-family detached living unit and is commonly referred to as the single-family living unit equivalent (SFLUE). The number of current service units used for water and wastewater by a particular land use is determined by the water meter size employed by such land use. Service unit means, for current roadway impact fees, one vehicle mile of travel in the afternoon peak hour of traffic and is also referred to as a "vehicle mile." Previously determined service units for impact fees other than the town's most current impact fees are as set forth in previously adopted impact fee ordinances and impact fee studies, which typically set a service unit as one acre of equivalent single-family residential land use for utility and roadway impact fees. 
    Service unit equivalent means the amount of capacity created by contribution of a capital improvement on behalf of a new development. 
    Single-family residential lot means a lot platted to accommodate a single-family or a duplex dwelling unit, as authorized under the town's zoning regulations. 
    Site-related facility means an improvement or facility which is constructed for the primary use or benefit of a new development and/or which is for the primary purpose of safe and adequate provision of water, wastewater or roadway facilities to serve the new development, and which is not included in the impact fee capital improvements plan and for which the developer or property owner is solely responsible under the town's subdivision and/or other applicable regulations. For water and wastewater facilities, a site-related facility shall include those lines which are less than or equal to 12 inches in diameter. Site-related facilities also include water and wastewater lines between two or more developers where pro-rata reimbursement agreements are required to equitably allocate costs. Site-related facility cost means either the cost of a site-related facility or that portion of the cost of a system facility equivalent to the first 12 inches in diameter of the size of a water or wastewater main, and which has not been included in the costs used to compute the maximum impact fee per service unit. 
    System facility means a capital improvement or facility expansion which is designated in the impact fee capital improvements plan and which is not a site-related facility. System facility may include a capital improvement which is located off-site, within, or on and along the perimeter of the new development site. For water and wastewater facilities, a system facility shall include the oversized portion of those lines which are greater than 12 inches in diameter and which serve solely new development and which are on the impact fee capital improvements plan or the comprehensive water or wastewater improvements plan. 
    Wastewater facility means an improvement for providing wastewater service, including but not limited to, land or easements, treatment facilities, lift stations, collector mains or interceptor mains. Wastewater facility excludes wastewater facilities, lines, or mains which are constructed by developers, the costs of which are reimbursed through pro-rata or other development-related agreements paid by subsequent users of the facilities. Wastewater facilities exclude site-related facilities. 
    Wastewater facility expansion means the expansion of the capacity of any existing wastewater improvement for the purpose of serving new development, but does not include the repair, maintenance, modernization, or expansion of an existing wastewater facility to serve existing development. 
    Wastewater improvements plan means the adopted impact fee capital improvements plan, as it may be amended from time to time, which identifies the wastewater facilities or wastewater expansion and their associated costs which are necessitated by and which are attributable to new development, and for a period not to exceed ten years, and which are to be financed in whole or in part through the imposition of the town's wastewater impact fees. The wastewater improvements plan is a part or component of the impact fee capital improvements plan. 
    Water facility means an improvement for providing water service, including, but not limited to, land or easements, water treatment facilities, water supply facilities, or water distribution lines. Water facility excludes site-related water facilities, lines, or mains which are constructed by developers, the costs of which are reimbursed through pro-rata or other development related agreements paid by subsequent users of the facilities. Water facility excludes site-related facilities. 
    Water facility expansion means the expansion of the capacity of any existing water facility for the purpose of serving new development, but does not include the repair, maintenance, modernization, or expansion of an existing water facility to serve existing development. 
    Water improvements plan means the adopted impact fee capital improvements plan, as it may be amended from time to time, which identifies the water facilities or water expansions and their associated costs which are necessitated by and which are attributable to new development, for a period not to exceed ten years, and which are to be financed in whole or in part through the imposition of the town's water impact fees. The water improvements plan is a part or component of the impact fee capital improvements plan. 
    Water meter means a device for measuring the flow of water to a development, whether for domestic or for irrigation purposes. 
    Water meter size ("meter size") provides the expression of the magnitude of the water and wastewater demand created by each land use planned within a particular development based on the use of the 5/8 -inch water meter as the basic service unit. Other water meter sizes are compared to the 5/8 -inch water meter through a ratio of water flows. This same ratio is then used to determine the proportional impact fee amount for those water and wastewater impact fees determined by meter size as reflected on Schedule 1, attached to Ordinance No. 1041 and kept on file with the town and incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 2, 3-15-2011) 
Sec. 22-102. - Impact fee as condition of development approval. 
    No application for new development shall be approved within the town without assessment of applicable impact fees, and no building permit shall be issued unless the applicant has paid the applicable impact fees. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 2, 3-15-2011) 
Sec. 22-103. - Updates to plans and revision of fees. 
(a)  The town shall update its land use assumptions and capital improvements plan for impact fees and shall recalculate its impact fees not less than once every five years in accordance with the procedures set forth in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 395, or in any successor statute. 
(b)  The town may review its land use assumptions, impact fee capital improvements plan, and other factors such as market conditions more frequently than provided in subsection (a) to determine whether the land use assumptions and impact fee capital improvements plan should be updated and impact fees recalculated accordingly, or whether Schedules 1 or 2, attached to Ordinance No. 1431 and kept on file with the town (including the applicable conversion equivalency tables) should be increased, decreased, or otherwise recalculated. 
(c)  Amendments to the land use assumptions for impact fees shall incorporate projections of changes in land uses, densities, intensities and population therein over at least a ten-year period. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 2, 3-15-2011; Ord. No. 1431, § 2.B, 12-19-2017) 
Sec. 22-104. - Functions of advisory committee. 
(a)  The advisory committee shall perform the following functions: 
(1)  Advise and assist the town in adopting land use assumptions; 
(2)  Review the impact fee capital improvements plan and file written comments thereon; 
(3)  Monitor and evaluate implementation of the impact fee capital improvements plan; 
(4)  Advise the town of the need to update or revise the land use assumptions, impact fee capital improvements plan and impact fees; and 
(5)  File a semiannual report evaluating the progress of the town in achieving the impact fee capital improvements plan and identifying any problems in implementing the plans or administering the impact fees. 
(b)  The town council shall adopt, by resolution, procedural rules by which the advisory committee may carry out its duties. 
(c)  The town shall make available to the advisory committee any professional reports prepared in the development or implementation of the impact fee capital improvements plan. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 2, 3-15-2011) 
Sec. 22-105. - Establishments of accounts. 
(a)  The town's finance department shall establish an account to which interest is allocated for each category of capital facility in each service area for which an impact fee is imposed. Each impact fee collected within the service area shall be deposited in such account. 
(b)  Interest earned on the account into which the impact fees are deposited shall be considered funds of the account. 
(c)  The town's finance department shall establish adequate financial and accounting controls to ensure that impact fees disbursed from the account are utilized solely for the purposes authorized by this article and state law. Disbursement of funds shall be authorized by the town at such times as are reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes and intent of this article; provided, however, that any fee paid shall be expended within a reasonable period of time, but not to exceed ten years from the date the fee is deposited into the account. 
(d)  The town's finance department shall maintain and keep financial records for impact fees, which shall show the source and disbursement of all fees collected in or expended from each service area. The records of the account into which impact fees are deposited shall be open for public inspection and copying during ordinary business hours. The town may establish a fee for copying services. 
(e)  The finance department shall maintain and keep adequate financial records for said account which shall show the source and disbursement of all funds placed in or expended by such account. 
(f)  Any credits, offsets, or rights to reimbursement hereunder, including facility or development agreements, shall terminate or be payable, as the case may require, on September 30 of the final year of any right to such offset, credit or reimbursement. 
(g)  Any payments to a developer required hereunder accruing in any year shall be due on or before 60 days after the end of the fiscal year, September 30. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 2, 3-15-2011) 
Sec. 22-106. - Appeals. 
(a)  The property owner or applicant for development may appeal the following administrative decisions to the town council: 
(1)  The applicability of an impact fee to the development; 
(2)  The amount of the impact fee due; 
(3)  The availability of, the amount of, or the expiration of an offset or a credit; 
(4)  The application of an offset or credit against an impact fee due; 
(5)  The amount of the impact fee in proportion to the benefit received by new development; and 
(6)  The amount of a refund due, if any. 
(b)  The burden of proof shall be on the appellant to demonstrate that the amount of the impact fee or the amount of the offset or credit was not calculated according to the applicable schedule of impact fees or the guidelines established for determining offsets and credits. The appellant shall state the basis for the appeal in writing with particularity. The appellant shall submit any utility study, traffic study or other documents upon which he relies to the town with the request for appeal. 
(c)  The appellant must file a notice of appeal with the town secretary within 30 days following the decision. If the notice of appeal is accompanied by a bond or other sufficient surety satisfactory to the town attorney in an amount equal to the original determination of the impact fee due, the development application may be processed while the appeal is pending. 
(d)  The appellant shall promptly pay to the town the full amount of the impact fee determined to be due by the town council regarding such appeal. Failure to promptly pay such impact fee within five business days after the town council's determination on the appeal shall serve as authority for the town to present the bond or other surety to the bonding company or financial institution for performance with no other or further notice or contact with the appellant. 
(e)  Any appellant whose appeal has not been decided under this article may elect either to: (1) have the appeal decided under the terms of the ordinance that imposed the impact fees; or (2) waive the appeal and pay impact fees under the applicable Schedule 1 or Schedule 2, attached to Ordinance No. 1041 and kept on file with the town. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 2, 3-15-2011) 
Sec. 22-107. - Refunds. 
(a)  Any impact fee or portion thereof collected pursuant to this article, or prior impact fee ordinances of the town, which has not been expended within the service area within ten years from the date of payment, shall be refunded, upon application, to the record owner of the property at the time the refund is paid or, if the impact fee was paid by another governmental entity, to such governmental entity, together with interest calculated from the date of collection to the date of refund at the statutory rate as set forth in V.T.C.A., Finance Code § 302.002, or its successor statute. The application for refund pursuant to this section shall be submitted in writing within 60 days after the expiration of the ten-year period for expenditure of the fee. Impact fees shall be considered expended on a first-in, first-out, basis. 
(b)  An impact fee collected pursuant to this article shall be considered expended if the total authorized expenditures for capital improvements or facilities expansion within the service area within ten years following the date of payment exceeds the total fees collected for such improvements during such period. 
(c)  If a refund is due pursuant to subsections (a) and (b), the town shall prorate the refund by dividing the difference between the amount of expenditures and the amount of the fees collected by the total number of service units assumed within the service area for the period to determine the refund due per service unit. The refund to the record owner shall be calculated by multiplying the refund due per service unit by the number of service units for the development for which the fee was paid, and interest due shall be calculated upon that amount. 
(d)  Upon completion of all the capital improvements or facilities expansions identified in the impact fees capital improvements plan for the service area, the town shall recalculate the maximum impact fee per service unit using the actual costs for the improvements or expansions. If the maximum impact fee per service unit based on actual cost is less than the impact fee per service unit paid, the town shall refund the difference, if such difference exceeds the impact fee paid by more than ten percent. The refund to the record owner (the owner of the property at the time the refund is paid) shall be calculated by multiplying such difference by the number of service units for the new development for which the fee was paid, and interest due shall be calculated upon that amount. 
(e)  If the building permit for a new development for which an impact fee has been paid has expired, and a modified or new application has not been filed within six months of such expiration, the town shall, upon written application, refund the amount of the impact fee to the applicant. The town may establish guidelines for refunding of impact fees collected for which construction plans have been abandoned. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 2, 3-15-2011) 
Sec. 22-108. - Agreement for capital improvements. 
(a)  An owner of a new development may construct or finance a capital improvement or facility expansion designated in the impact fee capital improvements plan, if required or authorized by the town, by entering into a facilities agreement or developer's agreement with the town prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. The agreement shall be on a form approved by the town, and shall identify the estimated cost of the improvement or expansion, the schedule for initiation and completion of the improvement or expansion, a requirement that the improvement be designed and completed to town standards and such other terms and conditions as deemed necessary by the town. The facility agreement or developer's agreement shall provide for the method to be used to determine the amount of the offset to be given against impact fees due for the development. 
(b)  In the event that the cost of any improvements constructed exceeds the impact fee to be collected for the new development, the town shall within ten years reimburse the owner for the dedication, construction or financing of a capital improvement or facility expansion designated in the impact fee capital improvements plan. The terms of reimbursement shall be incorporated in the agreement required by subsection (a). Such reimbursement agreements shall take into account the proximity of the new development to existing infrastructure and may require a repayment schedule which is based upon actual connections to the improvements constructed. Reimbursement agreements shall further be based on and made subject to the availability of town funds from all sources including current and projected impact fee fund accounts. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 2, 3-15-2011) 
Sec. 22-109. - Use of other financing mechanisms. 
(a)  The town may finance capital improvements or facilities expansions designated in the impact fee capital improvements plan through the issuance of bonds, through the formation of public improvement districts or other assessment districts, or through any other authorized mechanism, in such manner and subject to such limitations as may be provided by law, in addition to the use of impact fees. 
(b)  Except as herein otherwise provided, the assessment and collection of an impact fee shall be additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other tax, fee, charge or assessment which is lawfully imposed on and due against the property. 
(c)  The town may pay all or part of impact fees due for a new development taking into account available offsets and credits pursuant to duly adopted criteria. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 2, 3-15-2011) 
Sec. 22-110. - Impact fee as additional and supplemental regulation. 
    Impact fees established by this article, as well as the town's current and previously determined impact fees and impact fee studies, are additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other requirements imposed by the town on the development of land or the issuance of building permits or certificates of occupancy. Such impact fees are intended to be consistent with and to further the policies of town's comprehensive plan, the impact fee capital improvements plan, the zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations, and other town policies, ordinances and resolutions by which the town seeks to ensure the provision of adequate public facilities in conjunction with the development of land. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 2, 3-15-2011) 
Sec. 22-111. - Utility impact fees. 
    Sections 22-111 through 22-117 of this article shall govern the town's utility impact fees for water and wastewater, which fees shall apply to all new development within the corporate boundaries of the town and within its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 2, 3-15-2011) 
Sec. 22-112. - Utility impact fees per service unit. 
(a)  The impact fee per service unit for wastewater and water facilities shall be set forth for each service unit equivalent or meter size, whichever is applicable in: 
(1)  Schedule 1, Table A, if the date of final plat recording is on or after September 19, 1994, through and including February 2, 1997, and for which property no replatting is necessary; 
(2)  Schedule 1, Table B, if the date of final plat recording is on or after February 3, 1997, through and including July 18, 1999, and for which property no replatting is necessary; 
(3)  Schedule 1, Table C, if the date of final plat recording is on or after July 19, 1999, through and including January 16, 2000, and for which property no replatting is necessary; 
(4)  Schedule 1, Table D, if the date of final plat recording is on or after January 17, 2000, through and including June 30, 2008, and for which property no replatting is necessary; and 
(5)  Schedule 1, Table E if the date of final plat recording is on or after March 15, 2011, through and including December 19, 2017, and for which property no replatting is necessary; and 
(6)  Schedule 1, Table F if the date of final plat recording is on or after December 20, 2017. 
Schedule 1, Table A through F (sometimes hereinafter referred to collectively as "Schedule 1") are attached to Ordinance 1431 and kept on file with the town and made a part of this article by reference. 
(b)  Schedule 1 may be amended from time to time by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 2, 3-15-2011; Ord. No. 1431, § 2.C, 12-19-2017) 
Sec. 22-113. - Assessment of utility impact fees. 
(a)  Assessment of utility impact fees for any new development shall be made as follows: 
(1)  For a new development for which a final plat was recorded on or after September 19, 1994, through and including February 2, 1997, and for which property no replatting is necessary pursuant to the town's subdivision regulations prior to development, assessment of impact fees shall occur at the time of final plat recordation, and shall be the amount of the impact fee per service unit equivalent as set forth in Schedule 1, Table A, attached to Ordinance No. 1431 and kept on file with the town and incorporated herein by reference, for each service unit equivalent for each proposed development unit as set forth in Schedule 1, Table A. The number of service unit equivalents shall be determined by using Conversion Table 1 to Schedule 1. 
(2)  For a new development for which a final plat was recorded on or after February 3, 1997, through and including July 18, 1999, and for which no replatting is necessary pursuant to the town's subdivision regulations, assessment of impact fees shall occur at the time of final plat recordation and shall be the amount of the impact fee per service unit equivalent as set forth in Schedule 1, Table B, attached to Ordinance No. 1431 and kept on file with the town and incorporated herein by reference, for each service unit equivalent for each proposed development unit as set forth in Schedule 1, Table B. The number of service unit equivalents shall be determined by using Conversion Table 1 to Schedule 1. 
(3)  For a new development for which recordation of the final plat occurred on or after July 19, 1999, through and including January 16, 2000, and for which no replatting is necessary pursuant to the town's subdivision regulations, assessment of impact fees shall occur at the time of final plat recordation and shall be the amount of the impact fee per service unit equivalent as set forth in Schedule 1, Table C, attached to Ordinance No. 1431 and kept on file with the town and incorporated herein by reference for each service unit equivalent for each proposed development unit as set forth in Schedule 1, Table C. The number of service unit equivalents shall be determined by using Conversion Table 1 to Schedule 1. 
(4)  For a new development for which recordation of the final plat occurred on or after January 17, 2000, through and including June 30, 2008, and for which no replatting is necessary pursuant to the town's subdivision regulations, assessment of impact fees shall occur at the time of final plat recordation and shall be the amount of the impact fee per service unit equivalent as set forth in Schedule 1, Table D, attached to Ordinance No. 1431 and kept on file with the town and incorporated herein by reference, for each service unit equivalent for each proposed development unit as set forth in Schedule 1, Table D. The number of service unit equivalents shall be determined by using Conversion Table 1 and the applicable Conversion Table 2 to Schedule 1. 
(5)  For a new development for which recordation of the final plat occurred on or after July 1, 2008, through and including December 19, 2017 assessment of impact fees shall occur at the time of final plat recordation and shall not exceed the amount of the impact fee per meter size for each proposed development unit as set forth in Schedule 1, Table E, attached to Ordinance No. 1431 and kept on file with the town and incorporated herein by reference. The town's utility impact fees shall be based on the size of the water meter determined by the town engineer to be necessary to serve the new development and the number of equivalent residential connections associated with that size of water meter. If the town allows a development to connect to the wastewater system without connecting to the water system, the town engineer shall determine the size of the water meter that would be required if the development did connect to the water system. The single service area for Schedule 1, Table E, Utility Impact Fees is set forth in Figure 2.1 of the "Water and Wastewater CIP Report," dated March 2008 and prepared by Freese and Nichols, Inc., a copy of which is on file in the town secretary's office. 
(6)  For a new development for which recordation of the final plat occurred on or after December 20, 2017 assessment of impact fees shall occur at the time of final plat recordation and shall not exceed the amount of the impact fee per meter size for each proposed development unit as set forth in Schedule 1, Table F, and kept on file with the town and incorporated herein by reference. The town's utility impact fees shall be based on the size of the water meter determined by the town engineer to be necessary to serve the new development and the number of equivalent residential connections associated with that size of water meter. If the town allows a development to connect to the wastewater system without connecting to the water system, the town engineer shall determine the size of the water meter that would be required if the development did connect to the water system. The number of equivalent residential connections associated with various water meter sizes is set forth in Schedule 1, Table 2. Figure 2-2 "Roadway, Water, and Wastewater Impact Fee Update dated October 11, 2017 identifies the single water and wastewater service area in Schedule 1, Table F, Utility Impact Fees attached to Ordinance No. 1431. 
(7)  For land on which new development occurs, or is proposed to occur, without platting, assessment of impact fees shall occur at the time application is made for the building permit, and shall be the amount of the impact fee per meter size for each proposed development unit as set forth in Schedule 1, Table F, attached to Ordinance No. 1431 and kept on file with the town and incorporated herein by reference, for each meter size for each proposed development unit as set forth in Schedule 1, Table E. 
(b)  Following assessment of the utility impact fee pursuant to subsection (a), the amount of the impact fee assessed per service unit or meter size, whichever is applicable, for that development cannot be increased, unless the owner proposes to change the approved development by the submission of a new application for final plat approval or proposes to increase the meter size or service unit equivalent for any use within that development, in which case new assessment shall occur at the maximum assessable Schedule 1 rate then in effect. 
(c)  Following the vacating of any plat or submittal of any replat, a new assessment must be made in accordance with the section. 
(d)  Approval of an amended plat pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.016, and the town's subdivision ordinance, is not subject to reassessment for an impact fee provided that the use of the property remains the same and no increase in the meter size or service unit equivalent for any use within that development is sought. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 2, 3-15-2011; Ord. No. 1431, § 2.D, 12-19-2017) 
Sec. 22-114. - Payment and collection of utility impact fees. 
(a)  For all new developments, utility impact fees shall be collected at the time of application for and in conjunction with the issuance of a building permit or at the time of application for utility connection, whichever event occurs first. The impact fees to be paid and collected for each service unit equivalent or meter size, whichever is applicable, are listed in Schedule 1. 
(b)  The town reserves the right to enter into an agreement with a developer for a different time and manner of payment of utility impact fees, in which case the agreement shall determine the time and manner of payment. 
(c)  The town shall compute the utility impact fees for new development in the following manner: 
(1)  Determine the number of each service unit equivalent or meter size, whichever is applicable, in the new development and multiply by the corresponding proportionate amount of impact fees for each such service unit equivalent or meter size, whichever is applicable, contained in the applicable Schedule 1 Table. 
(2)  The amount of each utility impact fee shall be reduced by any allowable offsets for that category of capital improvements, in the manner provided in section 22-115. 
(3)  The total amount of the utility impact fees for the new development shall be calculated and attached to the development application or request for connection as a condition of approval. 
(d)  The amount of each utility impact fee (wastewater and water) for a new development shall not exceed an amount computed by multiplying the maximum assessable fee per service unit for each category of utility pursuant to sections 22-112 and 22-113 by the number of service units generated by the development. The town's water and wastewater impact fees set forth in Schedule 1 shall be based on the size of the service unit equivalents or water meter, whichever is applicable, determined by the town engineer to be necessary to serve the development and the number of equivalent residential connections associated with that size of water meter or service unit equivalents, whichever is applicable. 
(e)  For a new development which is unplatted at the time of application for a building permit or utility connection, or for a new development that received final plat approval prior to September 19, 1994, for water and wastewater facilities, and for which no replatting is necessary pursuant to the town's subdivision regulations prior to development, collection of impact fees shall occur at the time application is made for the building permit or utility connection, whichever occurs first, and shall be the amount of the current impact fee per service unit as set forth in Schedule 1 then in effect. 
(f)  Whenever the property owner proposes to increase the number of service units for a development or increase the meter size for any use within that development, the additional impact fees collected for such new service units shall be determined by using the current impact fee per service unit as set forth in Schedule 1 then in effect, and such additional fee shall be collected at the times prescribed by this article. 
(g)  For a single-family residential lot of record existing before September 19, 1994, for which no replatting is necessary pursuant to the town's subdivision regulations prior to development, no utility impact fees shall be assessed or collected. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 2, 3-15-2011) 
Sec. 22-115. - Offsets and credits against utility impact fees. 
(a)  The town shall offset the reasonable value of any water or wastewater system facility which is on the impact fee capital improvements plan and which has been dedicated to and has been accepted by the town on or after September 19, 1994, or credit the amount of any monetary contribution to such facility against the amount of the utility impact fee for that category of capital improvement. 
(b)  All offsets and credits against utility impact fees shall be subject to the following limitations and shall be granted based on this article and additional standards promulgated by the town council, which may be adopted as town council-approved administrative guidelines. 
(1)  No offset or credit shall be given for the dedication of land or easements for, or the construction of, site-related facilities. 
(2)  No offset or credit shall exceed the documented and town-approved costs to the developer of the system facility which was dedicated to and accepted by the town, or the amount of the monetary contribution actually made. 
(3)  The costs used to calculate the offsets shall not exceed those assumed for the capital improvements included in the impact fee capital improvements plan for utility impact fees for the category of water and wastewater facilities within the service area for which the utility impact fee is imposed. 
(4)  Offsets or credits given for system facilities for a development which has received final plat approval prior to the effective date of this article shall be discounted taking into consideration the number of existing service units within such development. 
(5)  An offset or credit created pursuant to prior impact fee ordinances for which a specific termination date was not established shall expire no later than ten years after the date the ordinance under which such offset or credit was created was amended, repealed or replaced. Utility impact fee offsets or credits created pursuant to this article shall expire within ten years from the date the offset or credit was created. 
(6)  In no event will the town reimburse the property owner or developer for an offset or credit when no utility impact fees for the new development can be collected pursuant to this article or for any amount exceeding the total utility impact fees due for the development for that category of capital improvement, unless otherwise agreed to by the town. 
(7)  No utility impact fee offset shall be given for a site-related or system facility or any facility which is not identified within the applicable impact fees capital improvements plan, unless the town agrees that such improvement supplies capacity to new developments other than the development paying the utility impact fee, provisions for offsets are incorporated in an agreement for capital improvements pursuant to section 22-108, and an amendment is adopted adding such improvement to the impact fee capital improvements plan. 
(c)  An applicant for new development must apply for a utility impact fee offset or credit against impact fees due for the development either at the time of application for final plat approval or at the time of connection(s) to the utility system, unless the town otherwise agrees. The applicant shall file a petition for offsets or credits with the town on a form provided for such purpose. The contents of the petition shall be established by council-approved administrative guidelines. The town must provide the applicant, in writing, with a decision on the offset or credit request, including the reasons for the decision within 90 days. 
(d)  The available utility impact fee offset or credit associated with the plat shall be applied against a utility impact fee in the following manner: 
(1)  For single-family residential lots in a new development consisting only of single-family residential lots which have received final plat approval, such offset or credit shall be applied at the time of issuance of the building permit or connection to the town's utility system by the first lot and thereafter for each subsequent lot within the final plat at the time of plat recordation in the order in which building permits or utility connections are issued for such lots until the offset or credit has been exhausted, unless stipulated otherwise in a binding facilities agreement or a binding impact fee credit agreement. 
(2)  For all other types of new development, including those involving mixed uses, which have received final plat approval, the offset or credit applicable to the plat shall be applied to the impact fee due at the time of issuance of the first building permit or connection to which the offset or credit is applicable, and thereafter to all subsequently issued building permits or connections, until the offset or credit has been exhausted, unless stipulated otherwise in a binding facilities agreement or a binding impact fee credit agreement. 
(3)  At its sole discretion, the town may authorize alternative credit or offset agreements upon petition by the owner in accordance with guidelines promulgated by the town council. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 2, 3-15-2011) 
Sec. 22-116. - Water service area. 
(a)  The town's current water service area, constituting of the town's corporate limits and its extraterritorial jurisdiction, is depicted in Figure 2.2 of the Roadway, Water, and Wastewater Impact Fee Update dated October 11, 2017 and prepared by Freese and Nichols, Inc., a copy of which is on file in the town secretary's office and is provided in Schedule 1, Figure 1. 
(b)  The boundaries of the water service area may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 2, 3-15-2011; Ord. No. 1431, § 2.E, 12-19-2017) 
Sec. 22-117. - Wastewater service area. 
(a)  The town's current wastewater service area, constituting of the town's corporate limits and its extraterritorial jurisdiction, is depicted in Figure 2.2 of the Roadway, Water, and Wastewater Impact Fee Update dated October 11, 2017 and prepared by Freese and Nichols, Inc., a copy of which is on file in the town secretary's office. 
(b)  The boundaries of the wastewater service area may be amended from time to time, and new wastewater service areas may be delineated. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 2, 3-15-2011; Ord. No. 1431, § 2.F, 12-19-2017) 
Sec. 22-118. - Roadway impact fees. 
    Sections 22-118 through 22-125 of this article shall govern the town's roadway impact fees, which fees shall apply to all new development within the corporate boundaries of the town. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 2, 3-15-2011) 
Sec. 22-119. - Roadway impact fees per service unit. 
(a)  The roadway impact fee per service unit for each roadway service area shall be set forth in: 
(1)  Schedule 2, Table A, if the date of final plat recording is on or after February 3, 1997, through and including July 18, 1999, and for which property no replatting is necessary; 
(2)  Schedule 2, Table B, if the date of final plat recording is on or after July 19, 1999, through and including January 16, 2000, and for which property no replatting is necessary; 
(3)  Schedule 2, Table C, if the date of final plat recording is on or after January 17, 2000, through and including August 29, 2001, and for which property no replatting is necessary; 
(4)  Schedule 2, Table D, if the date of final plat recording is on or after August 30, 2001, through and including June 30, 2008, and for which property no replatting is necessary; and 
(5)  Schedule 2, Table E, if the date of final plat recording is on or after July 1, 2008, through and including December 19, 2017, and for which property no replatting is necessary; and 
(6)  Schedule 2, Table F if the date of final plat recording is on or after December 20, 2017. 
Schedule 2, Tables A through F (sometimes hereinafter referred to collectively as "Schedule 2") are attached to Ordinance No. 1431 and kept on file with the town and hereby incorporated into and made a part of this article by reference. 
(b)  Roadway impact fees for Schedule 2, Tables A, B, C and D, shall be calculated by multiplying the number of service units in the new development by the impact fee per service area. The number of service units shall be determined by using the applicable Conversion Tables in Schedule 2. 
(c)  Roadway impact fees for Schedule 2, Table E and F, shall be calculated by multiplying the roadway impact fee per service unit for the particular roadway service area in which the new development is situated by the number of vehicle miles (per development unit) for each proposed development unit in each proposed land use category as set forth using Schedule 2, Table E and F. 
(d)  Impact fee Schedule 2, and/or its various Conversion Tables may be amended from time to time by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 2, 3-15-2011; Ord. No. 1431, § 2.G, 12-19-2017) 
Sec. 22-120. - Assessment of roadway impact fees. 
(a)  Assessment of the roadway impact fees per service unit for any new development shall be made as follows: 
(1)  For a new development for which a final plat was recorded on or after February 3, 1997, through and including July 18, 1999, and for which no replatting is necessary pursuant to the town's subdivision regulations prior to development, assessment of impact fees shall occur at the time of final plat recordation and shall be the amount of the impact fee per service unit equivalent as set forth in Schedule 2, Table A, attached to Ordinance No. 1041 and kept on file with the town, for the particular roadway service area in which the new development is situated multiplied by the number of service units in the new development. The number of service units shall be determined by using Conversion Table 1 to Schedule 2. 
(2)  For a new development for which a final plat was recorded on or after July 19, 1999, through and including January 16, 2000, and for which no replatting is necessary pursuant to the town's subdivision regulations prior to development, assessment of impact fees shall occur at the time of final plat recordation and shall be the amount of the impact fee per service unit equivalent as set forth in Schedule 2, Table B, attached to Ordinance No. 1041 and kept on file with the town, for the particular roadway service area in which the new development is situated multiplied by the number of service units in the new development. The number of service units shall be determined by using Conversion Table 1 to Schedule 2. 
(3)  For a new development for which a final plat was recorded on or after January 17, 2000, through and including August 29, 2001, and for which no replatting is necessary pursuant to the town's subdivision regulations prior to development, assessment of impact fees shall occur at the time of final plat recordation and shall be the amount of the impact fee per service unit equivalent as set forth in Schedule 2, Table C, attached to Ordinance No. 1041 and kept on file with the town, for the particular roadway service area in which the new development is situated multiplied by the number of service units in the new development. The number of service units shall be determined by using Conversion Table 1 and the applicable Conversion Table 2 to Schedule 2. 
(4)  For a new development for which a final plat was recorded on or after August 30, 2001, through and including June 30, 2008, and for which no replatting is necessary pursuant to the town's subdivision regulations prior to development, assessment of impact fees shall occur at the time of final plat recordation and shall be the amount of the impact fee per service unit equivalent as set forth in Schedule 2, Table D, for the particular roadway service area in which the new development is situated multiplied by the number of service units in the new development. The number of service units shall be determined by using the applicable Conversion Table 1 and Conversion Table 2 shown in Schedule 2. 
(5)  For a new development for which a final plat was recorded on or after July 1, 2008, through and including December 19, 2017, and for which no replatting is necessary pursuant to the town's subdivision regulations prior to development, assessment of impact fees occur at the time of final plat recordation and shall be calculated by multiplying the roadway impact fee per service unit for the particular roadway service area in which the new development is situated by the number of vehicle miles (per development unit) for each proposed development unit in each proposed land use category as set forth in Schedule 2, Table E. 
(6)  For a new development for which a final plat was recorded on or after December 20, 2017, assessment of impact fees occur at the time of final plat recordation and shall be calculated by multiplying the roadway impact fee per service unit for the particular roadway service area in which the new development is situated by the number of vehicle miles (per development unit) for each proposed development unit in each proposed land use category as set forth in Schedule 2, Table F. 
(7)  For land on which new development occurs or is proposed to occur without platting, assessment of impact fees shall occur at the time application is made for the building permit, and shall be the impact fees calculated by multiplying the roadway impact fee per service unit for the particular roadway service area in which the new development is situated by the number of vehicle miles (per development unit) for each proposed development unit in each proposed land use category as set forth in Schedule 2, Table F. 
(b)  Following assessment of the roadway impact fee pursuant to subsection (a), the amount of the impact fee assessed per service unit for that new development cannot be increased, unless the owner proposes to change the approved development by the submission of a new application for final plat approval, in which case a new assessment shall occur at the maximum assessable Schedule 2 rate then in effect. 
(c)  Following the vacating of any plat or submittal of any replat, a new assessment must be made in accordance with this section. 
(d)  Approval of an amending plat pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.016 is not subject to reassessment of an impact fee hereunder provided that the use of the property remains the same. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 2, 3-15-2011; Ord. No. 1431, § 2.H, 12-19-2017) 
Sec. 22-121. - Payment and collection of roadway impact fees. 
(a)  For all new developments, roadway impact fees shall be collected at the time of application for and in conjunction with the issuance of a building permit. The roadway impact fees to be paid and collected are listed in Schedule 2, attached to Ordinance No. 1041 and kept on file with the town, using the application conversion tables attached to Schedule 2. 
(b)  The town reserves the right to enter into an agreement with a developer for a different time and manner of payment of roadway impact fees in which case the agreement shall determine the time and manner of payment. 
(c)  The town shall compute the roadway impact fees to be paid and collected for the new development in the following manner: 
(1)  Determine the roadway impact fee using the applicable Schedule 2, attached to Ordinance No. 1041 and kept on file with the town and the applicable conversion table pursuant to sections 22-119 and 22-120. 
(2)  If an offset agreement providing for offsets and credits against roadway impact fees exists, the number of service units attributable to the new development shall be reduced by subtracting available service unit equivalents as provided in section 22-122. If adequate service unit equivalents for offsets and credits are available in an amount equal to or greater than the number of service units generated (required) by the new development, no fee is paid, but the pool of available service unit equivalents shall be reduced accordingly. 
(3)  The amount of roadway impact fees to be collected shall be determined by multiplying the number of service units for the new development by the impact fee per service unit for the applicable roadway service area using Schedule 2, attached to Ordinance No. 1041 and kept on file with the town and the applicable conversion table and shall be calculated at the time of application for and in conjunction with the issuance of a building permit. 
(d)  If the building permit for which a roadway impact fee has been paid has expired, and a new application is thereafter filed, the impact fees shall be computed using the LUVMET and Schedule 2 then in effect with credits for previous payment of fees being applied against any new fees due. 
(e)  Whenever the property owner proposes to increase the number of service units for a development, the additional roadway impact fees collected for such new service units shall be determined by using the LUVMET and Schedule 2 then in effect, and such additional fees shall be collected at the times prescribed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 2, 3-15-2011) 
Sec. 22-122. - Offsets and credits against roadway impact fees. 
(a)  The town shall offset the reasonable value of any roadway system facility which has been dedicated to and has been accepted by the town on or after September 19, 1994, or offset the amount of any monetary contributions to such facility, against the amount of the roadway impact fees due, in accordance with the rules set forth in this section. The value of an offset may be stated in dollars or service units. 
(b)  An offset associated with a capital improvement on the roadway improvement plan contributed to the town after the effective date of Ordinance No. 327 (September 19, 1994) is created at the time that the town accepts the system facility for dedication or as may be otherwise stipulated in a binding facilities agreement for the facility pursuant to the town's subdivision regulations. 
(c)  At the time the offset is created, if no offset agreement exists, the developer shall apply for an offset agreement, and the agreement thereafter shall be enforced in accordance with the following terms, providing: 
(1)  Identification of the plat with which the offset is to be associated; 
(2)  The amount of the capacity created by the system facility, expressed in service unit equivalents; 
(3)  A provision stating that the offset may be used to reduce impact fees imposed on new development contained within the land subject to the associated plat after the effective date of the agreement; and 
(4)  A provision that the amount of the offset shall be determined by estimating the number of service unit equivalents of capacity supplied by the system facility, reduced by: (1) the number of service units developed within the plat since the contribution of the system facility, using the LUVMET; by (2) the amount of the city's participation in the excess costs of the system facility (expressed in service unit equivalents); and by (3) the amount of any payments received from other new developments utilizing the system facility (expressed in service unit equivalents). 
The developer may assign the offset agreement with the town's consent, but in no event shall the offsets provided for in the agreement be transferred to any development not subject to the plat associated with such offsets. 
(d)  The developer may petition the town council for offsets for contribution of a capital improvement, including road right-of-way, which is not identified in the roadway improvements plan, if the improvement will supply capacity to new development other than to the development seeking the offset, at the time the facility is accepted by the town or a binding facilities agreement for the facility is executed pursuant to the town's subdivision regulations. In no event, however, may offsets attributable to such facility be used to reduce roadway impact fees until the roadway improvements plan has been amended to include the capital improvement for which the offset was granted. If the petition is granted, the terms shall be incorporated into an offset agreement. The agreement shall also provide that the amount of the offset shall not exceed the capacity of the capital improvement that is included in the roadway improvements plan. 
(e)  As provided in the offset agreement, the developer may apply for reimbursement of excess offsets following either completion of all development subject to the plat with which the offsets are associated or after ten years following execution of the offset agreement. The following rules apply to such reimbursement, and shall be incorporated into the offset agreement: 
(1)  The developer must apply for reimbursement within six months following either: (1) completion of all development subject to the plat with which the offsets are associated; or (2) ten years after the date of execution of the offset agreement. 
(2)  The following terms shall be incorporated into the reimbursement agreement and the agreement shall be enforced in accordance with such terms: 
a.  A provision stating that the amount to be reimbursed shall be equal to the number of unused offsets (expressed as a number of service units) multiplied by a fraction equal to the impact fee per service unit to be collected, as set forth in Schedule 2 in effect on the date of execution of the offset agreement; 
b.  A provision stating that the amount to be reimbursed may be further equitably reduced, if fewer than 50 percent of the number of service units in the plat with which the system facility giving rise to the offset have been developed on the date of application for reimbursement; 
c.  A provision stating that repayment shall be made within five years from the date of execution of the reimbursement agreement, from roadway impact fees collected within the same roadway service area in which the property in question is located, subject to the availability of such funds; 
d.  A provision that termination or reduction of the town's authority under state law to impose impact fees for roadway facilities shall terminate or correspondingly reduce any obligation of the town to make payments under the offset agreement; and 
e.  A provision stating that, in converting the offsets from service unit equivalents to a dollar value, the number of service unit equivalents shall be multiplied by the value of a service unit expressed in dollars using Schedule 2 in effect at the time the offset agreement was executed. 
(f)  Execution of a reimbursement agreement shall automatically terminate any offsets associated with a plat pursuant to an offset agreement. Thereafter, new development within the area subject to the plat shall pay roadway impact fees in accordance with Schedule 2 then in effect. 
(g)  All offsets against roadway impact fees shall be subject to the following limitations and shall be granted based on this article and additional standards promulgated by the town council, which may be adopted as town council-approved administrative guidelines: 
(1)  No offset shall be given for the dedication of land or easements for or the construction of site-related facilities. 
(2)  No offset shall exceed the documented and town-approved costs to the developer of the system facility which was dedicated to and accepted by the town, or the amount of the monetary contribution actually made. 
(3)  The costs or service unit equivalents used to calculate the offsets shall not exceed those assumed for the specific capital improvement included in the capital improvements plan for roadway impact fees or the actual cost of that improvement, whichever amount is less. 
(h)  Offsets shall be associated with the approved preliminary plat for the new development and shall apply to the development of all land subject to such plat. For new developments that are to be developed in phases, offsets may be created sequentially and may be applied to any undeveloped portions of the plat with which the offset is associated. The offset shall be expressed in service unit equivalents. The available offset associated with the plat shall be applied against an impact fee in the following manner: 
(1)  For single-family residential lots which have received final plat approval, the offset or credit shall be applied to reduce the impact fee equally for all such lots within the final plat at the time of final plat recordation. 
(2)  For all other types of new development, the offset shall be applied to reduce the impact fee at the time of issuance of the first building permit, and thereafter to all subsequently issued building permits for each new development within the associated plat, until the offset has been exhausted, unless stipulated otherwise in a binding facilities agreement or a binding impact fee credit agreement. 
(i)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section relating to offsets, the town in its sole discretion may choose to acquire all or a portion of any outstanding offsets associated with a new development by giving the property owner 60 days' written notice of such intent and by tendering the dollar value of such offsets using Schedule 2 in effect at the time the applicable offset agreement was executed. 
(j)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, for new development subject to a development agreement predating the effective date of Ordinance No. 327 (September 19, 1994), which agreement provides for dedication or construction of system facilities and for offsets against roadway impact fees in proportion thereto, offsets shall apply to the amount of impact fees to be collected for each service unit pursuant to Schedule 2 then in effect in accordance with the terms of such development agreement. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 2, 3-15-2011) 
Sec. 22-123. - Roadway service areas. 
(a)  There are hereby established two current roadway service areas, as depicted in Figure 2-1 of the "Roadway, Water, and Wastewater Impact Fee Update" dated October 11, [2017] and prepared by Freese and Nichols, Inc., a copy of which is on file in the town secretary's office and is provided in Schedule 2, Figure 2. 
(b)  The boundaries of the roadway service areas may be amended from time to time or new roadway service areas may be delineated. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 2, 3-15-2011; Ord. No. 1431, § 2.I, 12-19-2017) 
Sec. 22-124. - Roadway improvements plan. 
(a)  The "Roadway, Water, and Wastewater Impact Fee Update" dated October 11, [2017] and prepared by Freese and Nichols, Inc., is hereby adopted as the current roadway improvements plan for the Town of Little Elm. 
(b)  The roadway improvement plan may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 2, 3-15-2011; Ord. No. 1431, § 2.J, 12-19-2017) 
Sec. 22-125. - Roadway impact fees. 
(a)  The impact fees per service unit for roadway facilities set out in Schedule 2 attached to Ordinance No. 1431 and kept on file with the town and made a part hereof by reference is hereby adopted and incorporated into this article. 
(b)  The impact fees per development unit for roadway facilities, which are to be paid by each new development, set out in Schedule 2 attached to Ordinance No. 1431 and kept on file with the town and made a part hereof by reference is hereby adopted and incorporated into this article. 
(c)  The impact fees per service unit for roadway facilities may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 2, 3-15-2011; Ord. No. 1431, § 2.K, 12-19-2017) 
Secs. 22-126-22-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - COMMUNITY INTEGRITY PROGRAMS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1077, § 2, adopted Oct. 4, 2011, repealed the former art. V., §§ 22-141, 22-142, and enacted a new art. V as set out herein. The former art. V was entitled "Permitting and Registration of Rental Properties and Electrical Release of Foreclosed Properties" and derived from: Ord. No. 781, §§ 1-5, adopted July 11, 2006; and Ord. No. 1001, § 1, adopted Feb. 2, 2010. 

Sec. 22-141. - Rental registration. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Single-family rental dwelling. Any single-family dwelling or individual unit of a two-family dwelling which is rented, leased, or otherwise occupied by a person other than the owner. 
(2)  Multifamily rental building. A residential building containing three or more attached units available for rental. Under this definition an apartment complex can consist of multiple rental buildings. 
(b)  Rental permit required. All owners of a single-family rental dwelling or a multifamily rental building shall obtain a rental permit issued under the provisions of this section for each single-family rental dwelling or multifamily dwelling unit owned. Rental permits are valid for the calendar year in which they were issued. It shall be unlawful to submit a false or fraudulent application for a rental permit. A property owner who rents a dwelling unit knowing that a rental permit has not been issued for that dwelling or building or who knows that the permit issued has been revoked commits an offense each day the dwelling or building is occupied by a tenant and may permanently lose the rental permit. 
(c)  Registration required. An applicant for a rental permit shall file with the town a written registration form, on the form provided for that purpose, signed by the owner of the single-family rental dwelling or multifamily rental building to be permitted, by no later than February 15th of each year. An applicant who owns more than one single-family rental dwelling shall file a separate registration form for each. Owners of multifamily rental buildings can file based on complex, if desired. Registration must be completed in order to receive a permit and must be kept updated with current information. 
(d)  Registration form contents. The registration shall include: 
(1)  The name, mailing address, physical street address, telephone number, email address, and driver's license or other government-issued identification number of the owner and/or agent assigned to the property for which the registration is being submitted; 
(2)  If the owner is other than an individual, the legal name, all trade names, and the registered agent, managing partner, or other person authorized to accept service of process on behalf of the owner; and 
(3)  A signed agreement to comply with the stated maintenance and safety conditions of the rental dwelling unit. 
(e)  Agent for service. An applicant may designate on the registration an agent for service of process who shall be the authorized agent for purposes of notice and other communications provided in this section. If an owner designates an agent for service as provided in this subsection, service of any notice under this article on the designated agent shall constitute service upon the owner unless the director of development services receives actual notice from the owner that the designated agent is no longer authorized to accept service on behalf of the owner. 
(f)  Accessibility of permit; replacement. A rental permit issued pursuant to this section shall be maintained by the town, with a copy provided to the permittee. 
(g)  Permit nonassignable; surrender. A permit issued under this section is valid for the calendar year in which it was issued and is not assignable or transferable. A permit is valid only for the premises for which it is issued. It shall be unlawful for any person to counterfeit, forge, change, deface or alter a permit. A permit may be canceled upon written request of the owner(s) and surrender of the permit itself to the director of development services. The surrender of a permit shall be effective immediately upon its filing in the office of the director. 
(h)  Landlord responsibility. The landlord/owner is responsible for ensuring the dwelling unit on the permitted property is compliant with all standards within this article. Any repair required to meet these conditions will be the responsibility of the landlord and not passed on to the tenant. The landlord must acknowledge this responsibility on the annual registration form for the property. 
(i)  Permit term and fee. 
(1)  Each rental permit issued under this section shall be valid for the calendar year in which it was issued, unless suspended or revoked. 
(2)  Annual rental permits shall be per the development services fee schedule, as amended. Uncollected fees shall apply retroactively, unless otherwise authorized by the director. 
(3)  Inspections, when required, shall be per the development services fee schedule, as amended. 
(4)  A monthly late fee of $10.00 shall be accessed for each month, or partial month, a dwelling unit fails to register with a maximum of $50.00 in late fees assessed per year. 
(5)  Permit fees for owner-occupied dwelling units converted to rental dwelling units during a calendar year may be pro-rated on a monthly basis for the year in which the conversion occurred, provided a rental permit application is submitted to the development services department within ten days of tenant occupancy. 
(6)  The fees stated herein may be increased in the future, as shown on the comprehensive fee schedule maintained by the development services department. 
(j)  Temporary tenancies. It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution that the single-family residential dwelling was rented or leased for a period of less than 60 days to a person who was the immediate past owner of the dwelling or who shall be the immediate next owner of the dwelling. 
(k)  Suspension of permit. A rental permit shall be temporarily suspended by the town: 
(1)  If a life safety violation exists on the premises of the permitted rental dwelling unit; or 
(2)  If, after notice and a period of correction as provided herein, a violation remains on the premises of the permitted single-family rental unit; or 
(3)  If, the owner of the property has not paid all amounts then-due and outstanding to the town (other than amounts for ad valorem taxes) directly related to such property, including, without limitation, the payment of any amounts secured by liens filed against the property by the town and fines owed by the owner. 
(l)  Reinstatement of suspended permit. A person whose rental permit has been suspended may, at any time, make written application for a reinspection for the purpose of reinstating the permit. Within ten days following receipt of a request, which shall include a statement signed by the applicant that in the applicant's opinion, all of the violations that caused suspension of the permit have been corrected, the town shall make a reinspection. Upon reinspection, if all life safety, critical and noncritical violations have been corrected, the permit shall be reinstated. 
(m)  Revocation of permit. For serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this article, or for interference with the town or any of its agents in the performance of their duties, the single-family rental permit may be permanently revoked after the town has provided an opportunity for a hearing. Prior to such action, the town shall notify the holder of the permit in writing, stating the reasons for which the permit is subject to revocation and advising that the permit shall be permanently revoked at the end of ten days from the service of such notice unless a request for a hearing is filed with the town, by the permit holder, within such ten-day period. A permit shall be suspended for cause pending its revocation or a hearing relative thereto. 
(n)  Hearings. The hearings provided for shall be conducted at a time and place designated by the board of adjustment. Based on the record of such hearing, the board shall make a finding and shall sustain, modify, or rescind any official notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the permit holder by the town. 
(o)  Fire code applies. This article does not include, nor exempt commercial, residential properties from any inspection required or allowed by the most current adopted fire code. 
(p)  Municipal immunity. The town is not liable for the condition of an inspected/uninspected rental dwelling unit. Successful rental permit registration and/or safety inspection in no manner makes the town responsible for anything that may occur on private property. 
(q)  Penalty. Failure to register, failure to pay all fees assessed by the town pursuant to this article, or the suspension or revocation of a permit, may result in suspension of water service and/or judicial action resulting in liens filed against the property. 
(Ord. No. 1077, § 2, 10-4-2011; Ord. No. 1091, § 3, 12-13-2011) 
Sec. 22-142. - Safety inspection. 
(a)  Safety inspection. An exterior and interior safety inspection shall be conducted by the town on all single-family and two-family rental dwelling units (including foreclosure homes) within 30 days of occupancy of a new tenant or upon request of a new water utility account. Inspections shall also be made based upon code violation complaints or at the town's discretion on any rental property. Inspections shall include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  The International Property Maintenance Code, as amended; 
(2)  Town nuisance codes, as amended; 
(3)  Driveways and other hardscape; 
(4)  Interior safety (plumbing, electrical, heat/bir, means of egress, etc.); 
(5)  Trees and landscaping; 
(6)  Other conditions as determined by the town. 
(b)  Code violations. Any code violations which are the responsibility of the landlord to correct, must be corrected within ten days of notice by the town or have work plan approved by the development services department. Property owner must obtain all applicable permits, if any are required, prior to starting any work. Failure to do so will result in citations and possible loss of rental permit. 
(c)  Entry. The agent(s) of the town administering this program is authorized and directed to make inspections to determine conditions of dwellings and premises located within the town. This article shall not be construed to require an occupant, operator, or owner to consent to a warrantless inspection of a dwelling or premises, except as provided by law. 
(d)  Foreclosure home. Prior to an electrical connection being made, the owner or agent of a foreclosed property must request a safety inspection (electrical release) from building safety division. A single-family or two-family dwelling unit that has been vacated by the owner/occupant, and has been foreclosed upon by the lender, is considered a foreclosure home. 
(Ord. No. 1077, § 2, 10-4-2011; Ord. No. 1091, § 3, 12-13-2011) 
Sec. 22-143. - Commercial site integrity. 
(a)  Inspection required. Each year, the town shall inspect its commercial, institutional, HOA common areas, multifamily developments, and other nonresidential sites to ensure continued compliance with development regulations and safety regulations and to ensure completion of deferred maintenance. Commercial sites are typically determined by the lotting pattern on the approved plat. All inspections required by this section are exclusive to any inspections required by the currently adopted fire code or any complaints made as to perceived existence of any fire code violations. 
(b)  Fee. The charge for this service is $25.00 to be paid by the property owner or its agent. Institutional uses [churches, schools, government facilities, etc., as defined within chapter 106 (zoning)] are exempt from the fee, but not the mandatory annual inspection. This fee may change in the future per the development services fee chart, as amended. 
(c)  Code violations. Any code violations are the responsibility of the landlord to correct and should be corrected within ten days of notice by the town or have a work plan approved by the development services department. Property owner must obtain all applicable permits, if any are required, prior to starting any work. Failure to do so will result in citations and possible loss of certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 1077, § 2, 10-4-2011; Ord. No. 1091, § 3, 12-13-2011) 
Secs. 22-144-22-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RIGHT-OF-WAY ACQUISITION BY GOVERNMENTAL AGENCY 

Sec. 22-166. - Definitions. 
(a)  Governmental agency. United States of America, State of Texas, County of Denton, Town of Little Elm, or any other governmental agency having jurisdiction in the Town of Little Elm with the ability to exercise eminent domain powers. 
(b)  Right-of-way acquisition. The securing of right-of-way through negotiation, purchase, bargain, trade, donation, condemnation or other means, but not including the dedication of right-of-way through platting or zoning processes. 
(c)  Curative measures. Those actions, corrections, repairs and/or improvements identified in an appraisal or similar valuation analysis prepared in the context of considering damages to the remainder. 
(d)  Damages to the remainder. The diminution or reduction of value of the remainder property suffered as result of the acquisition of a portion of a property for a public purpose. 
(Ord. No. 918, § 2, 10-8-2008) 
Sec. 22-167. - Regulations and exemptions. 
    In the event a right-of-way acquisition by a governmental agency causes a property or its improvements to be in violation of town zoning ordinances, subdivision rules, or other town ordinances said property shall be exempt from said provisions to the extent said violation is caused by the right-of-way acquisition, subject to the following: 
(1)  Property which undergoes a zoning change initiated by the property owner subsequent to a right-of-way acquisition shall no longer be subject to this exemption and shall instead have a nonconforming status to the extent that any nonconformance with town ordinances resulted from a right-of-way acquisition by a governmental agency prior to the rezoning and shall therefore be treated as a nonconforming use/structure pursuant to the provisions of the town's zoning ordinance rather than exempt as provided above. However, a zoning change initiated by the town shall not cause a property to lose the exemption provided by this section for properties affected by right-of-way acquisitions. 
(2)  Nothing provided in this provision shall be construed to permit any site element to create a traffic safety hazard or another life safety hazard. 
(3)  Compensation provided; exemption inapplicable. 
a.  If a governmental agency offers compensation to a property owner for the demolition of improvements or for other curative measures which renders the property or its improvements to be in violation of town zoning ordinances, then the property shall not be eligible for exemptions under this section. 
b.  The planning director is authorized to provide notice to any affected property owner, lien holder, and/or certificate of occupancy holder, listing the items of noncompliance for which no exemption is being provided under this section. 
c.  The planning director is authorized to file an affidavit in the Denton County Deed Records noting such noncompliance, that the property has been compensated for said noncompliance, and that a certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until such noncompliance is cured. 
d.  Once the property and its improvements are brought into full compliance with all applicable ordinances to the Town of Little Elm, the planning director will be authorized to file an affidavit in the Denton County Deed Records noting such compliance. 
(4)  The building official is authorized to revoke a certificate of occupancy of any building or structure for which compensation has been offered to be paid for the building or structure to be demolished as part of a right-of-way acquisition by a governmental agency and the property has been physically impacted by the roadway project construction. 
(5)  The board of adjustments is authorized to issue an order of demolition a minimum of 90 days after the certificate of occupancy has been revoked for any building or structure for which compensation has been offered to be paid for the building or structure to be demolished as part of a right-of-way acquisition by a governmental agency. 
(6)  A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for any building or structure for which compensation has been paid for the building or structure to be demolished or for other curative measures until such time that the property and its improvements either come into full compliance with all applicable ordinances of the Town of Little Elm or the curative measures, for which the compensation was paid, have been completed. 
(7)  Waiver or variance. 
a.  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, any property owner that receives compensation from a governmental agency in an eminent domain action for the demolition of improvements, or for other curative measures which render the property or its improvements to be in violation of town zoning and development ordinances, may request a waiver or variance from the applicable town ordinances if the property owner contends that the amount of compensation received is inadequate to pay for all of the real or personal property improvements, modifications, alterations and other requirements imposed by the town as a result of the loss of property occasioned by the eminent domain action. 
b.  Such request must be made to the town council in a manner and format approved by the town's director of planning. The town council may grant a waiver or variance from any town standard or requirement that is not considered a life-safety standard or requirement if the town council finds that the imposition of a particular town standard or requirement upon a property owner will result in an undue hardship to a property owner that has not received compensation adequate to pay for all of the real or personal property improvements, modifications, alterations and other requirements imposed by the town as a result of the loss of property occasioned by the eminent domain action. 
c.  In addition to undue hardship, the town council may grant a waiver or variance from any town standard or requirement that is not considered a life-safety standard or requirement if the town council finds that the imposition and enforcement of a particular standard or requirement: (i) is not in the best interest of the public; (ii) constitutes waste or inefficient use of land or other resources; (iii) is not effective or necessary; or (iv) is not in the best interest of the town for any other reason that the town council, after consideration of the equities of the situation and the health, safety, and welfare of the public, determines to be in the best interest of the town. 
(Ord. No. 954, § 2, 5-19-2008; Ord. No. 918, § 2, 10-8-2008) 
Secs. 22-168-22-190. - Reserved. 
Chapter 26 - BUSINESSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Federal law reference -Basic cable television service rates may be regulated by a local government according to federal regulations, 47 USC 543. 
State Law reference- Home rule municipality may license any lawful business subject to police power, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.075; municipal governing body may impose and collect occupation taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 302.101; local occupational tax prohibited unless specifically permitted by state law, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 101.008; state regulation of massage therapists does not preempt local zoning and limited regulation of massage establishments, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 455.005; automobile wrecking and salvage yards, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 396.001 et seq.; municipality may regulate theaters, bowling alleys, other public amusement places, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.074. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1-26-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALARM SYSTEMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Burglar alarm systems, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.191 et seq.; duration of municipal permit, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 213.193; maximum $50.00 fee for annual municipal permit, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 213.194; local governments cannot enact ordinances inconsistent with state law regarding fire alarm systems, V.A.T.S. Insurance Code, Art. 5.43-2, Sec. 3(a); license holders for emergency alarm systems installation and operation, exempt from certain local regulations, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1702.134; municipality may charge reasonable inspection fees for device causing five false alarms in 12-month period, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1702.134(2)(c). 

Sec. 26-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm notification means a notification intended to summon emergency service personnel of the city, which is designed either to be initiated purposely by a person or by an alarm system that responds to a stimulus characteristic of fire or unauthorized intrusion. 
    Alarm site means a single premises or location (one street address) served by an alarm system that is under the control of one owner or tenant. 
    Alarm system means a device or system that emits, transmits or relays a signal intended to summon an emergency service of the city, including, but not limited to, local alarms. An alarm system does not include: 
(1)  An alarm installed on a motor vehicle unless installed at a permanent site. 
(2)  An alarm system designed to alert only the inhabitants within a premises. 
(3)  An alarm system that has been disabled and does not have the ability to send an alarm notification to emergency service personnel. 
    Director means the chief of police or fire department of the city or the director's authorized representative. 
    False alarm notification means an alarm notification to an emergency service department where an agency of the city responds within 30 minutes of the alarm notification and determines from an inspection of the interior or exterior of the premises that there was no evidence of actual or attempted intrusion, fire or threat to life, as the case may be. 
    Local alarm means an alarm system which emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible or visible from the exterior of a structure and has as its purpose the summoning of aid from a city department. 
    Permit means a certificate, license, permit or other form of permission that authorizes a person to engage in an action. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, organization, or similar entity. 
    Town means the Town of Little Elm. 
(Ord. No. 605, § 1, 9-2-2003; Ord. No. 730, § 1, 10-4-2005) 
Sec. 26-20. - Permit required; application; issuance. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated an alarm system without first obtaining a valid permit issued by the director for such system. This requirement is applicable to the person responsible for the management and control of the property which the alarm system is designed to protect. 
(b)  An alarm system user or his agent shall obtain a permit for each alarm site within 30 days after the effective date. 
(c)  Application for a permit under the provisions of this article constitutes a grant of approval for members of the police department to conduct a search for intruders or the fire department to conduct a search for injured or ill persons on the interior of any building on the alarm site found to be unsecured when responding to the alarm site as a result of an alarm notification. 
(d)  Upon receipt of a completed application form, the director shall issue a permit to the applicant unless the applicant has failed to pay a fee assessed under section 26-29 or has had a permit for the alarm site revoked, and the violation causing revocation has not been corrected. 
(e)  Each permit application must contain the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number of the person who will be the permit holder and be responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees assessed under this article; 
(2)  The street address of the property on which the alarm system is to be installed and operated; 
(3)  Classification of the alarm site as either residential or commercial; 
(4)  Any business name or title used for the premises on which the alarm system is to be installed and operated; 
(5)  The name of one other person who will respond to an alarm in the event the permit holder is unavailable; 
(6)  Name, address and phone number of the entity that monitors the alarm system; and 
(7)  Any other information required by the director which is necessary for the enforcement of this article. 
(f)  Any false statement of a material matter made by the applicant for the purpose of obtaining an alarm permit shall be sufficient cause for refusal to issue a permit and/or for revocation of a permit already issued. 
(g)  A permit shall not be transferred to another person. A permit holder shall inform the director of any change that alters any information listed on the permit application within five days of the occurrence of the change. A fee shall not be assessed for such changes. 
(h)  The fee for a permit issued pursuant to this article shall be $25.00 per year for residences and businesses. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event a permit holder experiences excessive false alarms as set forth in section 22-29, a renewal fee of $50.00 shall be assessed on all future renewals following such 12-month period. 
(Ord. No. 605, § 2, 9-2-2003; Ord. No. 730, § 2, 10-4-2005) 
Sec. 26-21. - Permit duration and renewal. 
    A permit is valid from the date of issuance for one year, upon receipt of the annual fee. A permit will be automatically renewed for a period of one year upon receipt of the annual fee unless revoked by the chief or cancelled by the permit holder. 
(Ord. No. 605, § 3, 9-2-2003; Ord. No. 730, § 3, 10-4-2005) 
Sec. 26-22. - Proper alarm system operation and maintenance. 
(a)  A permit holder or alarm system user shall: 
(1)  Maintain the premises containing an alarm system in a manner that ensures proper operation of the alarm system. 
(2)  Maintain the alarm system in a manner that will minimize false alarm notifications. 
(3)  Respond or cause a representative to respond within a reasonable period of time when notified by the city to repair or inactivate a malfunctioning alarm system and to provide access to the premises or to provide security for the premises. A permit holder may present extenuating circumstances regarding the reasonableness of his response time at any administrative hearing under this article. 
(4)  Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report. 
(b)  A permit holder or person in control of an alarm system shall adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to be adjusted so that an alarm signal will sound for no longer than 15 minutes after being activated. 
(c)  A permit holder or person in control of an alarm system shall maintain at each alarm site a complete set of written operating instructions for each alarm system. Special codes, combinations, or passwords shall not be included in these instructions. 
(d)  A permit holder or person in control of an alarm system which has an automatic resetting device and which system causes three or more alarms within a 24-hour period, shall manually reset the system. 
(Ord. No. 605, § 4, 9-2-2003; Ord. No. 730, § 4, 10-4-2005) 
Sec. 26-23. - Authority of the director to disable alarm systems. 
    The director may take all necessary measures to disable any malfunctioning alarm system within the city. The director shall not be liable for any damages to property if such alarm is disabled. 
(Ord. No. 605, § 5, 9-2-2003; Ord. No. 730, § 5, 10-4-2005) 
Sec. 26-24. - Reporting of alarm signals by permit holder. 
    A permit holder or person in control of an alarm system shall not allow alarm signals to be reported through a relaying intermediary that does not comply with the requirements of this article and any rules and regulations promulgated by the chief, or is not licensed by the state board of private investigators and private security agencies. 
(Ord. No. 605, § 6, 9-2-2003; Ord. No. 730, § 6, 10-4-2005) 
Sec. 26-25. - Alarm reporting. 
    A person who is engaged in the business of relaying alarm notifications to the city shall: 
(1)  Make notification by a human operator. The reporting of alarms by means of a recorded message is prohibited. 
(2)  Communicate alarm notifications to the city in a manner and form designated by the director. 
(Ord. No. 605, § 7, 9-2-2003; Ord. No. 730, § 7, 10-4-2005) 
Sec. 26-26. - Automatic dialing prohibited. 
    No person shall operate or cause to be operated any automatic dialing device which, when activated, uses a telephone device or attachment to automatically select a telephone line leading into an emergency services department and then transmit any prerecorded message or signal. 
(Ord. No. 605, § 8, 9-2-2003; Ord. No. 730, § 8, 10-4-2005) 
Sec. 26-27. - Alarm dispatch records. 
    Emergency personnel responding to a dispatch resulting from an alarm system notification shall record such information as necessary to permit the director to maintain appropriate records. 
(Ord. No. 605, § 9, 9-2-2003; Ord. No. 730, § 9, 10-4-2005) 
Sec. 26-28. - Excessive false alarms. 
(a)  The holder of a permit shall pay a fine of: 
(1)  Fifty dollars if the location has had more than three but fewer than six other false alarm notifications in the preceding 12-month period; 
(2)  Seventy five dollars if the location has had more than five but fewer than eight other false alarm notifications in the preceding 12-month period; or 
(3)  One hundred dollars if the location has had eight or more other false alarm notifications in the preceding 12-month period. 
(b)  A permit holder shall pay assessed fees for any false alarm notification within ten days after notification by certified mail that such fees have been assessed. Failure to pay fees may result in a citation being issued for each false alarm thereafter or revocation of the alarm permit. A certified letter will be sent to homeowner for every false alarm with fees assessed until the annual renewal. 
(Ord. No. 605, § 11, 9-2-2003; Ord. No. 730, § 10, 10-4-2005) 
Sec. 26-29. - Revocation of permit; appeal; forfeiture of fees; reapplication. 
(a)  Revocation. The director may revoke a permit if determined that: 
(1)  There is any violation of this article; 
(2)  There is a false statement of a material matter in the application for a permit; 
(3)  An alarm system has generated in excess of eight false alarms during any 12-month period; or 
(4)  The permit holder has failed to make payment of any fee assessed under section 26-28 within 30 days of the assessment. 
(b)  Appeal of denial or revocation of a permit: 
(1)  If the director refuses to issue or renew a permit, or revokes a permit, he shall send to the applicant or permit holder by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his action and a statement of the right to an appeal. The applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision of the director to the city manager by filing with the city manager a written request for a hearing setting forth the reason for the appeal, within ten days after receipt of the notice of the director. The filing of a request for an appeal hearing with the city manager stays the action of the director to the denial of a permit or the revocation of a permit until the city manager makes a final decision. If a request for an appeal hearing is not made within the ten-day period, the action of the director is final. 
(2)  The city manager shall serve as hearing officer at an appeal, and consider evidence by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply at an appeal hearing, but the hearing officer shall make his decision on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented. A decision shall be made within 30 days after the request for an appeal hearing is filed. The hearing officer shall affirm, reverse, or modify the action of the director. The decision of the hearing officer is final as to administrative remedies within the city. 
(3)  In addition to prohibiting or requiring certain conduct of individuals, it is the intent of this article to hold a corporation, partnership, or other associations responsible for acts or omissions performed by an agent acting in behalf of the corporation, partnership, or other association, within the scope of this employment. 
(c)  Forfeiture of application fee upon revocation of permit. When the revocation of a permit is final, all permit fees shall be forfeited. 
(d)  Reapplication for permit after revocation. 
(1)  Should an alarm system user or the user's agent, after final permit revocation, desire to reapply for a permit, the user shall be required to submit a new permit application, including required permit fees. 
(2)  The applicant shall also submit satisfactory proof of ability to comply with this article. 
(Ord. No. 605, § 12, 9-2-2003; Ord. No. 730, § 11, 10-4-2005) 
Sec. 26-30. - Confidentiality of information. 
    All information provided by a permit holder pursuant to this article shall be confidential pursuant to the V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 552 and V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1702.284, to the extent allowed by law, and shall be utilized solely for law enforcement purposes. However, the information shall be available to the permit holder. 
(Ord. No. 605, § 13, 9-2-2003; Ord. No. 730, § 12, 10-4-2005) 
Sec. 26-31. - Penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate an alarm system during the period in which an alarm permit is revoked. Each day, or part thereof, of such operation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an alarm system without a permit or in violation of any provision of this article. Each day, or part thereof, of such operation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Any person in violation of any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 605, § 14, 9-2-2003; Ord. No. 730, § 13, 10-4-2005) 
Sec. 26-32. - Implementation. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced and shall apply to all alarm systems in the town from and after October 4, 2005. 
(b)  Any person who has an alarm system on his property on the effective date of this article shall have 60 days from said date to comply with the terms and provisions herein. 
(Ord. No. 605, § 15, 9-2-2003; Ord. No. 730, § 14, 10-4-2005) 
Secs. 26-33-26-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GARAGE SALES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Former §§ 26-53-26-58 have been deleted as having been superceded by Ord. No. 780, adopted July 11, 2006. The former §§ 26-53-26-58 was derived from Ord. No. 127, adopted Nov. 1, 1979, and pertained to similar subject matter. Ord. No. 780 has been included as new §§ 26-53-26-59 at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 26-53. - Definitions. 
    The following terms used in this article shall be defined as follows: 
    Garage sale means an occasional sale, exchange, or barter to the general public, within a residential-family zoning district, for the purpose of disposing of surplus personal property. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sales entitled "garage," "lawn," "yard," "room," "estate," "backyard," "patio," and "rummage." 
    Right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway, or utility easement in which the town has an interest. The term does not include the airwaves above a right-of-way with regards to wireless communications. 
    Signs means and includes only those signs issued by the town for purposes of advertising a garage sale. 
    Property owners associations means a designated representative of the owners of property in a subdivision, condominium complex, or other property and may be referred to as a "homeowners association," "neighborhood association", "community association," "civic association," "civic club," "association," "committee," or similar term. The membership of the association consists of the owners/tenants of property within the subdivision, condominium complex, or other property. 
(Ord. No. 780, § 1, 7-11-2006) 
Sec. 26-54. - Permit required. 
    No person, firm, nonprofit, or corporation shall advertise, operate, or participate in a garage sale within the limits of the Town of Little Elm without first obtaining a garage sale permit. The fee for a garage sale permit shall be $10.00. 
(Ord. No. 780, § 2, 7-11-2006) 
Sec. 26-55. - Conditions of permit. 
    The following regulations apply in connection with the conduct and operation of a garage sale: 
(a)  Prior to holding or conducting a garage sale, a garage sale permit must be obtained in person at town hall, planning and development office, located at 100 West Eldorado Parkway Little Elm, Texas 75068. Only individuals who are residents of the Town of Little Elm may apply for a garage sale permit. 
(b)  A garage sale permit, if issued, will be issued by the Planning Director of the Town of Little Elm or the planning director's designee(s). 
(c)  A garage sale permit must be obtained by an adult occupant of the property where the garage sale is to be conducted or their designated adult representative (herein referred to as the "occupant"). Proof of the ownership or occupancy of such property may be verified by the town through the Denton County Appraisal District, by a copy of a deed, by a copy of a rental/lease agreement, or by water account information. 
(d)  A garage sale permit shall be issued by property address, not applicant name. 
(e)  A garage sale permit may only be issued for properties that are zoned for residential use. 
(f)  A garage sale permit may be issued no more than three times per calendar year for the same premises (the "maximum number of garage sales"), excluding community garage sales. At least 30 days must elapse between garage sales occurring on the same property. 
(g)  A garage sale permit shall be valid for up to three consecutive calendar days. On each such day, a garage sale may commence not earlier than 30 minutes following sunrise and shall end not later than 30 minutes prior to sunset. 
(h)  A current garage sale permit issued for the property must be posted on the property where the sale is conducted at all times while the garage sale is being conducted, and must be displayed in a conspicuous location. 
(i)  No more than three families may combine their property for sale at a single garage sale. 
(j)  A property owners association shall be permitted to have a community garage sale and in connection therewith shall abide by and be subject to the provisions set forth in section 26-54 and this section of this article. For purpose of determining the number of garage sales conducted annually on a property, the holding of a community garage sale shall not be considered a garage sale conducted on an individual residential property which is subject to the jurisdiction of the association. Except as otherwise provided for in this article, all community garage sales shall be subject to the same terms and conditions applicable to a garage sale for an individual residential property including, without limitation, that no more than three community garage sales may occur each calendar year. 
(k)  Garage sale items may be displayed for sale only in the following areas: residential yard including the front or back yard, garage, patio area, under a carport covering, driveway, or inside a residence. 
(l)  Garage sale items must be placed at least seven feet from the back of the curb and at least five feet from each side property line. Garage sale items shall not be located within the public right-of-way. 
(m)  Garage sale items including, but not limited to: items for sale, displays, tables, racks, tarps, and boxes must be removed by the occupant from the sale area by 8:00 a.m. the day following the last day of the sale. Items are strictly prohibited from remaining in the sale area or in the yard of the property. 
(Ord. No. 780, § 3, 7-11-2006) 
Sec. 26-56. - Signs. 
    The following regulations pertain to signs in connection with a garage sale: 
(a)  The town will issue five signs for a "garage sale," which may be used in connection with the garage sale for which the signs are issued. All other signs related to a garage sale are strictly prohibited. 
(b)  A garage sale sign may not be placed or located in any public right-of-way or on a utility pole. 
(c)  Prior to the placement of a garage sale signs on private property which is not the property for which a garage sale permit has been issued (an "off-site sign"), the applicant for a garage sale permit must obtain permission to place the off-site sign on such private property from the private property owner. Such permission must be indicated by the private property owner's signature on the back of the garage sale sign. 
(d)  All garage sale signs must be posted using a wood or metal stake. All other posting methods are strictly prohibited. 
(e)  A garage sale sign may be posted no sooner than 12 hours prior to the first day of the garage sale. 
(f)  All garage sale signs must be removed by the occupant by 8:00 a.m. on the day following the last day of the garage sale. 
(Ord. No. 780, § 4, 7-11-2006) 
Sec. 26-57. - Cancellations/inclement weather. 
    The following regulations pertain to the cancellation of a garage sale: 
(a)  Subject to subsection (b) of this section, if inclement weather occurs on any part of three days of a scheduled garage sale, resulting in cancellation of the garage sale in its entirety each such day, the garage sale shall not count toward the maximum number of garage sales permitted within one calendar year. 
(b)  If the conditions of subsection (a) of this section apply, the occupant must contact the planning and development office, located at 100 West Eldorado Parkway, 214-975-0472 on the next business day following cancellation due to inclement weather to reschedule the date of the garage sale. If the occupant fails to do so, the garage sale shall be counted toward the maximum number of garage sales allowed per calendar year. 
(c)  Garage sales will only be rescheduled due to inclement weather. (No exceptions.) 
(d)  Permit fees will not be refunded under any circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 780, § 5, 7-11-2006) 
Sec. 26-58. - Charitable, religious, educational, fraternal, governmental or nonprofit organizations. 
    The following regulations shall apply to charitable, religious, educational, fraternal, governmental, or nonprofit organizations (together, "nonprofit organizations"): 
(a)  Nonprofit organizations may only conduct a garage sale on the nonprofit organization's property or other properties with written permission regardless of zoning. 
(b)  If a nonprofit organization desires to conduct a garage sale on property not its own the nonprofit organization must present to the town a letter from the owner of the property authorizing the nonprofit organization to conduct a sale on the property. The letter must include the name of the nonprofit organization sponsoring the garage sale and the dates the garage sale is to take place and must be signed by the property owner. 
(c)  The fee for the garage sale permit will be applied as in section 22-54. 
(d)  A garage sale permit sponsored by a nonprofit organization will be counted as a sale against the maximum number of garage sales allowed annually for each property. 
(e)  The number of families participating in a garage sale sponsored by a nonprofit organization is not restricted. 
(Ord. No. 780, § 6, 7-11-2006) 
Sec. 26-59. - Penalty. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this article, and, except as otherwise provided for herein, any person violating or failing to comply with any provision hereof shall be fined, upon conviction, in an amount not more than $500.00, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 780, § 7, 7-11-2006) 
Secs. 26-60-26-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FOOD AND FOOD PERMITS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 776, adopted Aug. 15, 2006, repealed former §§ 26-90-26-218 and enacted similar new provisions which have been designated as §§ 26-90-26-142 at the editor's discretion. The provisions of former §§ 26-90-26-218 derived from Ord. No. 221, adopted July 21, 1986. 
State Law reference- Municipal regulatory authority concerning food service employees not preempted by state regulation, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 438.037; municipality which is member of public health district not prohibited from regulating or administering permit system concerning food service establishments, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 437.004(d). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-90. - Adoption of Texas food establishments rules. 
    The town adopts in this article the rules entitled "Texas Food Establishments," 25 Texas Administrative Code, Sections 229.161-229.171, and 229.173-229.175, as amended (the "rules"). A certified copy of the rules shall be filed and maintained in the office of the town secretary, and the rules are hereby adopted and incorporated herein as if the same were copied in their entirety in this article and all the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the town. 
(Ord. No. 776, § 2, 8-15-2006) 
Sec. 26-91. - Definitions. 
    The following words and terms, when used in this article, shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Beverage: A liquid for drinking, including water. 
    Child care center: Any facility licensed by the regulatory authority to receive 13 or more children for child care and that prepares food for on-site consumption. 
    Commissary: A catering establishment, restaurant or any other place in which food, food containers, or food supplies are kept, handled, prepared, packaged or stored. Commissary shall not mean a residential kitchen, but constitutes a commercial food service operation that is operated and maintained pursuant to state rules and regulations. 
    Comminuted: Reduced in size by methods including chopping, flaking, grinding or mincing. The term includes fish or meat products that are reduced in size and restructured or reformulated such as gefilte fish, gyros, ground beef and sausage; and a mixture of two or more types of meat that have been reduced in size and combined, such as sausages made from two or more meats. 
    Consumer: A person who is a member of the public, takes possession of food, is not functioning in the capacity of an operator of a food establishment or food processing plant, and does not offer the food for resale. 
    Critical violations: Critical items as defined on the food service establishment inspection report, distributed by the Texas Department of State Health Services, with a demerit weight of four or five and requiring immediate attention. 
    Director of planning and development or director: The director of planning and development of the town or the director's designated official. 
    Drinking water: Water that meets the standards of 30 Texas Administrative Code, Sections 290.101-290.121 (relating to Drinking Water Standards Governing Drinking Water Quality and Reporting Requirements for Public Water Systems). The term is traditionally known as "potable water" and includes the term "water" except where the term connotes that the water is not potable, such as "boiler", "mop water," "rain," or "waste" water, and "nondrinking" water. 
    Extensive remodeling: The remodeling of a 20 percent or greater area of a food establishment, which necessitates obtaining a permit prior to performing any remodeling. 
    Follow-up inspection: Any inspection, other than a routine inspection or full follow-up re-inspection, of a permitted food establishment, after notice has been given to the establishment to correct a violation, conducted to document that the violation has been corrected. 
    Food: Raw, cooked or processed edible substance, ice, beverage or ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human consumption. 
    Food-borne illness: Diseases, usually either infectious or toxic in nature, caused by agents that enter the body through the ingestion of food. 
    Food-contact surface: A surface of equipment or utensil with which food normally comes into contact; or a surface of equipment or utensil from which food may drain, drip, or splash into a food, or onto a surface normally in contact with food. 
    Food establishment or establishment: A restaurant, cafe, dining room, grocery store, meat market, soft drink stand, hamburger stand, ice cream wagon, commissary, day care center or any place where food or drink for human consumption is offered for sale, given in exchange or given away, including temporary food establishments and mobile units. The term includes an element of the operation such as a transportation vehicle or a central preparation facility that supplies a vending location or satellite feeding location unless the vending or feeding location is permitted by the regulatory authority; a restaurant; a grocery store; an operation that is conducted in a mobile, roadside, stationary, temporary, or permanent facility where consumption is on or off the premises; and regardless of whether there is a charge for the food. 
    The term does not include the following operations and establishments, provided that the operations do not expose the public to a substantial and imminent health hazard as determined by the town health officer: 
(1)  An establishment that offers only prepackaged foods that are not potentially hazardous; a produce stand that only offers whole, uncut fresh fruits and vegetables; a food processing plant; a kitchen in a private home if only food that is not potentially hazardous is prepared for sale or service at a function, such as a religious or charitable organization's bake sale; a bed and breakfast limited facility as defined in these rules; or a private home. 
(2)  An organization that serves only its own membership and immediate guests or other structured groups of persons who gather occasionally for fellowship and society that provide the food from amongst their membership; 
(3)  The sale, distribution or service of food at an event, party or other special gathering that is not open to persons other than the members or invited guests of the sponsor, provided that there is no public advertisement of the event, public solicitation of funds at or for the event, or participation by the general public in the event. 
    Food establishment permit or permit: The permit issued to a food establishment to operate within the town. 
    Food manager: A person who has shown proficiency of required information through passing a test that is part of a food protection management program accredited by the Texas Department of State Health Services, pursuant to 25 Texas Administrative Code, Section 229.172, and has responded correctly to questions as they relate to specific food operations. 
    Full follow-up re-inspection: A complete inspection of a permitted food establishment, which takes place after a full routine inspection that resulted in a rating in which the cumulative demerit value of the establishment exceeded 30 demerits. 
    Group residence: A private or public housing corporation or institutional facility that provides living quarters and meals. The term includes a domicile for unrelated persons, such as a retirement home, correctional facility, or a long-term health care facility. 
    Health code: Refers to the Texas Food Establishments," 25 Texas Administrative Code, Sections 229.161-229.171, and 229.173-229.175, as amended. 
    Imminent health hazard: A significant threat or danger to health that is considered to exist when there is evidence sufficient to show that a product, practice, circumstance, or event creates a situation that requires immediate correction or cessation of operation to prevent injury based on the number of potential injuries and the nature, severity, and duration of the anticipated injury. 
    Law: Federal, state and local statutes, ordinances and regulations. 
    Mobile unit: A vehicle-mounted food establishment or a food establishment pulled behind a vehicle so as to be readily moveable. 
    Nonprofit organization: A civic or fraternal organization, charity, lodge, association, proprietorship, or corporation possessing an Internal Revenue Code, Section 501(c)(3) exemption; or a religious organization meeting the definition of "church" under the Internal Revenue Code, Section 170(b)(1)(A)(i). 
    Packaged: Bottled, canned, cartonned, securely bagged or securely wrapped, whether packaged in a food establishment or a food processing plant. The term does not include a wrapper, carry-out box or other nondurable container used to containerize food with the purpose of facilitating food protection during service and receipt of the food by the consumer. 
    Permit: The document, issued by the regulatory authority, which authorizes a person to operate a food establishment. 
    Permit holder: The entity that is legally responsible for the operation of the food establishment such as the owner, the owner's agent, or other person; and who possesses a valid permit to operate a food establishment. 
    Person: Any individual, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity. 
    Person in charge: The person present in a food establishment who is the apparent supervisor of the food establishment at the time of inspection. If no person is the apparent supervisor, then any employee present is the person in charge. 
    Plumbing fixture: A receptacle or device that is permanently or temporarily connected to the water distribution system of the premises and demands a supply of water from the system or discharges used water, waste materials, or sewage directly or indirectly to the drainage system of the premises. 
    Plumbing system: The water supply and distribution pipes; plumbing fixtures and traps; soil, waste, and vent pipes; sanitary and storm sewers and building drains, including their respective connections, devices, and appurtenances within the premises; and water-treating equipment. 
    Potentially hazardous food: Food that is natural or synthetic and that requires temperature control because it is in a form capable of supporting the rapid and progressive growth of infectious or toxigenic microorganisms; the growth and toxin production of clostridium botulinum; or, in raw shell eggs, the growth of salmonella enteritidis. 
    Premises: The physical facility, its contents, and the contiguous land or property under the control of the permit holder; or the physical facility, its contents, and the contiguous land or property and its facilities and contents that are under the control of the permit holder that may impact food establishment personnel, facilities, or operations, if a food establishment is only one component of a larger operation such as a health care facility, hotel, motel, school, recreational camp, or prison. 
    Public water system: Has the meaning stated in 30 Texas Administrative Code, Sections 290.101-290.121 (relating to drinking water standards governing drinking water quality and reporting requirements for public water systems). 
    Pushcart: A non-self-propelled mobile food unit limited to serving non-potentially hazardous food or potentially hazardous foods requiring a limited amount of preparation as authorized by the regulatory authority. A pushcart is classified as a mobile food establishment. 
    Ready-to-eat food: Food that is in a form that is edible without washing, cooking, or additional preparation by the food establishment or the consumer and that is reasonably expected to be consumed in that form. The term includes unpackaged potentially hazardous food that is cooked to the temperature and time required for the specific food under 25 Texas Administrative Code, Section 229.164(k) (relating to food); raw, washed, cut fruits and vegetables; whole, raw fruits and vegetables that are presented for consumption without the need for further washing, such as at a buffet; and other food presented for consumption for which further washing or cooking is not required and from which rinds, peels, husks, or shells are removed. 
    Regulatory authority: The State of Texas and/or the town. 
    Routine inspection: An unannounced inspection conducted of a permitted food establishment to determine the compliance of the establishment with the provisions of this article. 
    Rules: The rules of the Texas Department of State Health Services, entitled "Texas Food Establishments," 25 Texas Administrative Code, Sections 229.161-229.171, and 229.173-229.175, as amended. 
    Sanitization: The application of cumulative heat or chemicals on cleaned food-contact surfaces that, when evaluated for efficacy, yield a reduction of five logs, which is equal to a 99.999 percent reduction of representative disease microorganisms of public health importance. 
    Sewage: Liquid waste containing animal or vegetable matter in suspension or solution and which may include liquids containing chemicals in solution. 
    Snow cone: Snow cone and/or a snow cone-type product defined as crushed or shaved ice served in a single-use container and topped with flavored syrups. 
    Special event: Any occasion including, but not limited to, fairs, shows, exhibitions, town-wide celebrations, festivals, etc., within a specifically-defined area of the town for a period of time established by the town council. 
    Stand: Any newsstand, table bench, booth rack, handcart, pushcart, vehicle or any other fixture or device used for the display or storage of articles offered for sale by a vendor or peddler. Such stands must be located at least ten feet away from all other property lines adjacent to a street. 
    Stationary cart: A food unit that serves only pre-packaged foods or foods requiring minimal preparation or handling from a cart that remains stationary at one location. 
    Supervisory personnel: The permit holder, the individual having supervisory or management duties, and any other person working in a food establishment who may be in charge of its operation. 
    Temporary food establishment: A food establishment that operates at a fixed location for a period of time of not more than the length of time associated with a single event or celebration. 
    Town health officer: The person(s) employed by or with whom the town has a contract to provide inspection and other services necessary for the administration and enforcement of the rules and ordinances regulating food establishments and the service and sale of food within the town. 
    Vendor: Any individual who offers for sale food, beverages, goods, merchandise, or services to be performed immediately or in the future, from a certain location, for a period of more than 15 minutes, that is not within a building or structure for which a certificate of occupancy is required by the town. This term shall not apply to businesses that operate from within a building or structure within the town for which a certificate of occupancy is required and also display or sell food, beverages, goods, merchandise, etc. outside. 
    Vending machine: A self-service device that, upon insertion of a coin, paper currency, token, card or key, dispenses unit servings of food in bulk or in packages without the necessity of replenishing the device between each vending operation. 
(Ord. No. 776, § 3, 8-15-2006) 
Sec. 26-92. - Enforcement of these provisions. 
    The director of planning and development is responsible for the enforcement of the rules and the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 776, § 4, 8-15-2006) 
Secs. 26-93-26-103. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 26-104. - Permits and exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall operate a food establishment who does not have a valid permit issued by the regulatory authority. Only a person who complies with the requirements of this article shall be entitled to receive or retain a permit. A valid permit shall be posted and visible to the public in every food establishment. Permits are not transferable from one person to another or from one location to another except as otherwise permitted by this article. 
(b)  A food establishment operated solely by a nonprofit or public organization is exempt from the fee requirements of this article, but is not exempt from compliance with state rules or inspections. The town may require any information necessary to determine whether an organization is a nonprofit or public organization for purpose of this exemption. 
(Ord. No. 776, § 5, 8-15-2006) 
Sec. 26-105. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  Permit requirements to operate a food establishment. 
(1)  A person commits an offense if the person sells, offers to sell, gives away, trades, or otherwise conveys food to the public or operates a food establishment within the town, without having first obtained a food establishment permit issued by the regulatory authority. 
(2)  A person commits an offense if the person operates a food establishment in violation of the rules or this article. 
(b)  Issuance of permits. 
(1)  A person desiring to operate a food establishment shall make written application for a permit on forms provided by the town. The application shall include: 
a.  The applicant's full name and street address and whether such applicant is an individual, firm, corporation or partnership. If the applicant is a partnership, the names of the partners, together with their addresses shall be included; 
b.  The location and type of proposed food establishment; 
c.  The signature of the applicant or applicants, or agents; 
d.  Copy of the valid driver's license or other state identification card of the applicant or the applicant's agent; 
e.  Copy of valid food manager's certificate; and 
f.  Such other information as the director deems necessary. 
(2)  A mobile unit, or temporary food establishment which operates from a fixed food facility or commissary located outside the town, shall include with the completed application a copy of the facility's current, valid state and/or local health permit, except that mobile food establishments shall be issued a permit for six-month periods, twice a year, commencing on January 1 and remaining in effect until June 30 and July 1 remaining in effect through December 31. Any permit issued during the first six months of the year shall expire on June 30, irrespective of date of issuance. Any permit issued during the second six months of the year shall expire on December 31, irrespective of date of issuance. There shall be no pro-ration of fees assessed after the first month of each period. 
(3)  Prior to approval of an application for an existing, proposed or extensively remodeled food establishment, the director of planning and development shall review all available documentation for such establishment to insure compliance with the rules and this article. An application for a permit shall be denied if any part of the application is improperly or erroneously completed, or if any part of the required documentation is not properly submitted. A person whose application is denied may appeal the denial in accordance with the provisions of section 26-107 of this article. 
(4)  If a single building or establishment contains multiple, separate, distinct food operations, regardless of whether one or all of the operations are owned or operated by one or more individuals or entities, a separate food establishment permit and payment of a separate permit fee shall be required for each operation. 
(c)  Permit fee and duration. 
(1)  Except as set forth in subsection (c)(3) of this section, each food establishment operating within the corporate limits of the town shall pay the permit fee to the town as provided in the town's schedule of fees at the time of application. 
(2)  A permit shall remain in force for one year from the date of issuance unless suspended or revoked for cause as provided herein. 
(3)  No permit fee shall be charged to any food establishment owned and operated by a governmental agency, independent school district, institution of purely public charity, church and/or other nonprofit; however, such establishments shall be required to obtain a permit and comply with all other requirements of this article. Documentation of tax-exempt status of a nonprofit under federal or state law must be provided to the town at the time of application in order to be exempt from payment of the permit fee. 
(4)  As a condition of the permit, the food establishment shall be responsible for payment of the inspection fees assessed in accordance with this article and for any examination fees required. A permit shall not be renewed unless the permit holder has paid all fees previously assessed. 
(Ord. No. 776, § 6, 8-15-2006; Ord. No. 1128, § 2.a, 12-18-2012) 
Sec. 26-106. - Suspension of permit. 
(a)  Order of suspension. 
(1)  The director shall notify the permit holder, operator, or person in charge of the food establishment at the time of inspection, in writing, that the permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if the permit holder submits a written request for a hearing within ten days. The hearing shall be held in accordance with section 26-107 of this article. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this article, whenever the town finds unsanitary or other conditions in the operation of a food establishment that constitute a substantial hazard to the public health, a written notice may be issued to the permit holder, operator or person in charge citing such condition, specifying the corrective action to be taken, and specifying the time period within which such action shall be taken. If necessary, the order may state that the permit is immediately suspended and all food operations are to be immediately discontinued. 
(2)  If a permit holder, operator, or person in charge has failed to correct a violation of this article after receiving two written notices for the same violation, whether noted during a routine inspection or re-inspection, the director may suspend the food establishment permit. Suspension may be appealed in accordance with section 26-107 of this article. 
(b)  Sign. If a permit is suspended, a sign stating "Closed by Order of the Town of Little Elm Planning and Development Department" shall be placed on the entrance to the food establishment in plain view of the public. A person commits an offense if the person removes, covers, alters, defaces, or otherwise makes or causes such sign to be unreadable. 
(c)  Reinstatement of suspended permit. A person whose food establishment permit has been suspended may, at any time, make written application for a re-inspection for the purpose of reinstating the permit. The application shall include, a statement signed by the applicant, stating the conditions causing suspension of the permit have been corrected, and how each has been corrected. The director shall make a re-inspection. If upon re-inspection, the food establishment is found to be in compliance with the requirements of this article, the director shall reinstate the permit upon payment of the reinstatement fee as per the town's schedule of fees. 
(Ord. No. 776, § 7, 8-15-2006) 
Sec. 26-107. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  Basis. The director may revoke a food establishment permit if the permit holder has received two written notices for the same critical violation(s) or for repeated violations of any of the requirements of this article, or for interference with the town health officer in the performance of his or her duties. Prior to such action, the town shall notify the permit holder in writing, stating the reasons for which the permit is subject to revocation, and advising that the permit shall be permanently revoked at the end of ten days following service of such notice, unless the permit holder files a written request for an appeal with the director, within such ten-day period, which shall state the reasons the revocation is not authorized. A permit may be suspended pending its revocation or a hearing relative thereto. 
(b)  Appeal hearing. If requested, an appeal hearing shall be conducted by the Little Elm Municipal Court. Such hearing shall be an administrative hearing and shall be conducted within 20 days of the date that the appeal is filed with the town. The municipal court judge shall make a finding and shall sustain, modify or rescind any official notice or order considered in the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 776, § 8, 8-15-2006) 
Secs. 26-108-26-118. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REGULATIONS 

Sec. 26-119. - Inspection of food establishments. 
(a)  Inspection frequency. 
(1)  Food establishments shall be classified as high priority, medium priority or low priority; according to the type of operations, particular foods that are prepared, numbers of people served; susceptibility of the population served, and any other risk factor deemed relevant to the operation. 
(2)  Mobile food establishments and hot trucks shall be considered food establishments and shall comply with all pertinent regulations contained herein; provided, however, the permit required by this chapter shall be issued for six-month periods, twice a year, commencing on January 1 and remaining in effect until June 30 and July 1 remaining in effect through December 31. The inspection of a mobile food establishment shall occur before the issuance of a new permit 
(3)  Additional inspections of the food establishment shall be performed as often as necessary for the enforcement of this chapter. 
(b)  Fee. An inspection fee shall be charged in accordance with the town's schedule of fees, as adopted by the town council, as amended from time to time. 
(c)  Right of entry. As a condition of the food establishment permit, an employee or agent of the town, after presenting proper identification, shall be allowed to enter any permitted food establishment at any reasonable time, for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance this article. The agent shall be permitted to examine the records of the establishment to obtain information pertaining to employees or to food and supplies purchased, received, or used. 
(d)  Findings. Whenever an inspection of a food establishment or commissary is made, the town health officer shall record the findings on an inspection report form. The inspection report form shall summarize the requirements of the rules and of this article and shall set forth a weighted point value for each requirement. Inspection remarks shall reference, by section number, the section violated and shall state the correction to be made. The rating score of the food establishment shall be the total of the weighted point values for all violations, subtracted from 100. 
(e)  Report. A copy of the inspection report form shall be furnished to the person in charge of the food establishment at the conclusion of the inspection. The completed inspection report form is public information that shall be made available for public disclosure to any person who requests it in accordance with applicable law. 
(f)  Posting of finding. 
(1)  Posting. The findings, or score, of the health inspector must be posted in an area that is clearly visible to patrons and the public, at or near each entrance to the restaurant. The grade of each restaurant shall be evidenced by the posting of a grade card bearing a letter, "A", "B", "C", or "D". The letter "A" shall indicate a grade of 90 percent or higher. The letter "B" shall indicate a grade of less than 90 percent, but not less than 80 percent. The letter "C" shall indicate a grade of less than 80 percent. The letter "D" shall indicate a grade less than 70 percent. The grade/score card must remain posted until the next inspection, when the inspector will issue a new scorecard. Removal of the grade/score card is a violation of the ordinance and may result in the suspension or revocation of the public health. 
(2)  Providing of scorecard. The scorecard shall be provided by the health officer. Grade A cards shall be printed on blue paper, Grade B cards on green paper, Grade C cards on yellow paper, and Grade D on red paper all with black lettering. 
The language of the grade cards shall be worded, as follows: 
THIS ESTABLISHMENT HAS COMPLIED WITH FOOD ESTABLISHMENT 
REGULATIONS REQUIREMENTS FOR GRADE A TOWN OF LITTLE ELM 
PENALTY FOR REMOVAL 
(g)  Re-inspection. 
(1)  Any food establishment that receives a grade of 89 or less (B or C) shall receive a re-inspection within 15 working days of the initial inspection, or as otherwise arranged with the facility operator, to assure that the violations have been corrected. The letter grade shall remain posted at the food establishment, indicating to the public that the particular food establishment's most recent routine inspection requires corrective measures. 
(2)  Additionally, a food establishment receiving a score of 89 or less may, within 15 working days of the initial inspection and upon payment of a facility initiated re-inspection fee, request the health department conduct a random re-inspection of their facility. A re-inspection conducted under this subsection which results in a different score shall have the re-inspection grade posted in lieu of the original inspection grade. The score and/or letter grade achieved as a result of the facility initiated re-inspection shall remain posted until the next routine health inspection. A facility initiated re-inspection under this subsection will only be permitted once during the calendar year. 
(3)  Any food establishment that receives a grade of 69 or less (D) shall immediately cease operations. The establishment shall remain closed until corrective action on all identified critical violations is complete. Corrective action on all other violations must be initiated within 48 hours. The establishment shall remain closed until reopened by the town, at which time a re-instatement fee as set forth the town's schedule of fees shall be assessed. 
(h)  Correction of violations. 
(1)  Correction periods. The inspection report form shall specify a reasonable period of time for the correction of the violations found, and correction of the violations shall be accomplished within the period specified. 
(2)  Contents. The inspection report shall state that failure to comply with any time limits specified for corrections may result in suspension or the cessation of food service operations. An opportunity for appeal from the inspection findings and time limitations will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the director within ten days following suspension. If a request for a hearing is received, the director shall hold a hearing within 20 days of receipt of the request. 
(3)  Closure. Whenever a food establishment is required under the provisions of this section to cease operations, it shall not resume operations until such time as a re-inspection determines that conditions responsible for the requirement to cease operations no longer exist. Opportunity for re-inspection shall be offered within a reasonable time given the applicable deadlines for correcting violations. 
(Ord. No. 776, § 9, 8-15-2006; Ord. No. 1128, § 2.a, 12-18-2012) 
Sec. 26-120. - Examination and condemnation of food. 
(a)  Hold order. The director may examine or sample food as often as necessary for enforcement of this article and any other applicable law. The director may, upon written notice to the owner or person in charge specify with particularity the reasons therefore, place a hold order on any food, which he or she believes is in violation of any provision of this article and any other applicable law. The director or other regulatory authority shall tag, label, or otherwise identify any food subject to the hold order. No food subject to a hold order shall be used, served or moved from the establishment prior to a hearing. The director shall allow storage of the food under conditions specified in the hold order, unless storage is not possible without risk to the public health, in which case immediate destruction shall be ordered and accomplished. 
(b)  Hearing. The hold order shall state that a request for hearing may be filed within ten days and that if no hearing is requested the food shall be destroyed. The municipal court judge shall hold an administrative hearing if so requested, and on the basis of evidence produced at that hearing, the hold order may be vacated, or the owner or person in charge of the food may be directed by written order to denature or destroy such food or to bring it into compliance with the provisions of this division. 
(c)  Procedure when infection is suspected. When the director has reasonable cause to suspect the possibility of disease transmission from any food establishment employee, he or she may secure morbidity history of the suspected employee or make any other investigation as may be indicated and shall take appropriate action. In this instance, the director may require any or all of the following measures: 
(1)  The immediate exclusion of the employee from all food establishments; 
(2)  The immediate closing of the food establishment concerned until, in the opinion of the director, no further danger of disease outbreak exists; 
(3)  Restriction of the employee's services to some area of the food establishment in which no danger exists for transmission of the disease; and 
(4)  Adequate medical and laboratory examination of the employee, of other employees and of his/her and their bodily discharges, at the food establishment's expense. 
(Ord. No. 776, § 10, 8-15-2006) 
Sec. 26-121. - Submission and review of plans required. 
(a)  Requirements. 
(1)  A person commits an offense if the person: 
a.  Constructs a food establishment without submitting plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling, or conversion to the director for review and approval before construction begins; 
b.  Extensively remodels a food establishment without submitting plans and specifications for such remodeling to the director for review and approval before remodeling; or 
c.  Converts an existing structure to a food establishment without submitting properly prepared plans and specifications for the conversion to the director for review and approval before conversion begins. 
(b)  Plans. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout of the facility, arrangement of all intended equipment, mechanical plans, and types of construction materials and finish schedules for all areas, and the type and model of all proposed equipment to be installed. The director shall review and approve the plans and specifications to determine if they meet the requirements of this division. 
(c)  Compliance with Code. No food establishment shall be constructed, extensively remodeled or converted except in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the director. Food establishment owners/operators as well as all general contractors and subcontractors, shall ensure during plan review, construction, and operation that their facilities comply with all applicable town plumbing, mechanical, electrical, building, zoning, and fire prevention and protection codes. All properly prepared plans and specifications shall be submitted to the regulatory authority for review and approval before construction, remodeling or conversion is begun. 
(d)  Permit. A building permit to begin construction shall not be issued until the town has reviewed and approved the plans and specifications for the proposed construction. 
(e)  Approved materials. Only commercial-quality equipment, utensils, and materials that meet or exceed current accepted National Sanitation Foundation (NSF) standards, or their equivalent, will be approved for installation and use. 
(f)  Inspections. The director shall conduct one or more inspections of the food establishment prior to the start of operations to determine compliance with the approved plans and specifications, the requirements of this section, this division, and any other applicable law. 
(g)  Closure. If, upon inspection at any time, the food establishment is found not to be constructed in accordance with approved plans, and/or any fixed equipment has been added or removed without prior approval by the town, the director shall order the establishment to cease operation immediately, and to replace or remove the equipment in question, before resuming operation. 
(h)  Fee. A fee for plan review shall be assessed in accordance with the fee schedule set forth in the town's schedule of fees. 
(Ord. No. 776, § 11, 8-15-2006) 
Sec. 26-122. - Food manager. 
(a)  Requirement. The town requires that at least one certified food manager to be on-site during all hours of operation. A person commits an offense if the person owns, manages or operates a food establishment and fails to employ at least one person in charge who is on-site during all hours of operation of that food establishment and who is responsible for food preparation, presentation, sales and service and who has a valid food manager certification issued by the State of Texas. 
Exceptions: Establishments which have fewer than three employees are not required to have at least one certified food manager on-site at all times. 
(b)  Additional managers. 
(1)  The town may require additional certified food managers in sufficient number to insure that all areas of food preparation, presentation, sales and service, during times of operation are under the direction of certified supervisory personnel. 
(2)  A person commits an offense if the person owns, manages or operates a food establishment and allows said establishment to operate with fewer than the required number of certified food managers. 
(c)  Replacement required. 
(1)  A person commits an offense if the person owns, manages or operates a food establishment and fails to: 
a.  Provide the town written notice, within seven days of the effective date of termination or permanent transfer of the certified food manager; 
b.  Employ or assign another registered food manager within 30 days of the effective date of termination or permanent transfer of the previous certified food manager. 
(d)  Additional training. The director may require a registered food manager to successfully complete additional training when: 
(1)  The employing food establishment has repeated or persistent violations of health code requirements and effective corrective action has not been instituted over a period of time as instructed by the director; or 
(2)  The employing food establishment has been implicated by the regulatory authority as the source of a food-borne illness. 
(e)  Evidence of certification. 
(1)  During those times a food manager is on duty at a food establishment, the food manager must possess evidence of current valid certification. 
(2)  The food manager's certificate shall be prominently posted in the permitted establishment. 
(3)  A food manager certificate is not transferable. 
(f)  Responsibilities of food managers. A food manager shall be responsible for adequate instruction of the employees of the food establishment for which the food manager works to ensure and maintain safe food handling practices within the establishment. 
(g)  Exemption from requirements. 
(1)  The director may waive the requirements of this section for: 
a.  Food establishments that serve, sell, or distribute only prepackaged foods, and/or open foods that are not potentially hazardous; 
b.  Temporary food establishments, special facilities and/or events; 
c.  Establishments serving only fountain drinks, coffee, popcorn, and/or snow cones; 
d.  Food warehouses/wholesalers; and 
e.  Public school food service workers who attend accredited training courses. 
(2)  The Director may require the manager of a food establishment exempted under subsection (g)(1) to comply with the food manager's certification requirements if critical food safety violations are observed, or, in the judgment of the director, the nature of the operation requires such certification. 
(Ord. No. 776, § 12, 8-15-2006) 
Sec. 26-123. - Snow cone establishments. 
(a)  Permit requirements for snow cone establishments. A person commits an offense if the person: 
(1)  Operates a snow cone establishment out of a temporary building without a food establishment permit issued by the town; or 
(2)  Operates a snow cone establishment in violation of the requirements of section 26-105 of this article. 
(b)  Direction. Unless suspended or revoked under the provisions of this article, a permit for a snow cone establishment shall be valid only for a period of six months from the date of issuance. 
(c)  Revocation and appeal. A permit is subject to revocation in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 26-107 of this article, for violations of the provisions of this article. A revoked permit is subject to appeal in accordance with the provisions of section 26-107 or other applicable provisions of this article, or other local, state or federal law. 
(d)  Fee. An applicant shall pay a permit fee at the time of application in accordance with section 26-106 of this article. 
(e)  Special requirements for snow cone establishments. A person who operates a snow cone establishment shall: 
(1)  Prepare or offer for sale only snow cones, snow cone-related foods, and commercially prepackaged non-potentially hazardous foods, and all products must come from an approved source, as defined by state law; 
(2)  Not serve or utilize potentially hazardous foods, toppings, or flavorings, as defined by the rules; and 
(3)  Use only ice obtained in chipped, crushed, cubed, or blocked form and in single-service packaging, filled and sealed at the point of manufacture. The ice shall be held in these bags until dispensed in a way that protects it from contamination. 
(f)  Required equipment. A snow cone establishment shall contain: 
(1)  A single-unit-type, stainless steel, three-compartment sink with attached drain boards. The sink compartments shall be large enough to accommodate the largest piece of equipment or utensil that must be used and cleaned in the facility; 
(2)  A separate, dedicated hand-washing sink with hand-cleansing soap and sanitary, single-use towels. The sink shall be provided with hot and cold water, immediately available on demand; and 
(3)  Service and delivery openings designed and functioning properly to prevent the entrance of flying insects. Service openings shall be closed or screened, except during actual service of food to a consumer. 
(g)  Water supply. The water supply for a snow cone establishment shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  All equipment used for a potable water supply system shall be listed for such use by an organization acceptable to the town and shall be installed and operated according to law. 
(2)  All potable water not provided directly by pipe to the establishment from an approved source shall be transported in a bulk water transport system or individual containers, and shall be delivered by direct connection to a self-contained water system, or be delivered to a self-contained water system by direct hose attachment from an approved water source. 
(3)  All potable water containers or hoses shall be used only for water supply purposes. 
(4)  A self-contained water system of sufficient capacity to furnish an adequate quantity of potable water for cleaning and hand-washing purposes shall be provided (minimum 15 gallons). If at any time the Town determines that 15 gallons is not adequate to meet the needs of the operation, the capacity must be increased to a volume approved by the town. 
(5)  A water heater system capable of producing water of 110 degrees Fahrenheit or hotter, which is installed and interconnected with the potable water supply, shall be provided. 
(6)  The water system shall be capable of delivering a water supply under pressure of at least 15 pounds per square inch (PSI) at all times. If such water pressure cannot be provided by gravity flow, then a tank and a pump or other means, which will provide pressure of at least 15 PSI shall be installed. 
(h)  Liquid waste. 
(1)  If a snow cone establishment is not connected to the public sewage system, all liquid waste from the operation shall be held in an approved, permanently-installed liquid waste retention tank, or portable removable waste-retention tank. 
(2)  The liquid waste tank shall have a capacity at least 50 percent greater than the potable water tank. 
(3)  All waste lines shall be properly installed and connected with watertight seals to the liquid waste tank. 
(4)  All liquid waste from the holding tank shall be transported and disposed of in an approved manner. There shall be an approved liquid waste disposal facility conveniently located and accessible for use by the establishment employees at all times. If the facility is not located within the establishment, it must be located within a 300-foot radius of the snow cone establishment to be considered convenient. 
(i)  Employee restrooms. 
(1)  A snow cone establishment shall have adequate, conveniently-located and accessible toilet and lavatory facilities available at all times, and the facilities must be constructed and maintained to meet the standards set forth for public restroom facilities. 
(2)  If toilet facilities meeting the requirements of subsection (i)(1) are not located within the establishment, they must be located within a 300-foot radius of the establishment to be considered convenient. 
(j)  Use of facilities not located within snow cone establishment. 
(1)  If liquid waste disposal facilities and toilet and lavatory facilities are located off-site, a notarized letter from the owner of property within 500 feet of the site of the snow cone establishment must be submitted with the permit application giving permission for the snow cone establishment's employees to use such facilities, and that the facilities will be properly maintained and available for use at all times during the business hours of the establishment. 
(2)  If suitable restroom facilities are no longer available for use by the snow cone establishment's employees, the establishment shall cease operation immediately and remain closed until the town receives evidence of a notarized agreement with the authorized representative of another off-site facility. 
(k)  Garbage. If outside seating is provided, an easily cleanable, covered trash container shall be provided on the outside of the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 776, § 13, 8-15-2006) 
Sec. 26-124. - Stationary cart establishments. 
(a)  Permit requirements for stationary cart establishments. A person commits an offense if the person: 
(1)  Operates a stationary cart establishment out of a temporary building without a food establishment permit issued by the town; or 
(2)  Operates a stationary cart establishment in violation of the requirements of section 26-105 of this article. 
(b)  Direction. Unless suspended or revoked under the provisions of this article, a permit for a stationary cart establishment shall be valid for a period of 12 months from the date of issuance, which may be renewed annually. 
(c)  Revocation and appeal. A permit is subject to revocation in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 26-107 of this article, for violations of the provisions of this article. A revoked permit is subject to appeal in accordance with the provisions of section 26-107 or other applicable provisions of this article, or other local, state or federal law. 
(d)  Fee. An applicant shall pay a permit fee at the time of application in accordance with section 26-105 of this article. 
(e)  Special requirements for stationary cart establishments. A person who operates a stationary cart establishment shall: 
(1)  Prepare or offer for sale only hot dogs, ice cream, coffee, fresh produce, such related foods, an/or commercially prepackaged non-potentially hazardous foods and all products must come from an approved source, as defined by state law; 
(2)  Not serve or utilize potentially hazardous foods, toppings, or flavorings, as defined by the rules; and 
(3)  Have a permitted commissary as a base of operations. This commissary is to provide (a) storage for food products and single-service articles; (b) utensil washing facilities; and (c) site for obtaining potable water and disposing of wastewater. 
(f)  Sink requirements. 
(1)  A stationary cart shall contain a hand sink with hot and cold running water, dispensable soap, and disposable towels. The water must be under pressure, and water must be heated to a minimum of 105 degrees Fahrenheit. A mixing valve in good working condition must be available. 
(2)  All carts with utensils must provide a three-compartment sink for washing, rinsing, and sanitizing of utensils. If a three-compartment sink is provided on the cart that is of sufficient size to accommodate all of the utensils and equipment, no additional utensil wash sink is required at the commissary. Otherwise, the commissary must provide a three-compartment sink in addition to the hand sink. 
(3)  The commissary must provide at least a single-compartment utility sink for cleaning the cart and for providing water and wastewater disposal. 
(4)  Carts that sell only pre-packaged potentially hazardous foods, such as ice cream, are not required to provide a hand sink or utensil sinks. 
(g)  Construction. 
(1)  Carts must be constructed of smooth, easy to-clean materials such as stainless steel, fiberglass reinforced plastic panels or other approved water-resistant materials. The bottom of the cart must be at least six inches above the ground. 
(2)  Electrical cords must not extend beyond six feet, and must be installed so as not to be a safety hazard. 
(3)  The town fire department and building inspection division must approve the design of carts with cooking or grilling equipment. 
(4)  The stationary cart must have overhead protection, including, but not limited to an umbrella, to protect the food and equipment from contamination. 
(h)  Potable water tanks/retention tanks. 
(1)  For carts with a hand sink only, at least four gallons of water must be provided. 
(2)  For carts with utensil wash sinks, at least nine gallons of potable water must be provided. 
(3)  For carts using water for preparation, such as coffee carts, additional water may be required but will not be calculated in determining retention tank requirements. 
(4)  All hoses used for potable water must be made for that purpose (white or clear). 
(5)  All potable water tanks must be located and installed in such as way as to prevent any cross contamination. 
(6)  A capacity of at least 15 percent more than the available water is required for the retention tanks. 
(7)  The retention tanks must be easy to service with the top closed, except that the top is not required to be closed as the fill line is filling the tank. 
(8)  The owner must bring the required amount of water at the time of the permitting inspection in order to measure the size of the tanks. Permits will not be issued to carts requiring hand sinks unless the tanks are filled in front of the health inspector during the time of the permitting inspection. 
(i)  Operations. 
(1)  The stationary cart owner must provide the director with a letter from the owner/director of the business in which the cart will be located that grants permission to the owner of the stationary cart to operate on the premises. 
(2)  All foods that are to be sold must be stated on the application. A stationary cart is limited to serving pre-packaged foods or foods requiring minimal preparation. Preparation of potentially hazardous foods is limited to items such as hot dogs or nachos. Only foods approved by the director may be sold. 
(3)  Food temperature requirements as required by the health ordinance for cooking, holding, and reheating must be met. 
(4)  Food handlers must minimize contact with ready-to-eat foods by the use of utensils, tongs, spoons, deli tissues, or gloves and must thoroughly wash hands as required by the health ordinance. Any employee who directly handles food must use sanitizing gel after thoroughly washing their hands. 
(5)  Food carts must be located within 300 feet of approved restroom facilities. Operators must have written permission from the restroom owner or person in charge to utilize the restroom facilities. 
(6)  All wastewater must be disposed into the sanitary sewer. 
(j)  Refrigeration/hot holding. 
(1)  All potentially hazardous foods requiring refrigeration must be stored in a mechanical refrigerator located on the cart. Additional refrigeration may be required at the commissary to maintain product temperature. A numerically scaled thermometer must be located in each refrigeration and freezer unit that is accurate to 2 degrees Fahrenheit. During cold holding, all potentially hazardous food must be maintained at 41 degrees Fahrenheit or below. 
(2)  All potentially hazardous foods requiring hot holding must provide mechanical devices that will maintain the required temperature of 140 degrees Fahrenheit or above. A numerically scaled thermometer must be located in each hot holding unit. Note: Liquid petroleum gas (LPG) may not be used unless the fire department has given approval. In addition, no sterno is allowed. 
(Ord. No. 776, § 14, 8-15-2006) 
Sec. 26-125. - Mobile units. 
(a)  Permit requirements for mobile units. 
(1)  All mobile units originating from or serving food within the town must have a food establishment permit, which must be kept in the vehicle at all times. The permit must bear the name of the registered owner of the truck and truck license plate number. 
(2)  The permit is subject to revocation pursuant to section 26-107. If a permit is revoked, the permit holder has the right to appeal in accordance with the provisions of section 26-107 and other applicable provisions of this article. 
(b)  Mobile unit requirements. The permit holder for a mobile unit shall: 
(1)  Protect food from contamination and keep the truck clean and free of rust and corrosion; 
(2)  Identify the trucks using the same name that is on the permit; 
(3)  Serve all condiments and spices, such as salt, pepper, sugar, catsup, mustard, mayonnaise, sauces, non-dairy creamer, etc. in single-serving containers. No bulk dispensers, bottles or cans shall be permitted; 
(4)  Use all single-service tableware individually wrapped in plastic; 
(5)  Dispose of sewage, wastewater and solid waste according to law; 
(6)  Ensure that the wastewater tank outlet is lower than the inlet to the potable water supply; and 
(7)  Provide the director a route plan upon request. 
(c)  Penalty. A person commits an offense if the person violates the provisions of this article, or interferes with the director in the exercise of his or her duties under this section. Notwithstanding any provisions contained herein to the contrary, the director is hereby granted the authority to issue immediate citations to persons violating any provision of this article in the director's presence. 
(d)  Responsible person. If the owner, manager, person in charge at the time of inspection, or other responsible party of a permitted food establishment is found to have violated any provisions of this section, a citation may be issued. 
(Ord. No. 776, § 15, 8-15-2006) 
Sec. 26-126. - Temporary food establishment. 
(a)  Permit requirements for temporary food establishment. 
(1)  All temporary food establishments that operate for a single event or celebration must be permitted, but are not required to have a certified food manager. 
(2)  A temporary food establishment shall comply with the requirements of these rules except as otherwise provided in this section. The regulatory authority may impose additional requirements to protect against health hazards related to the conduct of the temporary food establishment, may prohibit the sale of some or all potentially hazardous foods, and when no health hazard will result, may waive or modify requirements of these rules. 
(b)  Requirements. 
(1)  Food-contact surfaces of equipment shall be protected from contamination by consumers and other contamination sources. Where necessary to prevent contamination, effective shields for such equipment shall be provided. 
(2)  Equipment shall be located and installed and cleaned in a way that prevents food contamination and that also facilitates cleaning of the establishment. 
(3)  Ice that is consumed or that contacts food shall be obtained only in chipped, crushed, or cubed form and in single-use safe plastic or wet-strength paper bags filled and sealed at the point of manufacture. Ice for consumption shall be held in their bags until it is dispensed in a way that protects it from contamination. 
(4)  Food temperatures. All food temperature requirements shall be met as contained in § 229.164(k)-(n) of the Texas Food Establishment Rules. 
(5)  Equipment for cooling or heating food, and holding cold or hot food shall be adequate in number and capacity to provide food temperatures as specified under § 229.164(k)-(n) of the Texas Food Establishment Rules. 
(6)  Dispose of sewage, wastewater and solid waste according to law. 
(7)  Food prepared in a private home, except as allowed in these rules, or from an unlicensed food manufacturer or wholesaler, is considered to be from an unapproved source and may not be used or offered for human consumption in a food establishment. 
(c)  Penalty. A person commits an offense if the person violates the provisions of this article, or interferes with the director in the exercise of his or her duties under this section. Notwithstanding any provisions contained herein to the contrary, the director is hereby granted the authority to issue immediate citations to persons violating any provision of this article in the director's presence. 
(d)  Responsible person. If the owner, manager, person in charge at the time of inspection, or other responsible party of a permitted food establishment is found to have violated any provisions of this section, a citation may be issued. 
(Ord. No. 776, § 16, 8-15-2006) 
Sec. 26-127. - General food establishment guidelines. 
    Food establishments shall be maintained and operated in accordance with this article, which incorporates the Texas Food Establishments rules, as amended (the "rules" or TFER). The following guidelines are excerpted from TFER. Please consult TFER for complete standards. TFER is available on the Secretary of State's website at http://www.sos.state.tx.us/. 
(1)  Hand washing sink. A separate sink designated for hand washing only shall be provided. Enough hand washing sinks are required to be readily accessible to each food preparation area and accessible to employees at all times. Hot water, soap, disposable towels and trash containers are required at each sink. 
(2)  Utility/mop sink. Utility sink or curbed floor sink used for the cleaning of mops and other janitorial equipment as well as the proper disposal of dirty mop water are required. This sink shall not be used as a hand washing sink and should not be closer than 18 inches to any food preparation, food or utensil storage area, to prevent potential splash contamination. 
(3)  Three-compartment sink. Required to wash, rinse and sanitize. Compartments should be large enough to submerge the largest piece of portable equipment, utensils, pots or pans. Automatic dishwashers are recommended, especially when multi-use utensils and tableware are utilized. 
(4)  Restrooms. At least one restroom is required for employee use. Number of required customer restrooms is regulated under the building code. Entrance doors must be self-closing when opening into dining area. 
(5)  Floors, walls, ceilings. Must be in good repair, installed using good construction standards, properly sealed with no cracks or seams and constructed of smooth durable materials to withstand repeated sanitizing. Protective shielding over light bulbs in food prep, utensil and unprotected food storage areas are required. 
(6)  Proper temperature control. All equipment shall be in good working order and be able to maintain temperature requirements. All potentially hazardous foods (PHFs) shall be maintained at proper temperatures. Cold storage units shall be maintained at 41 degrees Fahrenheit or below. Hot PHFs display/holding units shall be at 140 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. Reserved foods shall be reheated to a minimum of 165 degrees Fahrenheit before serving. Routinely check internal temperatures of hot and cold foods. 
(7)  Consumer protection. Food shall be offered in a way that does not mislead or misinform the consumer. Inspect all merchandise upon receipt to insure items have not been tampered or damaged. Report immediately any tampered merchandise. 
(8)  Tobacco, hair restraints, jewelry. Smoking or use of any tobacco product is prohibited at all times in food prep areas. No children are allowed in food prep areas. Cooks and food prep workers shall use hair restraints such as hats, hair coverings or nets, hairspray to effectively control and keep hair from contacting exposed food, cooking equipment, utensils, etc. Hair restraints keep food workers from touching hair and contaminating hands. Food prep workers shall not wear jewelry on arms or hands other than plain ring such as a band style. 
(9)  Food protection. Foods shall be covered and protected at all times. This includes inside coolers and freezers. Meat products shall be stored on lower shelves to prevent cross contamination from juices on to other foods or products. Keep foods and products six inches off the floor to prevent contamination while mopping. 
(10)  Disposable utensils. Single-service utensils shall be presented to the public with handles up. Toothpicks must be individually wrapped or available from a dispenser. Sanitizing. All food contact surfaces of utensils and equipment shall be washed, rinsed and sanitized after use and on a continual basis. If unused, then clean a minimum of every 24 hours. If equipment is immersed in hot water for sanitizing, the temperature shall be 171 degrees Fahrenheit or above. 
(11)  Food safety. Separate and store cleaning products away from food products. All bulk foods once opened shall be labeled by its common name and stored in a container with a lid, such as sugar, salt and flour. 
(12)  Date markings. When keeping longer than 24 hours after preparing, defrosting or opening the original container, PHFs (including meats and cheeses) shall be date marked. These PHFs shall be consumed or destroyed within seven days or less if temperature was maintained at 41 degrees Fahrenheit or lower. 
(13)  Employee health. Managers/supervisors shall be aware of the health of their employees and not permit employees who have acute gastrointestinal illness (diarrhea, fever) to work near food. Refer to the rules, section 229.163(d), regarding employees who have been diagnosed with or have symptoms of specific infectious diseases. 
(14)  Grease trap. A grease trap or grease interceptor is required unless otherwise approved by the regulatory authority, and shall be located to be easily accessible for cleaning, operation and maintenance. Location must be approved by the regulatory authority and shall not be located within an area where food is held, prepared, stored or transferred. All grease traps and interceptors shall also be approved by the regulatory authority prior to installation. Grease separators designed to be serviced manually by food establishment employees are not approved. Grease interceptors or separators located above ground, beneath one fixture, are prohibited. 
(15)  Pesticides. Pesticides shall be used only when applied by a certified applicator or under the direct supervision of a certified applicator. Personnel of food establishments are advised to keep receipts from pesticide applications. 
(Ord. No. 776, § 17, 8-15-2006; Ord. No. 1128, § 2.b, 12-18-2012) 
Secs. 26-128-26-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PENALTY 

Sec. 26-141. - Savings; repealer. 
    All rights and remedies of the town, are expressly saved as to any and all violations of the provisions of any other ordinances of the town affecting the provisions to safeguard persons in the town by regulating food establishments within the town, which have secured at the time of the effective date of this article; and, as to such accrued violations and all pending litigation, both civil and criminal, whether pending in court or not, under such ordinances same shall not be affected by this article but may be prosecuted until final disposition by the courts. Ordinance No. 221 of the town is hereby repealed, but provided that any complaint, action, cause of action, proceeding, or claim which prior to the effective date of this ordinance has been initiated or has arisen under or pursuant to Ordinance No. 221 shall continue to be governed by the provisions of that ordinance and for that purpose Ordinance No. 221 shall be deemed to remain and shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 776, § 18, 8-15-2006) 
Sec. 26-142. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor upon conviction and shall be fined, except as otherwise provided herein, in a sum not to exceed $2,000.00 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
    If the governing body of the town determines that a violation of this article creates a threat to the public safety, the town may bring suit in the district court to enjoin such violation as allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 776, § 20, 8-15-2006) 
Secs. 26-143-26-244. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OIL AND GAS DRILLING 

Sec. 26-245. - Oil and gas drilling and associated operations, prohibited. 
    No person shall explore for, drill for, mine, produce, refine or process oil or other petroleum or gas product within the town. 
(Ord. No. 434, § 1, 12-21-1998) 
Sec. 26-246. - Violation, penalty. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of this article, and any person violating or failing to comply with such provisions shall be fined, upon conviction, in an amount not more than $500.00, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 434, § 2, 12-21-1998) 
Secs. 26-247-26-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - VENDORS, PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1008, § 2, adopted May 4, 2010, repealed the former art. VI, §§ 26-271-26-285, and enacted a new art. VI as set out herein. The former art. VI pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Ord. No. 600, §§ 1-17, adopted June 24, 2003; and Ord. No. 949, § 2, adopted Mar. 17, 2009. 

Sec. 26-271. - Purpose. 
    That this article is and shall be deemed an exercise of the police powers of the state and of the town for the public safety, comfort, convenience, and protection of the town and the citizens thereof, and all of the provisions of this article shall be constructed for the accomplishment of that purpose. The primary purpose of the public streets, sidewalks, and other public ways is for use by vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Reasonable regulation of solicitation on public ways and in public places is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The regulations contained in this article are not intended in any way to prohibit or hamper speech that is protected by the Constitution of both the United States and the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 2, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 26-272. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Automated teller machine means a machine, other than a telephone: 
(1)  That is capable of being operated by a customer of a financial institution; 
(2)  By which the customer may communicate to the financial institution a request to withdraw a benefit for the customer or for another person directly from the customer's account or from the customer's account under a line of credit previously authorized by the financial institution for the customer; and 
(3)  The use of which may or may not involve personnel of a financial institution. 
    Charitable purpose means the solicitation of money or property for the benefit of a charity, philanthropy, or nonprofit organization or for the poor, underprivileged, needy, crippled, or handicapped persons; the teaching of patriotism or assistance to veterans or veteran's organizations; or for existing educational institutions or for the establishment or endowment of educational institutions. Solicitation for oneself or one's family, commonly termed panhandling, does not fall within this definition. 
    Consumer means an individual who acquires real or personal property, services, money, or credit for personal, family or household purposes. 
    Exterior public pay telephone means any coin or credit card reader telephone that is: 
(1)  Installed or located anywhere on a premises except exclusively in the interior of a building located on the premises; and 
(2)  Accessible and available for use by members of the general public. 
    Itinerant vendor means a person engaged in a temporary business, or who operates from a stationary cart, or who travels from city to city and is engaged in solicitation in a specific, nonmoving location. 
    Laundry mat means laundry mats that are privately-owned, but are open to the public regardless of whether owner of the laundry mat has given permission for solicitation. 
    Mobile vendor means a peddler/solicitor and includes any food service establishment attached to wheels and which is capable of moving under its own power (motorized) or pushed or pulled by human power, such as push carts and pull wagons. 
    Nonprofit organizations means any organization that does not aim to make a profit, and which is not a public body. This definition includes entities such as, but is not limited to: Multiple Sclerosis, American Heart Association, Muscular Dystrophy, American Cancer Society, Little Elm Public Safety Departments, Boy Scouts of America, Girl Scouts, etc. 
    Parking lot includes public or private parking areas, regardless of whether owner or property has given permission for solicitation. 
    Parkway shall mean the area between the edge of the designated street and the adjacent owner's property line. 
    Peddler, solicitor, vendor or person means any individual, firm, company, partnership, corporation, association, trust, society, religious sect, organization, league, or other legal entity and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, agent, or similar representative. 
    Public transportation stop means an area officially marked and designated as a place to wait for a bus, a light rail vehicle, or any other public transportation vehicle that is operated on a scheduled route with passengers paying fares on an individual basis. 
    Religious organization means an organization that is dedicated to the support of a church, religious society, or any other religious sect, group or order. 
    Self-service car wash means a structure: 
(1)  At which a vehicle may be manually washed by its owner or operator with equipment that is activated by the deposit of money in a coin-operated machine; and 
(2)  That is accessible and available for use by members of the general public. 
    Self-service fuel pump means a fuel pump: 
(1)  From which a vehicle may be manually filled with gasoline or other fuel directly by its owner or operator, without the aid of an employee or attendant of the premises at which the fuel pump is located; and 
(2)  That is accessible and available for use by members of the general public. 
    Sidewalk means any surface provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians. 
    Solicitation means conduct whereby a person or its agent, member, or representative: 
(1)  Either orally or in writing, asks for a ride, employment, property, financial aid, money, or any article representing monetary value, for any purpose; 
(2)  Whether orally or in writing, sells or offers to sell food, goods, services, publications or subscriptions. 
"Solicitation" shall include persons engaged in the delivery of handbills or circulars door to door for the solicitation of money, products, services or other items of pecuniary value, and it also includes mobile vendors. An offer of membership in any organization is expressly excluded. 
    Stationary cart is an itinerant vendor and means a cart, trailer, stand, or other facility that is moved on-site for the purpose of conducting business, selling food items, or other products. Examples include, but are not limited to, hot dog carts, taco stands, and snow cone trailers. 
    Street means the portion of the street that is paved, designated, or used for vehicular traffic, and all areas dedicated to public use for public street purposes, which includes parkways, alleys and sidewalks. 
    Town means the Town of Little Elm, Texas. 
    Traffic island means a barrier within a street or roadway to exclude vehicles, designated for the purpose of separating or directing streams of vehicular traffic. 
    Vehicle means any wheeled vehicle. This definition includes bicycles, push carts and any other wheeled vehicle of whatever kind or character. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 2, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 26-273. - Permits required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to attempt or to peddle, sell, solicit, canvass, or take orders for any services, wares, merchandise, food, or goods, or any article of value, including, but not limited to, plants, flowers, paintings, novelties, painting house numbers on streets, firewood, books, magazines, photographs, food, or any articles for future delivery, on a sidewalk, parkway, parking lot or the required landscaped areas within the parking lot, or town-owned, leased or controlled property within the town or from door to door without having first obtained a permit therefor from the town. 
(b)  Each person engaged in peddling or soliciting or selling as defined in subsection (a) above, must have a permit issued under the terms of this section, and such permit shall be personal to the applicant and shall not be reproduced, nor assigned nor transferred to any other person. Any such attempted transfer or reproduction shall render the permit void. 
(c)  Each permit shall expire as of the date noted thereon, which date shall be in accordance with the provisions of this article, and such permit shall indicate the hours when peddling, solicitation and selling within the town is permitted in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person who shall solicit funds in the town to represent in connection with such solicitation of funds that the issuance of a permit or identification card by the town constitutes an endorsement thereof. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit funds for a purpose other than that set out in the registration statement or application upon which the permit was issued. 
(f)  A permit shall not be issued to any person under 16 years of age. 
(g)  Solicitation shall be deemed completed when made, regardless of whether the person making the solicitation receives any contribution or makes any sale. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for an itinerant vendor to sell or attempt to sell or to establish a location for business within the town without first obtaining a permit. For sales on private property, the itinerant vendor must provide a letter from the property owner sufficient to demonstrate permission for the itinerant vendor to conduct business on the property. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit on town property unless the person has obtained a permit in connection with an authorized town event, as set forth in subsection 26-283(d) of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 2, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 26-274. - Permit application. 
(a)  Every person desiring to solicit in Little Elm shall, unless otherwise exempted, apply for a permit from the appropriate town department as set forth in section 26-276. Each application for a permit required by this section shall be in writing, under oath, notarized and shall set out the following: 
(1)  Name of the applicant, with his permanent residence; 
(2)  Whether the person represents a partnership, corporation or association, and: 
a.  The business address and telephone number of the applicant; 
b.  If a partnership, the names of all partners and the principal business address and telephone number of each partner; 
c.  If a corporation, the person applying shall state whether it is organized under the laws of Texas or is a foreign corporation, and must show the mailing address, business location, telephone number, name of the individual in charge of the Texas office of such corporation, and the names and addresses of all officers and directors or trustees of said corporation, and, if a foreign corporation, the place of incorporation; 
d.  If an association, the application shall show the association's principal business address and telephone number. If the association is part of a multistate organization or association, the mailing address and business locations of its local office. 
(3)  The specific location in which the applicant intends to solicit under the permit; 
(4)  The names mailing address and telephone number of all individuals who will be in direct charge or control of the solicitation of funds; 
(5)  The kind, type and character of goods or services he proposes to offer for sale, including the name brand, manufacturer and distributor of food, goods and commodities and the name, publisher and distributor of all books, magazines or periodicals to be offered for sale; 
(6)  Full description of goods and/or services for solicitation; 
(7)  How often the applicant will solicit during the year; 
(8)  The time period within which the solicitation is to be made, giving the date of the beginning of solicitation and its projected conclusion. 
(9)  A description of the methods and means by which the solicitation of funds is to be accomplished. 
(10)  The names of any cities where applicant has obtained a permit within the previous five years; 
(11)  Whether the applicant, or any solicitor listed in the application, has ever been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; 
(12)  State driver's license number or a state approved identification card number of applicant and each solicitor; 
(13)  If a motor vehicle is to be used during the time when the applicant will be soliciting, a description of the vehicle, together with the motor vehicle registration number, license number, and a copy of the vehicle's current proof of liability insurance; 
(14)  A copy of the applicant's current State of Texas sales tax permit, together with written documentation from the state comptroller, that all sales taxes that may be due and owing by the applicant have been fully paid; 
(15)  A sworn statement from the property owner, if applicable, consenting to the applicant's use of his/her property for the solicitation activities indicated in the permit application; 
(16)  If any portion of a parking lot will be used by a solicitor, a site plan must be submitted that indicates no required parking will be used or impacted; 
(17)  If the solicitor intends to use property that has a permanent business located on-site, the on-site business must grant permission for the solicitor or his/her patrons to use the business' restroom; 
(18)  If the solicitor intends to use property that has a permanent business on-site, a site plan must be submitted that shows that walkways and ingress and egress to the on-site business will not be impacted; and 
(19)  All stationary carts (itinerant vendor) and mobile vendors (solicitor-peddler) selling food items require a health permit, prior to issuance of their respective permit. 
(b)  In addition, there shall be attached to each application for a permit, the following: 
(1)  Two recent photographic likenesses of the applicant's face, and any solicitor soliciting under said permit, which photographs shall not exceed one inch square in size. 
(2)  A certificate or letter from the president, vice president, general manager, sales manager, assistant sales manager or district or area manager of the company for which the applicant works, sells or solicits stating that the applicant is an employee and/or agent of such company. 
(3)  A reference to a recognized financial rating publication, which reference shall show the page on which the company's or firm's financial standing can be found; or a letter or a certificate from an association or organization which has as its purpose the protection of citizens of the United States against illegal or unsavory business practices stating that the firm or company is a member in good standing of such association or organization. 
(4)  A copy of a valid health permit for any applicant engaged in the sale or distribution of food or beverages shall be included. A solicitor shall be subject to inspections by the health department at the time of application and at periodic intervals thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 2, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 26-275. - Application fee. 
(a)  The peddler/solicitor and itinerant vendor application shall be accompanied by a $100.00 fee for the original applicant, plus a $50.00 fee for each additional peddler/solicitor who works for or provides services for the original applicant, for the investigation and administration of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The special event application shall be accompanied by a $50.00 fee for the business owner or applicant, for the investigation and administration of the provisions of this article. 
(c)  All fees shall be paid to the town prior to acceptance of a permit application. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 2, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 26-276. - Permits generally. 
(a)  Investigation of applicant. It shall be the duty of the police chief, or his/her authorized designee, to secure a background check through any lawful means on each applicant, and all other persons listed on the application before issuance of a permit, which investigation may include, but is not necessarily limited to, personal interviews with named individuals, public history checks, verification of references and information contained within the application. 
(b)  Issuance of permit. A permit applied for under this article shall be issued by the town within 30 days after the application is completed and filed, unless it is determined that the applicant has provided false or incomplete information on its application. 
(1)  A peddler/solicitor permit requested under this article shall be issued for the length of time requested, not to exceed one year. An expired permit may be renewed under the same terms and conditions as the original application and subject to the same fees. Peddler/solicitor permits shall be applied for with the building safety department, reviewed by the police department as required, and issued or denied by the building official or his/her authorized designee. 
(2)  An itinerant vendor permit requested under this article shall be issued for the length of time requested, not to exceed one day unless associated with a permitted special event. An applicant or business may receive no more than four itinerant vendor permits per calendar year. Itinerant vendor permits shall be applied for with the building safety department, reviewed by the police department as required, and issued or denied by the building official or his/her authorized designee. 
(3)  A special event permit requested under this article shall be issued for the length of time permitted under this article for the type of event to be held. Special event permits shall be applied for with the building safety department, reviewed by the police and fire departments as required, and issued or denied by the building official or his/her authorized designee. 
(c)  Form of permit. Each permit shall be printed in black except that the following shall be printed prominently thereon: "The issuance of the permit is not an endorsement by the Town of Little Elm or any of its officers or employees". Each permit shall bear a permit number which is the same as the file containing the application filed by the applicant. 
(d)  Permit to be displayed. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or solicit in the town without carrying the identification card and displaying the permit required, by this section on his person, in plain view, while engaged in such soliciting or selling. 
(e)  Exhibiting permit. Every vendor, solicitor, peddler or seller shall identify themselves as a salesman upon approaching a citizen in a public place or at a private dwelling and explain his purpose, whether it be direct sales, solicitation or orders of the demonstration of goods or merchandise, or any combination of purposes thereof, and shall produce for inspection, upon request by any person, the solicitor's permit issued by this town. 
(f)  Solicitors' identification cards. Each identification card issued by the town shall bear the name of the applicant, the application number, the name of the solicitor, or agent, and the expiration date of the permit, and it shall have printed prominently thereon: "This identification card is not an endorsement of the solicitation by the Town of Little Elm or any of its officers or employees. It is your duty to verify all information given to you by this solicitor". The applicant shall provide, by a separate list, the names and addresses of all agents or employees for whom identification cards are to be issued. 
(g)  Responsibility for acts of solicitors. The recipient of a permit or named applicant shall be responsible for the acts of his/her authorized representatives or solicitors listed in the permit application in connection with solicitation activities. In this regard, the recipient of the permit shall actively supervise all persons listed in the permit application, which supervision shall include but not be limited to remaining within the corporate town limits during all solicitation activity and responding promptly (within ten minutes) to calls by town representatives relative to the solicitation activity which may include responding to an on-site complaint from a citizen. 
(h)  Itinerant vendors' permit. Each permit issued by the town shall bear the name of the applicant, the application number, the name of the itinerant vendor, or agent, and the expiration date of the permit, and it shall have printed prominently thereon: "This permit is not an endorsement of the solicitation by the Town of Little Elm or any of its officers or employees. It is your duty to verify all information given to you by this solicitor". 
(i)  Special event permit. A special event permit issued by the town, pursuant to the requirements of subsection 26-283(d) of this article, shall bear the name of the applicant, the application number, the name of the applicant, or agent, and the expiration date of the permit, and it shall have printed prominently thereon: "This permit is not an endorsement of the solicitation by the Town of Little Elm or any of its officers or employees. It is your duty to verify all information given to you by this solicitor". The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the special event location. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 2, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 26-277. - Revocation or denial of permit. 
(a)  Revocation of permit. 
(1)  If, after the permit required by this section has been issued, it is determined that the permit was obtained by false representation in the application, or the permit has been reproduced or transferred or assigned to another person or the applicant has led someone to believe the permit is an endorsement of the applicant's product or service by the town, or in the event of fraud or misrepresentation by the permit holder, or in the event the permit holder has failed to furnish the items required by this article, such permit may be revoked by, during the course of investigation finds a conviction of the permit holder of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude the permit can or will be suspended or revoked. 
(2)  If there is probable cause to believe that a solicitor has engaged in prohibited conduct as defined by this article, the town staff member may revoke the permit of the permit holder. 
(3)  If more than one complaint of misconduct by a solicitor or group of solicitors working for the same company is received, the permit may be immediately revoked by the town. 
(b)  Appeal from denial or revocation of permit. Should an applicant be denied a permit, or have a permit revoked, he may appeal that action to the Town Manager of the Town of Little Elm by submitting a letter to the town secretary or her designee within ten days to complain of that action. A hearing of the denial will then be scheduled with the town manager, to be held within 15 days of the appeal. The town manager shall render a decision on the appeal within one day of the date of the hearing. Such hearing shall be an administrative hearing. Adherence to formal rules of evidence shall not be required. The decision of the town manager shall be final and binding. No new application for a permit will be considered for six months after denial or revocation, unless said denial or revocation is without prejudice or is conditional and the conditions have been satisfied as determined by the town staff handling the permit application. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 2, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 26-278. - Bond. 
    Each person engaging in solicitation activities requiring cash deposits or taking orders on delivery purchases (COD) or who requires a contract of agreement to finance the sale of any goods, services or merchandise for future delivery, or for services to be performed in the future, shall furnish to the town a cash bond in the amount of $10,000.00, naming the applicant for the permit as principal. The bond shall be in full force and effect for one year from the date of issuance of the permit, unless otherwise extended by demand of the town due to the revocation of the permit, or an anticipated delivery date beyond 12 months, in order to protect the citizens of the Town of Little Elm from potential losses associated with such solicitations. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 2, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 26-279. - Permit exemptions. 
(a)  The following persons engaged in the activities set out in subsections (a)(1) through (3) below in the Town of Little Elm shall first register with the town by filling out a form to be promulgated by the town in accordance with the provisions of this article and by furnishing proof that he/she is actually engaged in such activity in the town, and the town shall issue to such person a registration certificate exempting him from the terms and conditions of this section and from paying a fee therefore, namely: 
(1)  Public utility companies or others operating under a franchise granted by the town; 
(2)  Commercial agents dealing with local business establishments in the usual course of business; and 
(3)  Insurance salesmen, real estate salesmen and others licensed by the state. 
(b)  The following persons engaged in the activities set out in subsections (b)(1) through (4) below in the Town of Little Elm are exempt from any registration requirements in addition to the exemption from the permit requirements: 
(1)  Solicitations related to nonprofit activities, including, but not limited to, public and/or private school-related activities, Girl Scouts, Boy Scouts, and Big Brothers and Sisters, which may involve children under the age of 16. Children under the age of 16 may participate in such activities to the extent they are actively supervised by a parent, guardian or other adult person, at least 18 years of age, who is responsible for the well being of the child; 
(2)  Religious, political or nonprofit organizations and their representatives distributing handbills or pamphlets only for the purpose of communicating issues of general interest to the public need not register with the town or pay a permit fee. A donation received from the distribution of handbills or pamphlets does not affect this exemption; 
(3)  Ordinary commercial travelers who sell or exhibit for sale goods, wares or merchandise to persons selling and dealing in the same within the town; and 
(4)  Little Elm citizens conducting a survey. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 2, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 1448, § 2, 3-20-2018) 
Sec. 26-280. - Prohibited location, activities and conduct. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle, solicit, hawk, sell or take orders for or offer to take orders for any item or service in the following places in the town, unless in possession of a valid town-issued permit: 
(1)  On any public street or alley or traffic island; or 
(2)  Within 25 feet of the following facilities: 
a.  Automated teller machines; 
b.  Entrances and exits of banks, credit unions or other financial institutions; 
c.  Exterior public pay telephones; 
d.  Self-service car washes; 
e.  Self-service fuel pumps; and/or 
f.  Public transportation stops. 
(3)  Distribution of any commercial handbill or noncommercial handbill upon any premises if requested not to do so by the owner, occupant, or any other person then present in or upon such premises, of if there is placed on such premises in a conspicuous place upon or near the main entrance to the residence or premises, a card as provided in section 26-286 (Exhibiting card prohibiting solicitation and handbills of any type). 
(4)  For purposes of subsection (a)(2), measurement will be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point at which a solicitation is being conducted to whichever is applicable of the following: 
a.  The nearest entrance or exit of a facility in which an automated teller machine is enclosed or, if the machine is not enclosed in a facility, to the nearest part of the automated teller machine; 
b.  The nearest entrance or exit of a bank, credit union or other similar financial institution; 
c.  The nearest part of an exterior public pay telephone; 
d.  The nearest part of the structure of a self-service car wash; 
e.  The nearest part of a self-service fuel pump; or 
f.  The nearest point of any sign or marking designating an area as a public transportation stop. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to block or obstruct or hinder the free flow of traffic in the lawful use of the street or free passage of pedestrians in the lawful use of the sidewalk. No solicitations, sales, or distribution of merchandise, products or service shall be offered or made to occupants of motor vehicles moving or stopped in traffic on a public street or alley. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a person engaged in solicitation to: 
(1)  Misrepresent the purpose of the solicitation; 
(2)  Misrepresent the affiliation of those engaged in the solicitation; 
(3)  Continue efforts to solicit from an individual once that individual informs the solicitor that he does not wish to give anything to or buy anything from that solicitor; 
(4)  Represent the issuance of any permit or registration under this article as an endorsement or recommendation of the solicitation; 
(5)  Remove, deface or render illegible a card placed by the occupant of a residence pursuant to subsection (a)(3) above; 
(6)  Go on property upon which the owner of the property or the person controlling the property has posted signs prohibiting solicitation; or 
(7)  Remain on property after the property owner, or the property owner's designee, representative or agent, has instructed the solicitor to leave. 
(d)  No solicitor, or person working on his or her behalf, shall shout, make an outcry, blow a horn or whistle, or use any sound device, including any sound amplifying system, upon any of the streets, avenues, alleys, parks or other public places of the town, or otherwise be in violation of the town's noise ordinance. Ice cream trucks playing traditional melodies in compliance with a town-issued permit are exempt from this regulation. 
(e)  No person shall engage in solicitation through the delivery of handbills or circulars by placing said handbills or circulars on motor vehicles, public utility posts, or other location such that the same constitutes littering under V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 365. It is presumed that the person or business whose address or telephone number is listed in the notice, poster, paper, or device, or who is otherwise named, described or identified in the notice, poster, paper, or device, is the person or business who committed the violation, either personally or through an agent or employee. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use children 16 years of age or younger for solicitation activities, unless otherwise expressly permitted herein, unless such children are actively supervised by a parent, guardian or other adult person at least 18 years of age who is registered as provided herein. For purposes of this section, actively supervised means that the adult person shall be within 100 feet of all children 16 years of age or younger for whom the adult person is responsible at all times when the children are engaged in solicitation activities. 
(g)  It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this article if the person is occupying the public right-of-way for the purpose of selling newspapers or publications or other printed material which deal with the dissemination of information or opinion; however, this defense is not available if said act occurred upon the paved surface or shoulder of any public street, highway or road. 
(h)  Public safety personnel shall be exempt from the requirements of subsection (a)(1) of this section; however, such activities should not hinder the flow of traffic. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful for any business and/or person to allow or facilitate any other person to peddle, solicit, hock, sell or take orders for or offer to take orders for any item or service in the following places in the town, or to be in violation of any portion of this article, unless in possession of a valid town-issued permit. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 2, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 1097, § 2, 4-3-2012; Ord. No. 1448, § 2, 3-20-2018) 
Sec. 26-281. - Solicitation restrictions. 
(a)  Residential. No person shall peddle, solicit, hawk, sell or take orders for or offer to take orders for any item or service at a private residence in the Town of Little Elm after sunset on any day until 9:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday, unless the transaction is the result of a request made to such person by the occupant of such private residence. For purposes of this section "sunset" means the time of day identified by the National Weather Service as the time for sunset for that day for the town. There shall be no solicitations on Sunday, New Years Day, Fourth of July, Memorial Day (observed), Labor Day (observed), Thanksgiving or Christmas Day. 
(b)  Nonresidential. Except for the vending of food or drinks from a motor vehicle or other nonstationary means within construction, manufacturing or similar areas in the manner specified in subsection (g) below, solicitation shall be allowed only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. All vending stands must be removed during nonvending hours. All stands and other vending operations must be removed during nonoperating hours. 
(c)  Stationary carts. A vendor stand shall not: 
(1)  Exceed 20 feet in length, ten feet in width or 13 feet in height; 
(2)  Impede access to the entrance or driveway of any adjacent building, impede flow of traffic, or within 20 feet of fire hydrant; 
(3)  Occupy more than half of the available sidewalk width or 20 feet of such sidewalk, whichever is less; 
(4)  Occupy any portion of required on-site parking; or 
(5)  Use a generator or other external power source. 
(d)  Handicapped areas. No solicitor shall conduct business within 20 feet of any handicapped parking space or access ramp. 
(e)  Removal of trash. All trash or debris accumulating within 50 feet of any vendor stand shall be collected by the solicitor and deposited in an authorized trash container. All solicitors selling food or beverages must provide trash receptacles adjacent to or as a part of their stands. 
(f)  Prohibited areas. A solicitation permit issued pursuant to this article is valid only on specified public ways or in public places of the Town of Little Elm. The town shall prohibit vendors from selling on specified public ways or in public places if it determines such prohibitions are necessary for the protection of public health and safety. Vendor stands and motor vehicles are prohibited within 20 feet of a fire hydrant, fire escape, loading zone, or the driveway of a fire station, police station or hospital. 
(g)  Monthly reports. Upon request from the town, all vendors shall provide a copy of their monthly report of sales tax receipts to the town. 
(h)  Motor vehicles. Solicitation from a motor vehicle shall be prohibited if the solicitor: 
(1)  Stops, stands or parks the vehicle within 20 feet of any intersection, within any other prohibited area, or during prohibited hours; 
(2)  Conducts business in such a way as would increase traffic congestion or delay, constitute a hazard to life or property, interfere with an abutting property owner, or obstruct access to emergency vehicles. 
(i)  Fire inspection. If in the sole opinion of the fire marshal, or his/her designee, he/she deems an unsafe condition exists, the solicitation must be immediately discontinued. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 2, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 26-282. - Consumers right to cancel. 
(a)  The vendor, merchant, peddler or seller shall provide to the consumer in writing the right to cancel a solicitation transaction made in person or by telephone in which the consideration exceeds $5.00, until midnight of the third business day after the day on which the consumer signs an agreement or offer to purchase in a solicitation transaction. For purposes of a telephone solicitation, date of transaction means the day that the consumer receives the goods, services, or realty purchased in a solicitation transaction. 
(b)  If the consumer chooses to cancel the solicitation transaction, notification by mail shall be considered given at the time mailed as evidenced by the postmark; notification by e-mail shall be considered given at the time filed for transmission; and notification by any other writing shall be considered given at the time delivered to the merchant's designated place of business. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a merchant, peddler or seller to refuse to allow the customer to cancel the solicitation transaction. 
(d)  Cancellations authorized, and the procedure and notice requirements set forth in V.T.C.A., Texas Business and Commerce Code ch. 39, as it may be amended, are applicable to this section, for transactions applicable there under. The text of chapter 39 is available in the town secretary's office or on the web at Texas Legislature On-line. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 2, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 26-283. - Special events. 
(a)  Tent sale-Parking lot sale. 
(1)  Temporary permission is granted, as a special privilege to on-site business owners, to hold two parking lot or two tent sales annually, or a combination thereof, but no more than two events in the aggregate. Individual events cannot exceed a two-week period. 
(2)  A permit is required. 
(3)  All tents must comply with the fire code and a flame-retardant certificate must be provided. 
(4)  A 30-foot buffer space must be clear around the tent at all times. 
(5)  If the event is to be held in a shopping center, a letter from the shopping center owner, granting permission for the use of the parking lot, must accompany the permit application. 
(6)  No parking spaces which are required in order to meet the requirements of this Code may be used to hold the sale. 
(7)  If the event is not held in a shopping center, the business holding the sale must be the owner or tenant of the premises being used. 
(b)  Sidewalk sales. 
(1)  Temporary permission may be granted to on-site business owners abutting a sidewalk adjacent to their business to hold a sidewalk sale up to four times per calendar year. Individual sidewalk sales may not exceed five days per event. 
(2)  A permit is required. 
(3)  The sidewalk shall remain open to pedestrian traffic and may not be obstructed. A minimum of a six-foot clearance aisle must be maintained. 
(4)  Displays or sale items cannot exceed a vertical height of four feet. 
(5)  Items located under the store canopy and displayed on a permanent basis, on the business property are exempt from this article. 
(c)  Town-sponsored events. 
(1)  Temporary permission to solicit on town property may be granted during a town event within the location of the town sponsored event. The term of a town sponsored event permit shall be for the length of the town sponsored event. 
(2)  A permit is required. 
(3)  The applicant must follow all procedures set forth by the coordinator of the town sponsored event. 
(d)  Grand opening. 
(1)  Temporary permission is granted, as a special privilege to on-site business owners, to hold one grand opening event within 30 days of receiving their certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  A grand opening event may be held once for up to three consecutive days. 
(3)  A special event permit is required. 
(4)  If the event is to be held in a shopping center, authorization from the owner must be submitted at time of application in the form of a letter granting permission to use the parking lot. 
(5)  The event may make use of stationary carts, outside amusements, signs, and entertainment, if the activity's location and scope of operation is included in a letter at time of application. 
(6)  No more than 50 percent of the required parking may be used. 
(7)  In conjunction with a grand opening event permit, the business may use streamers, balloons and banners for a period of time not to exceed the duration of the event. 
(e)  Special event-Other. 
(1)  Other special events may be permitted at the discretion of the director of community development, if the extent of its operations, duration, and location are clearly described and identified. 
(2)  The event may make use of stationary carts, outside amusements, signs, and entertainment, if the activity's location and scope of operation is included in a letter at time of application. 
(3)  A special event permit is required. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 2, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 26-284. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions or terms of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of $500.00 and for health and safety code violations a fine not to exceed $2,000.00 for each offense, and each and every day such violation shall continue be deemed to constitute a separate offense. Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state is not required for proof of any offense defined by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 2, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 26-285. - Public disclosure. 
    All applications, whether or not a permit has been issued, shall be a public record and shall be available for inspection by members of the public during regular business hours, and copies may be obtained at cost. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 2, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 26-286. - Exhibiting card prohibiting solicitation and handbills of any type. 
(a)  A person desiring that no merchant or other person engage in solicitation, a home solicitation transaction, or distribution of commercial handbills, noncommercial handbills at his/her premises shall exhibit, in a conspicuous place upon or near the main entrance to the premises (including but not limited to entrances to: an apartment unit, building or complex; a single- or multifamily residential structure; private sidewalks; a development with private streets; or areas maintained by a property owner's association) a weatherproof card, not less than three inches by four inches in size bear the words, "no advertisements", "no solicitation", or "no handbills" to indicate that the occupants of such premises do not desire to be molested or to have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have a handbill of any type left upon the premises. The card must also bear the words "Town Ordinance ch. 26 VI". The letters on such cards shall be not less than two-thirds of an inch in height. 
(b)  Every person upon going onto any premises shall first examine the premises to determine if any notice prohibiting soliciting or distribution of commercial handbill or noncommercial handbill distribution is exhibited upon or near the main entrance to the premises. If notice prohibiting solicitation or commercial handbill or noncommercial handbill distribution is exhibited, the person shall immediately depart form the premises without distributing, placing, or depositing any type of handbill or disturbing the occupant, unless the visit is the result of a request made by the occupant. 
(c)  No person shall go upon any premises and ring the doorbell, or rap or knock upon the door or create any sound in a manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of the premises, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant or engaging in or attempting to engage in a solicitation or distribution transaction, if a card, as described in this section, is exhibited in compliance with this section, unless the visit is the result of a request made by the occupant. 
(d)  No person, other than the owner or occupant of the premises, shall remove, deface, or render illegible, a card placed by the occupant to this section. 
(e)  Any merchant or person who has gained entrance to a premises, or audiences with the occupant, whether invited or not, shall immediately depart from the premises without disturbing the occupant further when requested to leave by the occupant. 
(Ord. No. 1448, § 2, 3-20-2018) 
Secs. 26-287-26-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PREPAYMENT FOR GASOLINE AND DIESEL FUEL AT RETAIL FUEL BUSINESSES 

Sec. 26-300. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Employee means the person(s), other than the owner or manager/supervisor, employed to perform services on the premises of a retail fuel business and who have no supervisory responsibilities. 
Manager/supervisor means the person(s) granted authority or responsibility by the owner for the operations of the retail fuel business. 
Owner means the individual, group, corporation, partnership, joint venture or other group or entity that owns a retail fuel business. 
Payment means payment by any legal means, including cash, credit card, debit card, check or otherwise. Presenting a form of payment to be finalized at the conclusion of the transaction shall be considered payment in full. 
(Ord. No. 887, § 2, 3-5-2008) 
Sec. 26-301. - Offenses. 
    It shall be an offense for a retail fuel business owner, manager/supervisor, or employee to: 
(1)  Activate any gasoline or diesel fuel pumping device prior to receiving payment in full for the gasoline or diesel fuel; or 
(2)  Allow or permit any person to dispense gasoline or diesel fuel from a pumping device at a retail fuel business unless the person has first made payment in full. 
(Ord. No. 887, § 2, 3-5-2008) 
Sec. 26-302. - Defense. 
    It shall be a defense if the owner, manager/supervisor or employee of a retail fuel business allows the dispensing of gasoline or diesel fuel for repair and/or testing of the dispensing devices used by the retail fuel business. 
(Ord. No. 887, § 2, 3-5-2008) 
Chapter 30 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1245, §§ 1, 2, adopted Dec. 16, 2014, repealed the former ch. 30, §§ 30-1-30-8, and enacted a new ch. 30 as set out herein. The former ch. 30 was entitled "Civil Emergencies" and derived from Ord. No. 268, §§ 1-8, adopted Mar. 18, 1991. 

Sec. 30-1. - Purpose and declaration policy. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide the necessary organization, powers, and authority to provide the timely and effective use of all town resources to prepare for, respond to and recover from disasters and or emergencies, natural or manmade, that are likely to affect the health, security, safety, welfare or property of the town and its residents, whether the events occur within or without the corporate limits of the town. This chapter is enacted to provide the town, its officers and employees, with the broadest power permitted by the town's Code of Ordinances, the town's Charter, and state and federal law to plan for and respond to disasters and or emergencies. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 2, 12-16-2014) 
Sec. 30-2. - Incident management adopted. 
    The National Incident Management System (NIMS) is designated as the town standard for incident management Homeland Security Presidential Directive 5 (HSPD-5) . 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 2, 12-16-2014) 
Sec. 30-3. - Federal disaster relief recognized. 
    The Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act, (as amended,) 42 U.S.C. 5121, as it may now or hereafter apply to the town, is recognized as part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 2, 12-16-2014) 
Sec. 30-4. - State law adopted. 
    The provisions of the Texas Disaster Act of 1975 (V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 418, as amended), as it may now or hereafter apply to the town, are adopted as part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 2, 12-16-2014) 
Sec. 30-5. - Office of emergency management established. 
    The office of emergency management is hereby created and established in accordance with the Home Rule Charter of the Town of Little Elm, Texas, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 418 (Emergency Management), and V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 421 (Homeland Security Act of 2003). 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 2, 12-16-2014) 
Sec. 30-6. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this chapter, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Continuity of government means the principle of establishing policies and procedures that allow town government to continue its essential municipal services and operations in case of a disaster or emergency. 
    Continuity of operations means the continuation of essential municipal services and operations in the case of a disaster or emergency. 
    Disaster means the occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe damage, injury, or loss of life or property resulting from any natural or manmade cause, including fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contamination, volcanic activity, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot, hostile military or paramilitary action, other public calamity requiring emergency action, or energy emergency, and may warrant disaster assistance. The emergency operations center will be activated as appropriate during and after a disaster. 
    Emergency means an occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe damage, injury, or loss of life or property that is smaller in scope than a disaster but is larger in scope and more severe in terms of actual or potential damaging effects than an incident. Characteristics of an emergency include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Involves a large area, significant population, or important facilities; 
(2)  May require implementation of large-scale evacuation or in-place sheltering and implementation of temporary shelter and mass care operations; 
(3)  May require community-wide warning and public instructions; 
(4)  Requires a sizable multi-agency response operating under an incident commander; 
(5)  May require some external assistance from other local response agencies, contractors, and limited assistance from state or federal agencies; and/or 
(6)  The emergency operations center may be activated to provide general guidance and direction, coordinate external support, and provide resource support. 
    Emergency management plan means the document adopted by the office of emergency management to maintain continuity of government, and in order to provide general guidance for emergency management activities of the town. 
    Emergency management volunteer means any person who is not employed by the town who is duly registered, identified, and appointed by the office of emergency management, or by the town manager, or by the mayor, and who is assigned to participate in an emergency management activity. 
    Emergency operations center means the physical location at which the coordination of information and town resources is located to support local disaster or emergency management activities. It is a specially equipped facility from which town officials exercise direction and control and coordinate necessary resources in a disaster or emergency situation. 
    Incident means an emergency occurrence that is limited in scope and potential effect on lives and property, and is typically handled by one or two town response agencies acting under an incident commander. An incident may require limited external assistance from other local response forces. The emergency operations center is usually not activated during most incidents. 
    Local state of disaster means an executive order or proclamation by the emergency management director declaring a state of local disaster, upon a finding by the emergency management director that a disaster has occurred or that the occurrence or threat of occurrence of a disaster is imminent. The order or proclamation must include: 
(1)  A description of the nature of the disaster; 
(2)  A designation of the area threatened; and 
(3)  A description of the conditions that have created the state of local disaster. 
    Local state of emergency means a proclamation by the governor of a state of emergency and designation of the area involved, upon application of the mayor or town council during an emergency, pursuant to V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 433, as amended. 
    Secondary emergency operations center means the physical location of a back-up facility that would be used if the primary emergency operations center is unavailable or has its capacity exceeded during an emergency operations center activation. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 2, 12-16-2014) 
Sec. 30-7. - Mayor's powers during disaster or emergency. 
    The mayor is authorized, if the mayor finds that the town or any part thereof is suffering or is in imminent danger of suffering a disaster, emergency, civil emergency, or utility emergency, to declare a local disaster and issue orders exercising all emergency powers including without limitation, all of the following: 
(1)  Temporarily suspend, limit, cancel, convene, reschedule, postpone, continue, or relocate all meetings of the town council, and any town committee, commission, board, authority, or other town body as deemed appropriate by the mayor. 
(2)  Suspend or limit the sale, distribution, dispensing or transportation of alcoholic beverages, firearms, explosives, and other combustible products and require the closing of those businesses or parts of businesses insofar as the sale, distribution, dispensing, or transportation of these items are concerned. 
(3)  Establish a curfew during such hours of the days or nights and affecting such categories of persons as may be designated. 
(4)  Require closing of business establishments. 
(5)  Prohibit the sale or distribution within the town of any products, which could be employed in a manner, which would constitute a danger to public safety. 
(6)  Temporarily close any and all streets, alleys, sidewalks, bike paths, public parks or public ways. 
(7)  Temporarily suspend or modify, for not more than seven days, any regulation or ordinance of the town, including but not limited to, those regarding health, safety, and zoning. This period may be extended upon approval of the town council. 
(8)  Suspend or limit the use of the town's water resources or other infrastructure. 
(9)  Control, restrict, allocate, or regulate the use, sale, production, or distribution of food, water, fuel, clothing, and/or other commodities, materials, goods, services and resources including the establishment of wage, rent, and price controls and other economic stabilization methods necessary to preserve economic stability. 
(10)  Suspend or limit burning of any items or property within the town limits and up to five miles outside the corporate limits. 
(11)  Require emergency services of any town officer or employee. If regular town forces are determined to be inadequate, then to acquire the services of such other personnel as the mayor can obtain that are available, including citizen volunteers. All duly authorized persons rendering emergency services shall be entitled to the privileges and immunities as are provided by state law to other registered and identified disaster emergency workers. 
(12)  Utilize all available resources of the town as reasonably necessary to manage the disaster or emergency. 
(13)  Direct and compel the evacuation of all or part of the population from any stricken or threatened areas within the town if the mayor deems this action is necessary for the preservation of life, property, or other disaster or emergency mitigation, response or recovery and to prescribe routes, modes of transportation and destination in connection with an evacuation. 
(14)  Purchase or lease materials, supplies or equipment during the local disaster or emergency, and to authorize any or all agencies or town officials to directly purchase or lease those materials, supplies, or equipment essential to continue the work of the town involved without the advertisement of bids. Purchases or leases exceeding the amount of $25,000.00 shall require prior approval by the director of finance and municipal services shall follow the emergency procurement procedures set forth in section 30-14. 
(15)  Hire and contract for construction, engineering, architectural, building, electrical, plumbing, and repair of public improvements and/or other professional or construction services essential to continue to work of the town without the advertisement of bids when the delay of advertising and public bidding might cause serious injury or loss. Such contracts shall not exceed $25,000.00 without prior approval having been given by the director of finance and administrative services and following the emergency procurement procedures set forth in section 30-14. 
(16)  Make application for local, state or federal assistance. 
(17)  Establish and control routes of transportation, ingress or egress. 
(18)  Control ingress and egress from any designated disaster or emergency area or home, building or structures located therein. 
(19)  Utilize private property as necessary to cope with emergency or disaster conditions, subject to any requirements established by law for compensation and in accordance with section 30-14. 
(20)  Appropriate and expend funds, exclude contracts, authorize the obtaining and acquisition of property, equipment, services, supplies and materials without strict compliance with procurement regulations or procedures. 
(21)  Transfer the direction, personnel, or functions of town departments and agencies for the purpose of performing or facilitating emergency or disaster services. 
(22)  Accept services, gifts, grants, loans, equipment, supplies, and/or materials whether from private, nonprofit or governmental sources. 
(23)  Terminate or suspend any process, operation, machine, device, or event that is or may negatively impact the health, safety and welfare of persons or property within the town. 
(24)  Delegate authority to such town officials as the mayor determines reasonably necessary, convenient or expedient. 
(25)  Require the continuation, termination, disconnection, or suspension of natural gas, electrical power, water, sewer, communication or other public utilities or infrastructure. 
(26)  Close or cancel the use of any municipally owned or operated building or other public facility. 
(27)  Disinfect, abate, demolish, remove or clean up any building, structure, site, wreckage or debris. 
(28)  Declare, issue, enforce, modify and terminate orders for quarantine and isolation of persons or animals posing a threat to public health. 
(29)  Exercise such powers and functions in light of the exigencies of emergency or disaster including the waiving of compliance with any time consuming procedures and formalities, including notices, as may be prescribed by law. 
(30)  Issue any and all such other orders or undertake such other functions and activities as the mayor reasonably believes is required to protect the health, safety and welfare of persons or property within the town or otherwise preserve the public peace or abate, clean up, or mitigate the effects of any emergency or disaster. 
(31)  Exercise the full power and authority to provide by proclamation all regulations reasonably necessary to protect the health, security, welfare, safety, peace, life and property of the town and the inhabitants during the time of such crisis. 
(32)  Delegate, to the extent allowed by law, any or all of these powers and duties to the emergency management coordinator. 
(33)  Petition the governor to apply to the federal government for financial assistance and for aid to local families and individuals adversely affected by the disaster or emergency. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 2, 12-16-2014) 
Sec. 30-8. - Organization. 
(a)  The mayor is hereby designated as the emergency management director of the town, pursuant to V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 418, as amended. The emergency management director serves as the governor's designated agent in the administration and supervision of the duties outlined in V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 418, on behalf of the town. 
(b)  The emergency management director may designate a person to serve as emergency management coordinator who shall serve as an assistant to the emergency management director for emergency management purposes. By the ordinance codified in this chapter, the emergency management director designates the town's emergency management coordinator, who may be hired by and shall report to the Chief of the Little Elm Fire Department, as the emergency management coordinator referred to in V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 418. 
(c)  The office of emergency management shall be directed by the town's emergency management coordinator, who shall serve as the primary point of contact for emergency management on behalf of the town. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 2, 12-16-2014) 
Sec. 30-9. - Duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director. 
(a)  The emergency management director shall exercise the powers granted to the governor under V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 418, as amended, on an appropriate local scale. 
(b)  The emergency management director may declare a state of local disaster if he finds that a disaster has occurred or that the occurrence or threat of disaster is imminent. A state of local disaster may not continue for more than seven days except with the consent of the town council. The emergency management director or the town council may make application during an emergency to the governor for a proclamation of a state of emergency and designate the area involved, pursuant to V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 43, as amended. 
(c)  The emergency management director may exercise other powers and have additional duties and responsibilities, as may be necessary, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Issuance of proclamations, regulations or directives necessary for carrying out the purposes of this chapter. Such proclamations, regulations or directives shall be disseminated promptly to the general public. 
(2)  Ensure all proclamations, regulations or directives related to a local state of disaster or local state of emergency are filed promptly with the town secretary, unless circumstances as a result of the emergency or disaster prevent or impede such prompt filing, whereupon the proclamation, regulation or directive shall be filed as soon as practicable. 
(3)  Other powers, duties or responsibilities as specified in V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 418, town ordinance or resolution, or the emergency management plan, as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 2, 12-16-2014) 
Sec. 30-10. - Duties and responsibilities of the town manager for emergency management. 
    The town manager shall have the following responsibilities for emergency management under this chapter: 
(1)  Marshal, assign and deploy all necessary personnel, equipment, supplies, and other available town resources, as needed, to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan, as well as to aid in responding to a disaster or emergency. 
(2)  Prepare and distribute to all appropriate town officials and employees a clear and complete statement of the disaster or emergency responsibilities of the departments within the town, including departmental support of the office of emergency management and the emergency operations center. This statement shall include, but is not limited to: NIMS compliance; a plan for the continuity of government; and a plan for the continuity of operations during the occurrence of a disaster or emergency. 
(3)  The town manager, or his designee, shall act as the manager of the town's emergency operations center during its activation and operation. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 2, 12-16-2014) 
Sec. 30-11. - Duties and responsibilities of the office of emergency management. 
(a)  The office of emergency management shall be responsible to the emergency management coordinator in regard to all phases of emergency management activities. 
(b)  The office of emergency management is responsible for planning, coordinating, developing, operating and maintaining a comprehensive emergency management program in compliance with state and federal law, including all phases of emergency management activities. 
(c)  A current emergency management plan for the town shall be prepared and maintained by the office of emergency management. The emergency management plan will include methods of mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery as required by the State of Texas. The emergency management plan shall describe the town's emergency response organization and assign responsibilities for various emergency tasks. The emergency management plan shall provide a framework for specific town department functions during a disaster or emergency. The emergency management plan applies to all town officials, departments and agencies. 
(d)  The office of emergency management shall coordinate its efforts with county, regional, state and federal emergency management programs. 
(e)  The office of emergency management shall coordinate the recruitment, training and supervision of emergency management volunteer personnel and agencies needed to augment the personnel, facilities and functions of the town for emergency management purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 2, 12-16-2014) 
Sec. 30-12. - Emergency operations center. 
(a)  The office of emergency management is responsible for developing and maintaining the emergency operations center. The emergency operations center shall be equipped and maintained to support the management of disasters and/or emergencies within the town. 
(b)  The office of emergency management shall maintain trained emergency operations center staff members in sufficient numbers who are available in the event of emergency operations center activation. Emergency operations center staff members may be town employees from any division of the town, or emergency management volunteers who are trained and assigned to the emergency operations center in the event of emergency operations center activation. 
(c)  The office of emergency management will conduct periodic training and exercises to evaluate and practice the functions that will be necessary during a disaster or emergency. 
(d)  The office of emergency management shall maintain a secondary emergency operations center for use in the event the primary emergency operations center is not available. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 2, 12-16-2014) 
Sec. 30-13. - Mutual aid agreements. 
(a)  The emergency management director may, on behalf of the town, enter into reciprocal aid, mutual aid, joint powers agreements, intergovernmental assistance agreements, or other compacts, plans or agreements with other governmental entities for the protection of life and property. Such agreements may include the furnishing or exchange of supplies, equipment, facilities, personnel, and/or services and authorize employment by the county and other cities and governmental entities within the county with the director as area coordinator for mutual aid. 
(b)  The town council or any of its committees, boards, commissions or authorities may exercise such powers and functions in light of the exigencies of the emergency or disaster and may waive compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by law. 
(c)  The emergency management director shall recommend for adoption by the town council mutual aid plans and agreements, which are deemed essential for the emergency management plan or program. 
(d)  The emergency management director is authorized to join with other municipal, county, state and federal officials to form joint emergency management plans and programs and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator and to participate in county-wide, regional and state-wide programs of emergency and disaster management and to present any such plans or programs for the approval of the town council. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 2, 12-16-2014) 
Sec. 30-14. - Emergency procurements. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any provision of this Code to the contrary, the mayor, upon declaration of a state of emergency by proclamation as provided in section 30-7, may authorize the town manager or the town manager's designees to procure by purchase or lease, such goods and services as are deemed necessary for the town's emergency response effort. This emergency procurement of goods or services may be made in the open market without filing a requisition or estimate and without advertisement for immediate delivery or furnishing. A full written account of all emergency procurements made during this emergency, together with a requisition for the required materials, supplies, equipment or services, shall be submitted to or provided by the town manager within 30 days after their procurement, and shall be open to public inspection for a period of at least one year subsequent to the date of the emergency purchases. The town manager shall, within three months of the conclusion of the emergency, formally communicate these emergency expenditures in a full written account to the town council. 
(b)  All payments or compensation for personal services must be approved by town council unless otherwise authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 2, 12-16-2014) 
Sec. 30-15. - Property taken or commandeered. 
    Any person making a claim for property taken, used or commandeered during the emergency or disaster shall follow the procedure set forth and be compensated in accordance with the requirements and restrictions of V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 418, or any successor statute. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 2, 12-16-2014) 
Sec. 30-16. - Override. 
    At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith but only to the extent of any such conflict or inconsistency. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 2, 12-16-2014) 
Sec. 30-17. - Commitment of funds. 
    No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the town in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this chapter without prior approval by the town council except in accordance with the approved town and/or county budgets or as authorized by this chapter and other applicable law. No person shall have any right to bind the town by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the town council, unless during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the town when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, safety, welfare, life or property in accordance with sections 30-7 and 30-14 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 2, 12-16-2014) 
Sec. 30-18. - Immunity. 
(a)  This section is an exercise by the town of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health, safety and welfare and neither the town, the agents and representatives of the town, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association or trustee nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall be liable for any damages sustained to persons as the result of the activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the town a license or privilege or otherwise permits the town to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack or natural or manmade disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of or injury to any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of or damage to the property of such person. 
(b)  Any officer, employee or volunteer of the town performing a homeland security activity or other emergency activity under this section shall also be entitled to the protection of the limitations on liability contained in V.T.C.A., chs. 418 and 421 or any successor statute or any other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 2, 12-16-2014) 
Sec. 30-19. - Authority for enforcement. 
    The members of the police force of the town and other law enforcement agencies have jurisdiction or as otherwise authorized by the mayor, the public health department, the fire department, or such other persons as authorized by the mayor, are hereby authorized and directed to enforce the orders, rules and regulations made or issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 2, 12-16-2014) 
Sec. 30-20. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction of any provision that governs fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation, be fined a sum not exceeding $2,000.00, and upon conviction of a violation of any other provision of this chapter, be fined a sum not exceeding $500.00. 
(b)  Any person violating a proclamation of emergency or disaster, a subsequent proclamation exercising emergency or disaster powers, a rule, regulation or order, which rule, regulation or order issued pursuant to this chapter, or who violates any order or directive of emergency services personnel pursuant to this chapter shall, upon conviction of any proclamation, rule, regulation, order or directive that governs fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation, be fined a sum not exceeding $2,000.00, and upon conviction of a violation of any other proclamation, rule, regulation, order or directive issued under this chapter, be fined a sum not exceeding $500.00. 
(c)  Each and every day that the provisions of or any proclamation, rule, regulation, order or directive issued under this chapter are violated shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 2, 12-16-2014) 
Sec. 30-21. - Civil penalty. 
    Any owner or owner's representative with control over the premises violating any provision of or any proclamation, rule, regulation, order or directive issued under this chapter upon proof that: (1) the defendant was actually notified of the provisions of this section or of any proclamation, rule, regulation, order or directive issued under this chapter; and (2) after the defendant received notice of the chapter, proclamation, rule, regulation, order or directive, the person committed acts in violation of same or failed to take action necessary for compliance may be assessed a civil penalty not exceeding $1,000.00 a day for violation or a civil penalty not to exceed $5,000.00 a day for violations relating to point source effluent limitations or the discharge of a pollutant, other than from a non-point source, into a sewer system, including a sanitary or stormwater sewer system, owned or controlled by the town or assessed a civil penalty as may otherwise be authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 2, 12-16-2014) 
Sec. 30-22. - Penalties cumulative. 
    All penalties in this chapter are in addition to and cumulative of any other remedies that may be available at law and in equity, including, without limitation, injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 2, 12-16-2014) 
Sec. 30-23. - Severability. 
    The provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable, and if any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter shall for any reason be held to be invalid or unconstitutional or if the application of this chapter to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses and/or phases of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 2, 12-16-2014) 
Sec. 30-24. - Repealer. 
    Every ordinance or parts of ordinances found to be in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 2, 12-16-2014) 
Sec. 30-25. - Effective date. 
    This chapter shall take effect and be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and publication as required by law. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 2, 12-16-2014) 
Sec. 30-26. - Scope and application. 
    The provisions of sections 30-1 to 30-25 shall apply to all executive, legislative, and judicial branches, powers and functions conferred upon the town and its officers, employees and authorized agents. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 2, 12-16-2014) 
Chapter 34 - COURTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 974, § 2, adopted Aug. 18, 2009, repealed former art. I, §§ 34-1-34-10, and enacted a new art. I, §§ 34-1-34-60, subsequently renumbering article II, §§ 34-37-34-39 as 34-87-34-89 and art. III, §§ 34-67-34-69 as 34-127-34-129, to conform with the number style of the Code. The former art. I pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 55, §§ 55-1-55-9, adopted Dec. 6, 1973; and Ord. No. 804, § 1, adopted July 3, 2007. 
Charter reference- Municipal court, ch. 6. 

ARTICLE I. - MUNICIPAL COURT OF RECORD 
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Creation and name. 
(a)  The town council hereby finds and determines that the creation of a municipal court of record is necessary to provide a more efficient disposition of cases arising within the town. 
(b)  The town council hereby creates a municipal court of record to be known as the "Municipal Court of Record No. 1 in the Town of Little Elm, Texas". 
(c)  The town council hereby adopts state law regarding municipal courts of records, as amended, and to the extent that this article conflicts with state law, state law shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 974, § 2, 8-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-2. - Seal of the court. 
    The town council shall provide the court of record with a seal. The seal's appearance and use shall substantially conform to Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 45.02. The seal shall include the following phrase: "Municipal Court of Record No. 1 in the Town of Little Elm, Texas". 
(Ord. No. 974, § 2, 8-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-3. - Jurisdiction. 
    The municipal court of record, as created herein, shall exercise the entire jurisdiction conferred upon the judge and municipal court by the ordinances of the town and the Constitution and laws of the state. The municipal court shall have jurisdiction as follows: 
(1)  General jurisdiction as provided by V.T.C.A., Texas Government Code § 30.00005, as amended; 
(2)  Concurrent jurisdiction with a district court or a county court at law under V.T.C.A., Texas Government Code ch. 54, subch. B, within the town's territorial limits and property owned by the town located in the town's extraterritorial jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing health and safety and nuisance abatement ordinances; 
(3)  Civil jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing municipal ordinances enacted under V.T.C.A., Texas Local Government Code ch. 214, subch. A; or V.T.C.A., Texas Transportation Code ch. 683, subch. E; 
(4)  Authority to issue: 
a.  Search warrants for the purpose of investigating a health and safety or nuisance abatement ordinance violation; and 
b.  Seizure warrants for the purpose of securing, removing or demolishing the offending property and removing the debris from the premises. 
(5)  Over the forfeiture and collection of bonds given in proceedings therein, and to order the forfeiture of cash acceptance bonds upon failure of the defendant to appear, and to accept same in lieu of a fine; 
(6)  Over cases involving a license or permit granted by the town for any calling, occupation, business or vocation. In addition to the punishment to be imposed therefore, the court may suspend or revoke the license or permit so granted; 
(7)  To enforce all process of the court in accordance with state law and town ordinance, punish witnesses for failing to obey subpoenas, and compel their attendance by process of attachment; 
(8)  To punish for contempt, admit to bail and forfeit bonds under such circumstances and as provided by county courts, or county courts exercising criminal jurisdiction only; and 
(9)  Over all other matters and cases provided for by state law, town ordinance and the Town's Home-Rule Charter. 
(Ord. No. 974, § 2, 8-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-4. - Collection fee; adoption of V.T.C.A., Texas Criminal Procedure Code § 102.0031. 
(a)  A collection fee is hereby authorized and imposed, as provided by V.T.C.A., § 102.0031, in the amount of 30 percent of debts and accounts receivable, such as unpaid fines, fees, court costs, forfeited bonds or restitution ordered paid by a municipal court of record serving the town when such debt or account receivable is more then 60 days past due and has been referred to an attorney or private vendor for collection; and 
(b)  A collection fee is hereby authorized and imposed, as provided by V.T.C.A., Texas Criminal Procedure Code § 102.0031, in the amount of 30 percent of amounts in cases in which the accused has failed to appear: 
(1)  As promised under V.T.C.A., Texas Transportation Code ch. 543, subch. A, or other law; 
(2)  In compliance with a lawful written notice to appear issued under V.T.C.A., Texas Criminal Procedure Code § 14.06(b) or other law; 
(3)  In compliance with a lawful summons issued under V.T.C.A., Texas Criminal Procedure Code § 15.03(b); 
(4)  In compliance with a lawful order of a court serving the town; or 
(5)  As specified in a citation, summons, or other notice authorized by V.T.C.A., Texas Transportation Code § 682.002, that charges the accused with a parking or stopping offense, when such amounts are more than 60 days past due and have been referred to an attorney or private vendor for collection. 
(Ord. No. 974, § 2, 8-18-2009) 
Secs. 34-5-34-9. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MUNICIPAL JUDGES 

Sec. 34-10. - Appointment of judge or judges. 
(a)  Generally: 
(1)  The municipal court of the town shall be presided over by one or more municipal judges, of whom one shall be designated as presiding judge. 
(2)  One or more associate judges may be appointed to assist the presiding judge. 
(3)  Biennially in June of each odd-numbered year, the town council shall appoint one or more municipal judges. 
(4)  A judge shall hold office for two years from the date of appointment or until his successor is appointed and qualified, unless sooner removed by the council, pursuant to section 34-14. 
(5)  In the event of any vacancy in the office of a municipal judge by death, resignation or otherwise, the town council shall appoint a qualified attorney to fill the unexpired term as municipal judge. 
(6)  A person may not serve as a municipal judge if the person is employed by the town. A municipal judge who accepts employment with the town vacates his position as municipal judge. 
(7)  Each municipal court judge shall devote as much time to the office as necessary. 
(b)  The presiding judge shall: 
(1)  Be the administrative head of the judiciary of the town; 
(2)  Maintain a central docket for cases filed within the territorial limits of the town over which the municipal court of record has jurisdiction; 
(3)  Provide for the distribution of cases from the central docket to the individual municipal judges to equalize the distribution of business in the courts; 
(4)  Request the jurors needed for cases that are set for trial by jury; 
(5)  Temporarily assign associate judges or substitute judges to exchange benches and to act for each other in a proceeding pending in a court if necessary for the expeditious disposition of business in the courts; 
(6)  Supervise and control the operation and functions of the proceedings of the court, specifically those operations relating to courtroom processes; however, the judge shall not supervise any court personnel; 
(7)  Promulgate work rules concerning the administration of the court dockets, the times and places for holding court, equalizing of the case assignments, the vacation schedules and other administrative details concerned with the judicial performance of the municipal court ("rules"), which rules shall be submitted to the town manager and town attorney for comment prior to adoption by the town council; 
(8)  Be responsible to see that the rules are adhered to by the court; and 
(9)  Make such reports as may be required by the town council. 
(c)  The associate judge shall: 
(1)  Assist the presiding judge; 
(2)  Attend and preside over any and all dockets assigned; 
(3)  Be available to assist court staff during and after assigned dockets and sign all documents as requested by court staff or relating to court assignments; 
(4)  Perform magisterial duties, as assigned; 
(5)  Comply with the rules promulgated by the presiding judge; 
(6)  Be available to serve for the presiding judge, if he is temporarily absent due to illness, family death, continuing legal or judicial education programs, or any other reason. 
(Ord. No. 974, § 2, 8-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-11. - Qualifications of judge. 
    An individual appointed to serve as a municipal court judge shall be: 
(1)  A resident of the state; 
(2)  A citizen of the United States; 
(3)  A licensed attorney in good standing; and 
(4)  Have two or more years of experience in the practice of law in this state. 
(Ord. No. 974, § 2, 8-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-12. - Salary. 
    A municipal judge is entitled to a salary, the amount of which shall be determined by the town council. The amount of a judge's salary may not be diminished during the judge's term of office. Further, the amount of the municipal court judge's salary shall not be based directly or indirectly on fines, fees or costs collected by the court of record. 
(Ord. No. 974, § 2, 8-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-13. - Powers and duties. 
    The municipal judge shall take judicial notice of state law and the ordinances and corporate limits of the town. The municipal judge shall have all powers assigned by state law, including the power to grant writs of mandamus, attachment and other writs necessary to the enforcement of the jurisdiction of the court of record and may issue writs of habe as corpus in cases in which the offense charged is within the jurisdiction of the court of record. The municipal judge is a magistrate and may issue administrative search warrants. 
(Ord. No. 974, § 2, 8-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-14. - Removal of judge. 
    A municipal judge may be removed from office at any time for the reasons stated and consistent with V.T.C.A., Texas Government Code § 30.000085, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 974, § 2, 8-18-2009) 
Secs. 34-15-34-19. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COURT CLERK AND COURT PERSONNEL 

Sec. 34-20. - Clerk of court. 
(a)  There shall be a clerk of the municipal court of record. Said clerk shall have the power to, and perform, all things and acts usual and necessary to be performed by clerks of court in issuing process of said court and conducting the business thereof, and such other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance of the town council. 
(b)  The clerk of the municipal court shall keep the records of the municipal courts of record, issue process, and generally perform the duties that a clerk of a county court at law exercising criminal jurisdiction performs for that court. In addition, the clerk shall maintain an index of all court judgments in the same manner as county clerks are required by law to prepare for criminal cases arising in county courts. 
(c)  The clerk of the municipal court shall be subject to the personnel rules and regulations applicable to all town employees and may be removed at will. 
(Ord. No. 974, § 2, 8-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-21. - Other court personnel. 
    Town council may provide deputy clerks, warrant officers and other personnel as needed for the proper operation of the municipal court of record. Such individuals shall perform their duties under the direction and control of the presiding judge during times when court is in session. 
(Ord. No. 974, § 2, 8-18-2009) 
Secs. 34-22-34-29. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RULES OF PROCEDURE 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 34-30. - Recording of court proceedings. 
    All proceedings before the municipal court of record, to the extent requested, shall be recorded by use of a good quality electronic recording device. This shall be the primary method for the recording of proceedings utilized by the municipal court of record. No recording shall be made unless the municipal judge, or one of the parties to the proceedings, requests a record. As an alternative to the electronic recording device, proceedings shall be recorded by an official court reporter appointed by the town council. The record of the proceedings shall be kept by the clerk of court if an electronic recording device is used, or the court reporter in cases where the court reporter records the proceedings, for the 20-day period beginning the day after the last day of the court proceeding, trial or denial of motion for new trial, whichever occurs last. If a case is appealed, the proceedings shall be transcribed from the recording by a court reporter appointed by the town. 
(Ord. No. 974, § 2, 8-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-31. - Court reporter; duties; compensation. 
    The town council shall appoint one or more court reporters to preserve a record in cases tried before the municipal court of record in which the proceedings are not recorded by a good quality recording device. The court reporter must meet the qualifications provided by law for official court reporters. The court reporter may use written notes, transcribing equipment, video or audio recording equipment, or a combination of those methods to record the proceedings of the court. The court reporter shall keep the record for the 20-day period beginning the day after the last day of the proceeding, trial or denial of motion for new trial, or until any appeal is final, whichever occurs last. The court reporter shall not be required to record testimony or any proceeding in a case unless the municipal judge or one of the parties requests a record. The party requesting the services of the official court reporter shall bear the cost of those services. When an electronic recording device is being used to record the proceedings, it is not necessary to have a court reporter present to record the proceedings or to certify the statement of facts. The town council shall set the compensation of the court reporter. 
(Ord. No. 974, § 2, 8-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-32. - Transcript preparation fee. 
    The town council hereby establishes a transcript preparation fee in the amount of $25.00. This fee does not include the fee for an actual transcript of the proceedings. The party requesting an actual transcript must pay the transcript preparation fee and the fee for an actual transcript of the proceedings. The fee for a transcript shall include the actual cost, as invoiced by the court reporter, for transcribing the recorded proceedings and the cost for copies. 
(Ord. No. 974, § 2, 8-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-33. - Prosecutions. 
    All prosecutions in the municipal court of record shall be conducted as provided by V.T.C.A., Texas Criminal Procedure Code § 45.03, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 974, § 2, 8-18-2009) 
Secs. 34-34-34-39. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Appeals 

Sec. 34-40. - Generally. 
    A defendant has the right to appeal from a judgment or conviction in the municipal court of record, as provided by V.T.C.A., Texas Government Code § 30.00014, as amended. The state has the right to appeal from a judgment in the court of record in manner provided for by V.T.C.A., Texas Criminal Procedure Code § 44.01, as amended. The appropriate county court of Denton County, Texas, shall have jurisdiction of appeals from the court of record. All appeals shall be conducted in the manner provided for by V.T.C.A., Texas Government Code ch. 30, as amended. Upon the enactment of this article, all cases for offenses alleged to have been committed on or after September 1, 2009, shall be appealed in accordance with V.T.C.A., Texas Government Code ch. 30, as amended. An offense committed before September 1, 2009, shall be appealed in accordance with the law in effect before such date. 
(Ord. No. 974, § 2, 8-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-41. - Perfecting right to appeal. 
(a)  The town council specifically adopts state law, as amended, relative to appeals. 
(b)  In order to perfect a right to appeal, the appellant must file a written motion for new trial with the clerk of court and must also give notice of the appeal to the appellee and to the court. 
(c)  The written motion for new trial must be filed with the clerk of court not later than the tenth day after the date on which judgment is rendered. The motion must set forth the points of error of which the appellant complaints. The motion or amended motion may be amended with leave of court at any time before action on the motion is taken, but may not be amended later than the 20th day after the date on which the original or amended motion is filed. The court may for good cause extend the time for filing or amending, but the extension may not exceed 90 days from the original filing deadline. If the court does not act on the motion before the expiration of the 30 days allowed for determination of the motion, the original or amended motion is overruled by operation of law. 
(d)  If the appellant requests a hearing on the motion for new trial, the appellant may give the notice of appeal orally in open court after the motion is overruled. If there is no hearing, the appellant must file the notice with the court not later than the tenth day after the date on which the motion is overruled. The court may for good cause extend the time period for providing notice; however, the extension shall not exceed 90 days from the original filing deadline. If the defendant is in custody, the appeal is perfected when the notice of appeal is given as provided by V.T.C.A., Texas Criminal Procedure Code § 44.13, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 974, § 2, 8-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-42. - Appeal bond. 
    If the defendant is not in custody, the defendant may not take an appeal until the defendant files an appeal bond with the municipal court of record. The bond must be approved by the court and must be filed not later than the tenth day after the date on which the motion for new trial is overruled. The appeal bond must be in the amount of $100.00 or double the amount of the fines and costs adjudged against the defendant, whichever is greater. The bond must state that the defendant was convicted in the case and has appealed and must be conditioned on the defendant's immediate and daily personal appearance in the court to which the appeal is taken. If the defendant is in custody, the defendant shall be committed to jail unless the defendant posts the appeal bond. 
(Ord. No. 974, § 2, 8-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-43. - Record. 
(a)  The record on appeal must substantially conform to the provisions relating to the preparation of a record on appeal in the Texas Rules of Appellate Procedure and the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended. 
(b)  Not later than the 60th day after the date on which the notice of appeal is given or filed, the parties must file with the clerk of court the statement of facts; a written description of material to be included in the transcript in addition to the required material; and any material to be included in the transcript that is not in the custody of the clerk of court. Upon completion of the record, the municipal judge shall approve the record in the manner provided for record completion, approval and notification in the court of appeals. After the municipal judge approves the record, the clerk of court shall promptly send the record to the appellate court clerk for filing. V.T.C.A., Government Code § 30.00020, as amended, charges the appellate court clerk with the responsibility of notifying the defendant and the prosecuting attorney that the record has been filed. 
(Ord. No. 974, § 2, 8-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-44. - Statement of facts. 
    The statement of facts must substantially conform to the provisions relating to the preparation of a statement of facts in the Texas Rules of Appellate Procedure and the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended. The appellant shall pay for the statement of facts. 
(Ord. No. 974, § 2, 8-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-45. - Transcript. 
    The transcript must substantially conform to the provisions relating to the preparation of a transcript in the Texas Rules of Appellate Procedure and the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 974, § 2, 8-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-46. - Bills of exception. 
    Bills of exception must substantially conform to the provisions relating to the preparation of bills of exception in the Texas Rules of Appellate Procedure and the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 974, § 2, 8-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-47. - Brief. 
(a)  Both the appellant and the appellee are required to file briefs with the appellate court clerk. Each party, on the filing of the party's brief with the appellate court clerk, shall deliver a copy of the brief to the opposing party and to the municipal judge. The record and the brief, on appeal, shall be limited as far as possible to the questions relied on for reversal. The municipal judge shall decide from the briefs of the parties whether the appellant should be permitted to withdraw the notice of appeal and be granted a new trial by the court of record. The court of record may grant a new trial at any time before the record is filed with the appellate court. 
(b)  The appellant must file a brief with the appellate court clerk not later than the 15th day after the date on which the transcript and statement of facts are filed with that clerk. The appellant or the appellant's attorney must certify that the brief has been properly mailed to the appellee. 
(c)  The appellee must file its brief with the appellate clerk not later than the 15th day on which the appellant's brief is filed. 
(Ord. No. 974, § 2, 8-18-2009) 
DIVISION 5. - JUVENILE MATTERS 

Sec. 34-60. - Juvenile case manager fund. 
(a)  There is hereby created a juvenile case manager fund in accordance with Vernon's Ann. C.C.P., art. 102.0174. This fund shall be administered by, or under the direction of, the Town Council of the Town of Little Elm. 
(b)  All defendants convicted in municipal court for a misdemeanor offense committed on or after September 1, 2009, shall be required to pay a $5.00 juvenile case manager fee as a cost of court. 
(1)  A person is considered convicted for purposes of this article if: (i) a sentence is imposed on the person; (ii) the person is placed on deferred disposition, including deferred proceedings under V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure, art. 45.052; or (iii) the person is placed on deferred adjudication in county court. 
(2)  The municipal court clerk shall collect the costs and pay the funds to the municipal treasurer, or to any other official who discharges the duties commonly delegated to the municipal treasurer, for deposit in the juvenile case manager fund. 
(3)  A municipal court judge is authorized to waive the juvenile case manager fee in a case of financial hardship. 
(c)  The juvenile case manager fund may be used only to finance the salary, benefits, training, travel expenses, office supplies, and other necessary expenses related to the position of a juvenile case manager jointly employed by the Municipal Court of the Town of Little Elm and another governmental entity or to contribute to the costs of a case manager employed by another governmental entity that provides juvenile case manager services to the Municipal Court of the Town of Little Elm. If there is money remaining in the juvenile case manager fund after such costs are paid, on approval by the employing court(s), a juvenile case manager may direct the remaining money to be used to implement programs directly related to the duties of the juvenile case manager. 
(Ord. No. 974, § 2, 8-18-2009; Ord. No. 1334, § 2, 6-7-2016) 
Secs. 34-61-34-86. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL COURT BUILDING SECURITY FUND[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- See editor's note at beginning of this chapter. 
State Law reference- Municipal court building security fund, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 102.017. 

Sec. 34-87. - Building security fund established. 
    The municipal court building security fund (referred to in this section as the "fund") is hereby created. All monies deposited into the fund shall be expended in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 478, § 1, 2-7-2000) 
Sec. 34-88. - Imposition of security fee. 
    Any defendant convicted in the municipal court shall be charged and shall pay as a cost of court, in addition to all other costs of court, a $3.00 security fee. For purposes of this section, a defendant is considered convicted if: 
(1)  A judgment and sentence is imposed on the defendant; 
(2)  The defendant receives community supervision, including deferred adjudication; or 
(3)  The court defers final disposition of the defendant's case. 
(Ord. No. 478, § 2, 2-7-2000) 
Sec. 34-89. - Deposit of fee into the fund; fund administration. 
    The municipal court clerk shall collect the security fee, pay the fee to the finance director, and the fee shall be deposited by the finance director into the fund. The fund shall be administered under the direction of the town council. The fund may be used only to finance items when used for the purpose of providing security services for the building housing the municipal court, as appropriate, including: 
(1)  The purchase of or repair of X-ray machines and conveying systems; 
(2)  Handheld metal detectors; 
(3)  Walk-through metal detectors; 
(4)  Identification cards and systems; 
(5)  Electronic locking and surveillance equipment; 
(6)  Bailiffs, deputy sheriffs, deputy constables or contract security personnel during times when they are providing appropriate security services; 
(7)  Signage; 
(8)  Confiscated weapon inventory and tracking systems; 
(9)  Locks, chains, alarms or similar security devices; 
(10)  The purchase or repair of bullet-proof glass; 
(11)  Continuing education on security issues for court personnel and security personnel; 
(12)  Warrant officers and related equipment; and 
(13)  Any other item or service authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 3, 3-6-2000; Ord. No. 1334, § 3, 6-7-2016) 
Secs. 34-90-34-126. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MUNICIPAL COURT TECHNOLOGY FUND[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- See editor's note at beginning of this chapter. 

Sec. 34-127. - Technology fund. 
    The municipal court technology fund ("fund") is hereby created. All monies deposited into the fund shall be expended in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 609, § 1, 10-7-2003) 
Sec. 34-128. - Imposition of technology fee. 
    Any defendant convicted in the municipal court shall be charged and shall pay as a cost of court, in addition to all other costs of the courts, a technology fee in the amount of $4.00. For the purposes of this section, a defendant is considered convicted if: 
(1)  A judgment and sentence is imposed on the defendant; 
(2)  The defendant receives community supervision, including deferred adjudication; or 
(3)  The court defers final disposition of the defendant's case. 
(Ord. No. 609, § 2, 10-7-2003) 
Sec. 34-129. - Deposit of fee into the fund; fund administration; use of fee. 
    The municipal court clerk shall collect the technology fee, pay the fee to the town's finance directors, and the fee shall be deposited by the finance director into the fund. The fund shall be administered under the direction of the town council. The fund may be used to finance the following when used for the purposes of providing technology enhancements for the municipal court: 
(1)  Computer systems; 
(2)  Computer networks; 
(3)  Computer hardware; 
(4)  Computer software; 
(5)  Imaging systems; 
(6)  Electronic kiosks; 
(7)  Electronic ticket writers; and 
(8)  Docket management systems. 
(Ord. No. 609, § 3, 10-7-2003) 
Secs. 34-130-34-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TEEN COURT PROGRAM[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1334, § 4, adopted June 7, 2016, repealed the former art. IV, §§ 34-150-34-153, and enacted a new art. IV as set out herein. The former art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1085, § 2, adopted Nov. 1, 2011. 

Sec. 34-150. - Teen court program established. 
(a)  Pursuant to the Vernon's Ann. C.C.P., ch. 45, "Justice and Municipal Courts," the Municipal Court of Record No. 1 in the Town of Little Elm, Texas, ("municipal court") is authorized to defer proceedings against a defendant who is under the age of 18 or who is enrolled full-time in an accredited secondary program leading toward a high school diploma by authorizing participation in a teen court program. 
(b)  Pursuant to state law, the town hereby establishes a Little Elm Teen Court Program ("teen court"), which operates under the authority of the presiding judge of the municipal court or his or her designee. 
(c)  The teen court shall be authorized to accept cases that are: 
(1)  Referred from the municipal court when approved by the presiding judge of the municipal court and all appropriate court costs and administrative fees have been paid; or 
(2)  Referred from the Little Elm Police Department upon approval of the Denton County Juvenile Court; or 
(3)  Lawfully referred under any state statute. 
(Ord. No. 1334, § 4, 6-7-2016) 
Sec. 34-151. - Teen court administration. 
(a)  The town may enter into an inter-local agreement with another political subdivision or a contract with a non-profit organization to administer teen court, or the town may direct the municipal court to self-administer teen court. 
(b)  If the municipal court administers teen court, it shall be the duty of the presiding judge of the municipal court to establish rules and regulations for teen court and to make recommendations to the town council for the appointment of one or more persons to serve as the teen court judge and alternate teen court judge(s). Final interpretation of teen court rules and regulations shall be at the sole discretion of the presiding judge of the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 1334, § 4, 6-7-2016) 
Sec. 34-152. - Compliance with state law. 
    Whether self-administered or administered via inter-local agreement or contract, the teen court shall operate in accordance with state law and if applicable, the rules and regulations established in accordance with subsection 34-151(b). 
(Ord. No. 1334, § 4, 6-7-2016) 
Sec. 34-153. - Teen court fees. 
(a)  A defendant who requests participation in teen court shall pay a fee of $10.00 to cover the costs of administering teen court. This fee shall be deposited in a fund of the town designated for the administration and operation of teen court. A defendant who participates in teen court and fails to complete the requirements of teen court shall not receive a refund of this fee. 
(b)  A defendant who requests participation in teen court shall pay an additional fee of $10.00 to cover the costs of the juvenile case manager in the administration of his or her duties. This fee shall be deposited in the teen court fund of the town. A defendant who participates in teen court and fails to complete the requirements of teen court shall not receive a refund of this fee. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the presiding judge of the municipal court shall have the discretion to waive a portion or all of the payment of the fees required authorized under this section due to defendant's financial hardship. 
(Ord. No. 1334, § 4, 6-7-2016) 
Secs. 34-154-34-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MUNICIPAL COURT FEES 

Sec. 34-176. - Deferred disposition administrative fee. 
    A defendant who is granted deferred disposition in the Little Elm Municipal Court shall be charged and shall pay a $25.00 administrative fee, in addition to all other costs of court. Such fee shall be charged and collected in accordance with the law. This fee shall be imposed on cases for which deferred disposition is granted on or after October 1, 2014. 
(Ord. No. 1227, § 2, 9-16-2014) 
Secs. 34-177-34-200. - Reserved. 
Chapter 42 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Emergency Services Medical Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 773.001 et seq.; local provisions of emergency medical services, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 774.001 et seq.; local administration of emergency communications, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 772.001 et seq. 

Sec. 42-1. - Fees for emergency services. 
    The town fire/EMS service will charge a base fee, mileage and additional fees relating to supplies and medications for users of ambulance services provided by the town fire/EMS service. The charges for particular services are as determined from time to time by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 633, § 1, 3-2-2004) 
Sec. 42-2. - Cost recovery. 
(a)  The town shall collect fees for specialized fire protection and emergency services. "Specialized fire and emergency services" includes services for providing adequate emergency rescue operation and fire protection services resulting from extraordinary and dangerous occurrences and hazardous materials incidents, but shall not include regular fire services to residential structures. The fees shall be based upon reimbursement for all equipment, personnel, materials, maintenance and overhead expenses and costs for such services actually rendered. The fees are adopted by ordinance and may be amended from time to time by ordinance. 
    Emergency services shall include the use of standby personnel and equipment when requested outside of a routine emergency calls for service or non-town sponsored events; or where required by other ordinance(s) of the town. A minimum of four hours will be charged for standby personnel. 
(b)  Within 90 days of the date of providing specialized fire protection and emergency services, the fire chief or such person or entity as is designated by the fire chief shall submit an invoice for all costs, fees, charges and expenses related to the provision of such services, to the owner or owner's designated agent, representative and/or insurer. 
(c)  Fees for cleanup costs, fees or expenses that are imposed upon the Town of Little Elm, state or federal agencies and related to the same situation or occurrences may be billed separately within 90 days of receipt by the town and shall be paid as provided in subsection (b) above. 
(d)  All invoices for specialized fire and emergency services are due within 60 days of receipt thereof; interest shall accumulate thereafter on any unpaid balances at the rate of ten percent per annum. 
(e)  Applicable fees shall be approved by the town council and may be amended from time to time as needed. 
(Ord. No. 1237, § 2, 11-18-2014; Ord. No. 1339, § 2, 7-5-2016) 
Chapter 46 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal power concerning weeds and other unsanitary matter, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.004; assessment of expenses and lien for abatement by municipality, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.007; persons not to permit abandoned property to become public health nuisance, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 341.013(e). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1-46-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES AND VEGETATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1106, § 1, adopted Aug. 7, 2012, repealed the former art. II., §§ 46-19-46-28, and enacted a new art. II as set out herein. The former art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Ord. No. 644, §§ 1-10, adopted June 1, 2004. 

Sec. 46-19. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, the terms set forth below shall have the following meanings, and any words not herein defined shall be construed in the context used and by ordinary interpretation and not as a word of art: 
    Abate shall mean to eliminate or remedy by removal, repair, rehabilitation, or demolition. 
    Brush shall mean scrub vegetation or dense undergrowth. 
    Carrion shall mean the dead and putrefying flesh of any animal, fowl or fish. 
    Dump shall mean to dispose, discharge, place, deposit, throw, leave, sweep, scatter, unload, or toss on or into land or water. 
    Filth shall mean any matter in a putrescent state. 
    Garbage shall mean solid waste that is putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials from the handling, preparation, cooking, or consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage facilities, and the handling and sale of produce and other food products. 
    Impure or unwholesome matter shall mean any putrescible or nonputrescible condition, object or matter which tends to, may or could cause injury, death or disease to human beings. 
    Includes and including are terms of enlargement and not of limitation or exclusive enumeration, and use of the terms does not create a presumption that components not expressed are excluded. 
    Junk shall mean all worn out, worthless or discarded material, including but not limited to any of the following materials, or parts of said materials or any combination thereof: New or used iron, steel or nonferrous metallic scrap, brass or waste materials; used and/or inoperative household appliances, household electrical or plumbing fixtures, floor coverings and/or window coverings not currently in use; used lumber, brick, cement block, wire, tubing and pipe, tubs, drums, barrels, and/or roofing material not currently in use; air conditioning and heating equipment not currently in use; used vehicle components and parts not currently in use; used furniture other than that designed for outdoor use or that which would normally be considered as antique furniture; used and/or inoperative residential lawn care equipment and machinery not currently in use; used pallets, windows or doors not currently in use; new or used sheet metal, structural steel and/or chain not currently in use; used and/or inoperable vending machines, radios and/or televisions, or other electronic devices not currently in use; and any other type of used and/or inoperable machinery or equipment not currently in use. 
    Matter shall mean that of which any physical object is composed. 
    Nuisance shall mean any condition, object, material or matter that is dangerous or detrimental to human life or health; or that renders the ground, the water, the air or food a hazard or likely to cause injury to human life or health, or that is offensive to the senses, or that threatens to become detrimental to the public health; and shall include but not be limited to: Any abandoned wells, shafts or basements, abandoned refrigerators, stagnant or unwholesome water, sinks, privies, filth, carrion, rubbish, junk, trash, debris or refuse, impure or unwholesome matter of any kind, any objectionable, unsightly, or unsanitary matter of whatever nature. 
    Objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter shall mean any matter, condition or object which is objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary to a person of ordinary sensitivities. 
    Owner shall mean any person or entity shown as the property owner on the latest property tax assessment rolls of the town or county, or any person having or claiming to have any legal or equitable interest in the property, or any person claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any property, including any tenant of the property and any agent who is responsible for managing, leasing or operating the property. 
    Person shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, association, business, corporation, or any other entity recognized at law. 
    Property shall mean all land, occupied or unoccupied, and any improvements located on or within such land, including any building or other structure designed or used for residential, commercial, business, industrial, or religious purposes. The term shall also include a yard, ground, wall, driveway, fence, porch, steps or other structure appurtenant to the land. 
    Putrefaction shall mean decomposition of organic matter resulting in production of foul-smelling matter; or putrefied matter; or the condition of being putrefied. 
    Putrescible shall mean subject to putrefaction. 
    Refuse shall mean heterogeneous accumulation of worn out, used, broken, rejected or worthless materials, including but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, paper or litter, and other decayable or nondecayable matter. 
    Rubbish shall mean nondecayable waste from a public or private establishment or residence. 
    Town shall mean the Town of Little Elm, Texas. 
    Trash and debris shall mean all manner of refuse including, but not limited to: Mounds of dirt; piles of leaves; grass and weed clippings; paper trash; useless fragments of building material; rubble; furniture, other than furniture designed for outside use; items of salvage, such as scrap metal and wood; old barrels; old tires; tree and brush trimmings; and other miscellaneous wastes or rejected matter. 
    Vegetative growth shall mean any grass, weeds, shrubs, trees, brush, bushes, vines, or other plant material. 
    Waste or litter shall mean nondecable solid waste or decable waste as defined in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 365.011. 
    Weeds shall mean any vegetation that because of its height is objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary, excluding: Shrubs, bushes and trees, cultivated flowers, and cultivated crops. 
(Ord. No. 1106, § 1, 8-7-2012) 
Sec. 46-20. - Prohibited accumulations, dumping, stagnant water, trash, and other unsightly or unsanitary matter declared a nuisance. 
(a)  It is unlawful and declared a nuisance for an owner of property within the corporate limits of the town to permit or allow any stagnant or unwholesome water, sinks, refuse, filth, carrion, weeds, rubbish, brush, trash, debris, junk, garbage, impure or unwholesome matter of any kind, or objectionable or unsightly matter of whatever nature to accumulate or remain upon such property or within any public easement on or across such property or upon any adjacent public street or alley right-of-way between the property line of such property and where the paved surface of the street or alley begins. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and declared a nuisance for any person to dump, or permit to be dumped, upon or along any drain, gutter, alley, sidewalk, street, park, right-of-way, vacant land, body of water, or any other public or private property within the town, any unwholesome water, refuse, rubbish, trash, debris, filth, carrion, weeds, brush, junk, garbage, impure or unwholesome matter of any kind, or other objectionable or unsightly matter of whatever kind. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the owner of property within the town to keep the sidewalks in front of such property free and clear of all such matter described in subsections (a) and (b), and to fill up, drain, or regrade any such property which shall have stagnant water thereon, and to cleanse and disinfect any such property from refuse, rubbish, trash, filth, carrion, or objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter of any kind, or other impure or unwholesome matter of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 1106, § 1, 8-7-2012) 
Sec. 46-21. - Weeds, brush, and other objectionable matter. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and declared a nuisance for an owner of any property within the town to permit weeds, grass, or any objectionable or unsightly matter, to accumulate or grow to a height greater than 12 inches upon such property within 150 feet of any property line of such property which abuts any street right-of-way, alley, utility easement, subdivided property, or any buildings or other structures. 
    Exceptions: 
(1)  Hay which is being cultivated on property that has been granted an agricultural property tax exemption on the most recent tax roll as certified by the Denton County Appraisal District. 
(2)  Regularly cultivated row crops; provided such crops shall not be allowed to grow within the right-of-way, or easement; nor shall they be allowed to obstruct the necessary view to and from adjacent rights-of-way. 
(3)  Within ten feet of any property line where the property is zoned agricultural. 
(4)  Landscaping that is maintained and in compliance with section 106-102 of the town's Code of Ordinances titled, Xeriscaping. 
(5)  Open space land located on or adjacent to the floodplain (riparian buffers, creeks, USACE easements, or other designated shorelines) may be left in its natural state to help filter runoff, prevent erosion, increase vegetation and shade, improve water quality, and other conservation benefits, subject to discretionary review and approval by the town manager or his/her designee. The extent, to which these areas are maintained, whether owned privately, by an HOA, or by a governmental entity, shall be determined on a case by case basis by town staff. Operations, environmental benefits, cost of maintenance, accessibility, proximity to floodplain and water, public use of the property, threat of fire, aesthetic factors, and other variables may be considered by staff. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of an owner of property within the town to keep the area from the property line of the owner's property to the curb line adjacent to it or if there is no curb line, then to the centerline of any adjacent unpaved street or the edge of the pavement of such street of any condition or matter deemed a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 1106, § 1, 8-7-2012; Ord. No. 1213, § 2, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 46-22. - Inspections. 
(a)  For the purpose of ascertaining whether violations of this article exist, the fire marshal of the town, or the fire marshal's designee, is authorized to enter property at a reasonable time to inspect, investigate, or abate a nuisance or other violation of this article or to enforce this article, in accordance with law. In connection therewith, the fire marshal must exhibit proper identification to the owner of the property or other appropriate person. 
(b)  If an inspection or investigation of property is sought from an owner of property but is refused, the fire marshal, or his respective designees, as the case may be, shall have every recourse provided by law, including an injunction to secure entry. If the owner of property cannot be identified or located, the fire marshal, or his designee, may enter the property to the extent allowed by law. The fire marshal is hereby designated as a code enforcement official of the town to be issued a search warrant as authorized by Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 18.05, as the same may be amended or superseded. 
(Ord. No. 1106, § 1, 8-7-2012) 
Sec. 46-23. - Duty of owner to cut and remove weeds, brush, and unsightly matter. 
    It shall be the duty of an owner of property to drain and/or fill any such property or portion thereof which is unwholesome, contains stagnant water, or in any other condition that may produce disease. It shall be the duty of an owner of property to cut and remove all weeds, brush, vegetative growth, and other objectionable or unsightly matter as often as may be necessary to comply with section 46-21, and to use every precaution to prevent the same from occurring, growing, or accumulating on such property. 
(Ord. No. 1106, § 1, 8-7-2012) 
Sec. 46-24. - Notice of violation and to abate; failure to comply; correction by town. 
(a)  If property within the town is in violation of this article, the town's fire marshal, or his duly appointed designee or representative, shall give notice, in accordance with this section, to an owner of property that such property is in violation of this article and the nature of the violation. 
(b)  If the owner of property for which such notice has been given does not comply with the terms of this article and the demand for compliance as set forth in the notice within seven days of the notice of a violation, the town may: 
(1)  Do or cause to be done the work or make or cause to be made the improvements required to obtain compliance with this article; and 
(2)  Pay for the work done or improvements made and charge the expenses to the owner of the property. The town shall be entitled to reimbursement of all such expenses. All such expenses incurred in doing or in having such work done shall be a charge to, and a personal liability of, such owner. 
(c)  The notice must be given: 
(1)  Personally to the owner in writing; 
(2)  By letter addressed to the owner at the owner's address as recorded in the appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the property is located; or 
(3)  If personal service cannot be obtained by: 
a.  Publication at least once; 
b.  Posting the notice on or near the front door of the primary building on the property to which the violation relates; or 
c.  Posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the violation relates. 
(d)  If notice is mailed to the owner of property in accordance with subsection (b) of this section, and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as "refused" or "unclaimed," the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered as delivered. If notice is returned for reason other than "refused" or "unclaimed" then notice shall be made as stated in subsection (c)(3) of this section. 
(e)  In a notice provided under this section, the town may inform the owner of property by regular mail and a posting on the property, or by personally delivering the notice, that if the owner commits another violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety on or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the town, without further notice may correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess the expense against the property. If the violation covered by a notice under this subsection occurs within the one-year period, and the town has not been informed in writing by the owner of an ownership change, then the town without notice may take any action permitted by subsections (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section and assess its expenses as provided by section 46-26. 
(Ord. No. 1106, § 1, 8-7-2012) 
Sec. 46-25. - Additional authority to abate nuisance. 
(a)  The town may abate, without notice, weeds that: 
(1)  Have grown higher than 24 inches; or 
(2)  Are an immediate danger to the health, life or safety of any person. 
(b)  Not later than the tenth day after the date the town abates weeds under this section; the town shall give notice to the property owner in the manner required by section 46-24. The notice shall contain: 
(1)  An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the property; 
(2)  A description of the violations of this article that occurred on the property; 
(3)  A statement that the town abated the weeds; and 
(4)  An explanation of the property owner's right to request an administrative hearing about the town's abatement of the weeds. 
(c)  The town shall conduct an administrative hearing before municipal courts on the abatement of weeds under this section if, not later than the 30th day after the date of the abatement of the weeds, the property owner files with the town a written request for a hearing. 
(d)  An administrative hearing conducted under this section shall be conducted not later than the 20th day after the date a request for a hearing is filed. The owner may testify or present any witnesses or written information relating to the town's abatement of the weeds. 
(e)  The town may assess expenses and create liens under this section as it assesses expenses and creates liens under section 46-26. A lien created under this section is subject to the same conditions as a lien created under section 46-26. 
(f)  The authority granted the town by this section is in addition to the authority granted by section 46-24. 
(Ord. No. 1106, § 1, 8-7-2012) 
Sec. 46-26. - Assessment of expenses; lien. 
(a)  Any and all expenses incurred by the town under or pursuant to this article may be assessed against the property on which the work is done or improvements made in addition to a $20.00 administrative fee. 
(b)  In order to obtain a lien against the property, the town's mayor, municipal health officer, or municipal official designated by the mayor, must file a statement of expenses with the county clerk of the county in which the town is located. The lien statement shall be filed in the real property records of the said county. The lien statement must state the name of the owner, if known, and the legal description of the property. The lien attaches upon the filing of the lien statement with the county clerk. 
(c)  The lien obtained by the town is security for the expenditures made and interest accruing at the rate of ten percent on the amount due from the date of payment by the town. 
(d)  The town shall charge a $150.00 administrative fee for expenses incurred associated with the filing and release of the lien. 
(e)  The lien is inferior only to: 
(1)  Tax liens; and 
(2)  Liens for street improvements. 
(f)  The town attorney may bring a suit for foreclosure in the name of the town to recover the expenditures and interest due. 
(g)  The town attorney may foreclose a lien on property under this section in a proceeding relating to the property brought under V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 33, subch. E, as amended or superseded. 
(h)  The statement of expenses or a certified copy of the statement is prima facie proof of the expenses incurred by the town in doing or causing to be done the work or making or causing to be made the improvements. 
(i)  The remedy provided by this section is in addition to any fines or civil penalties that may be assessed. 
(Ord. No. 1106, § 1, 8-7-2012) 
Sec. 46-27. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the fire marshal or the fire marshal's duly appointed representative, and it shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or hinder any such person in the exercise of that person's duties under this article. 
(Ord. No. 1106, § 1, 8-7-2012) 
Sec. 46-28. - Violation; penalty for failure to comply. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this article, and after any period of notice which may be required hereunder, any such violation shall be punishable, upon conviction, by a fine in an amount not to exceed $2,000.00. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation or failure to comply occurs or continues to occur. This section shall be in addition to and cumulative of the provisions for abatement of a nuisance by the town and charging the cost of same against the owner of the property. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, any violation of any provision of this article which constitutes an immediate danger or threat to the health, safety and welfare of the public may be enjoined in a suit brought by the town for such purpose. 
(c)  Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state is not required for the proof of an offense defined by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1106, § 1, 8-7-2012) 
Secs. 46-29-46-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - JUNKED AND ABANDONED VEHICLES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Former §§ 46-60-46-119, have been deleted as having been superceded by Ord. No. 778, adopted July 11, 2006, which enacted similar provisions. Ord. No. 778 has been codified as new §§ 46-60-46-98 at the discretion of the editor. 
State Law reference- Junked vehicles as nuisance, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.072; abatement of nuisance of junked vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code §§ 683.071-683.078. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-60. - Definitions. 
    The following terms used in this article shall be defined as follows: 
    Abandoned motor vehicle: A motor vehicle that: 
(1)  Is inoperable, is more than five years old, and has been left unattended on public property for more than 48 hours; or 
(2)  Has remained illegally on public property for more than 48 hours; or 
(3)  Has remained on private property without the consent of the owner or person in charge of the property for more than 48 hours; or 
(4)  Has been left unattended on the right-of-way of a designated county, state, or federal highway for more than 48 hours; or 
(5)  Has been left unattended for more than 24 hours on the right-of-way of a turnpike project constructed and maintained by the Texas Turnpike Authority Division of the Texas Department of Transportation or a controlled access highway; or 
(6)  Is considered an abandoned motor vehicle under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 644.153(r). 
    Antique vehicle: A passenger car or truck that is at least 25 years old. 
    Junked vehicle: A vehicle that is self-propelled and: 
(1)  Displays a motor vehicle registration certificate that is at least 30 days expired/invalid, or does not display a motor vehicle registration; or 
(2)  Is: 
a.  Wrecked, dismantled, or partially dismantled, or discarded; or 
b.  Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than: 
1.  Seventy-two consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or 
2.  Thirty consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property. 
    Motor vehicle: A vehicle that is subject to registration under V.T.C.A. Transportation Code, ch. 501, as amended or superseded. 
    Motor vehicle collector: A person who: 
(1)  Owns one or more antique or special interest vehicles; and 
(2)  Acquires, collects, or disposes of an antique or special interest vehicle or part of an antique or special interest vehicle for personal use to restore and preserve an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest. 
    Outboard motor: An outboard motor subject to registration under V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code, ch. 31, as amended or superseded. 
    Special interest vehicle: A motor vehicle of any age that has not been changed from original manufacturer's specifications an, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist. 
    Watercraft: A vessel subject to registration under V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code ch. 31, as amended or superseded. 
(Ord. No. 778, § 1, 7-11-2006; Ord. No. 1153, § 2, 6-18-2013; Ord. No. 1281, § 2, 6-2-2015) 
Secs. 46-61-46-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - JUNKED VEHICLES 

Sec. 46-71. - Public nuisance. 
    A junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle that is visible at any time of the year from a public place or public right-of-way: 
(1)  Is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the public; 
(2)  Tends to reduce the value of private property; 
(3)  Invites vandalism; 
(4)  Creates a fire hazard; 
(5)  Is an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors; 
(6)  Produces urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the town; and 
(7)  Is a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 778, § 2.A., 7-11-2006) 
Sec. 46-72. - Offense. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person maintains a public nuisance described by section 46-71 of this article. 
(b)  An offense under this division is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 778, § 2.B., 7-11-2006) 
Sec. 46-73. - Procedure for disposition of junked vehicle. 
    The procedure for the abatement and removal of a junked vehicle or part thereof as a public nuisance from private property, public property, or public right-of-way shall be as follows: 
(1)  Notice. After a determination is made by the code enforcement officer of the town, or the officer's designee, or other appropriate town employee (each such person being a regularly salaried, full time employee of the town) that a particular vehicle is a junked vehicle, or after an order is issued by the municipal court pursuant to section 46-91 of this article, there shall be provided not less than ten days notice of the nature of the nuisance. 
a.  Such notice must be personally delivered or sent by certified mail with a five-day return requested to: 
1.  The last known registered owner of the nuisance; 
2.  Each lienholder of record of the nuisance; and 
3.  The owner or occupant of: 
i.  the property on which the nuisance is located; or 
ii.  if the nuisance is located on a public right-of-way, the property adjacent to the right-of-way. 
If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the nuisance is unknown, notice may be placed on the nuisance or, if the owner is located, personally delivered. If the notice is returned undelivered, action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier than the 11th day after the date of the return. 
b.  The notice must state that: 
1.  The nuisance must be abated and removed not later than the tenth day after the date on which the notice was personally delivered or mailed; 
2.  Any request for a hearing must be made before that ten-day period expires; 
3.  If the vehicle is not removed and abated within the said ten-day period, a public hearing will be held on the abatement and removal (which hearing, if requested by a person for whom notice is required under subsection (1)a.3. shall not be earlier than the 11th day after the date of the service of the notice); and 
4.  The date, time and place of the hearing (if known at the time the notice is sent). 
(2)  Hearing. 
a.  If the junked vehicle is not removed and abated within the prescribed time period, the municipal court judge of the town shall hold a public hearing on the abatement and removal of the junked vehicle. At the hearing, the municipal court judge shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, objections or protests and shall receive testimony from owners, witnesses, city personnel and interested persons relative to such alleged public nuisance. The hearing may be continued from time to time. 
b.  At the hearing, the junked motor vehicle is presumed, unless demonstrated otherwise by the owner, to be inoperable. 
c.  Following the hearing, the municipal court judge shall consider all evidence and determine whether the vehicle or any part thereof, constitutes a public nuisance as alleged. If the municipal court judge finds that a public nuisance does exist and that there is sufficient cause to abate the nuisance, and that the notice requirements provided in this article have been met, the municipal court judge shall make a written order setting forth the judge's findings and ordering that the nuisance be abated. 
d.  If the information is available at the location of the nuisance, the order requiring removal of the nuisance must include the vehicle's: 
1.  Description; 
2.  Vehicle identification number; and 
3.  License plate number. 
In addition, the order must state that the vehicle will be disposed of in accordance with the Texas Transportation Code. 
e.  The relocation of a junked vehicle that is a public nuisance to another location within the corporate limits of the town after a proceeding for the abatement and removal of the public nuisance has commenced has no effect on the proceeding if the junked vehicle constitutes a public nuisance at the new location. 
(3)  Abatement of nuisance. 
a.  In the event the municipal court judge orders abatement of the nuisance, the town or any duly authorized person may abate such public nuisance by removal and disposal of the junked vehicle. 
b.  Not later than the fifth day after the date of the removal, notice identifying the vehicle or part of the vehicle must be given to the Texas Department of Transportation. 
(Ord. No. 778, § 2.C., 7-11-2006) 
Sec. 46.74. - Junked vehicles not to be reconstructed or made operable after removal. 
    After any junked vehicle has been removed under the authority of this article, it shall not be reconstructed or made operable again. 
(Ord. No. 778, § 2.D., 7-11-2006) 
Sec. 46-75. - Disposal of junked vehicles. 
    Any junked vehicle taken into custody by the town or any duly authorized person pursuant to this article shall be disposed of in accordance with applicable provisions of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 683, as amended or superseded. 
(Ord. No. 778, § 2.E., 7-11-2006) 
Sec. 46-76. - Application. 
    The provisions of this division of this article shall not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part that is: 
(1)  Completely enclosed in a building in a lawful manner and is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or 
(2)  Stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, or that is an antique or special interest vehicle stored by a motor vehicle collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle or part and the outdoor storage area, if any, are: 
a.  Maintained in an orderly manner; 
b.  Not a health hazard; and 
c.  Screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means, including a fence, rapidly growing trees, or shrubbery. For purposes hereof, a car cover is not an appropriate means to screen a vehicle or vehicle part. 
(Ord. No. 778, § 2.F., 7-11-2006) 
Sec. 46-77. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Any regularly salaried, full-time town employee is authorized to enforce this article. Such employee may issue a warning or a citation before issuing a notice. 
(b)  Upon conviction on a citation issued under this article, the municipal court judge shall order that the vehicle be abated and removed within a prescribed period of time, subject to the terms and provisions of this article. 
(c)  The enforcement remedies authorized under this article shall not be deemed exclusive, and the town reserves the right to seek any enforcement remedy available at law, in equity, or otherwise. The failure of the town to seek enforcement of this article by any means provided for hereunder shall not foreclose the enforcement of this article by any other means. 
(Ord. No. 778, § 2.G., 7-11-2006) 
Secs. 46-78-46-88. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ABANDONED VEHICLES 

Sec. 46-89. - Taking into custody. 
    The police department of the town may take into custody an abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor found on public or private property. The police department may use its own personnel, equipment, and facilities or, when specifically authorized by the town council, contract for other personnel, equipment, and facilities, to remove, preserve, store, send notice regarding, and dispose of an abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor it takes into custody. 
(Ord. No. 778, § 3.A., 7-11-2006) 
Sec. 46-90. - Notice. 
    The police department shall send notice of abandonment of a vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor taken into custody to: 
(1)  The last known registered owner of each motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor (i) taken into custody by the police department, or (ii) for which a garagekeeper's report is received pursuant to V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.031, as amended or superseded; and 
(2)  Each lienholder recorded under V.T.C.A, Transportation Code, ch. 501 (as amended or superseded) for the motor vehicle or under V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code ch. 31, (as amended or superseded), for the watercraft or outboard motor. 
(Ord. No. 778, § 3.B., 7-11-2006) 
Sec. 46-91. - Contents of notice. 
    The notice under section 46-90 of this division must: 
(1)  Be sent by certified mail not later than the tenth day after the date the police department: 
a.  Takes the abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor into custody; or 
b.  Receives the garagekeeper's report under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.031; 
(2)  Specify the year, make, model, and identification number of the abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor; 
(3)  Give the location of the facility where the abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor is being held; 
(4)  Inform the owner and lienholder of the right to claim the abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor not later than the 20th day after the date of the notice on payment of: 
a.  Towing, preservation, and storage charges; or 
b.  Garagekeeper's charges and fees under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, § 683.032, and if the vehicle is a commercial motor vehicle impounded under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 644.153(a) (as amended or superseded), the delinquent administrative penalties and costs; and 
(5)  State that failure of the owner or lienholder to claim the abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor during the period specified by subsection (4)b. is: 
a.  A waiver by that person of all right, title, and interest in the item; and 
b.  Consent to the sale of the item at a public auction. 
(Ord. No. 778, § 3.C., 7-11-2006) 
Sec. 46-92. - Notice by publication. 
    Notice by publication in one newspaper of general circulation in the town is sufficient notice under this division if: 
(1)  The identity of the last registered owner cannot be determined; 
(2)  The registration has no address for the owner; or 
(3)  The determination with reasonable certainty of the identity and address of all lienholders is impossible. 
    Notice by publication (i) must be published in the same period that is required by section 46-91 of this division for notice by certified mail and contain all of the information required by that section, and (ii) may contain a list of more than one abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor. 
(Ord. No. 778, § 3.D., 7-11-2006) 
Sec. 46-93. - Storage fees. 
    The police department or the agent of the police department that takes into custody an abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor is entitled to reasonable storage fees: 
(1)  For not more than ten days, beginning on the day the item is taken into custody and ending on the day the required notice is mailed; and 
(2)  Beginning on the day after the day the police department mails notice and ending on the day accrued charges are paid and the vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor is removed. 
(Ord. No. 778, § 3.E., 7-11-2006) 
Sec. 46-94. - Auction or use of abandoned items; waiver of rights. 
(a)  If an abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor is not claimed under sections 46-90 and 46-91 of this division: 
(1)  The owner or lienholder: 
a.  Waives all rights and interests in the item; and 
b.  Consents to the sale of the item by public auction or the transfer of the item, if a watercraft, as provided in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, § 683.014(d), (as amended or superseded); and 
(2)  The police department may sell the item at a public auction, transfer the item, if a watercraft, as provided in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.014(d), (as amended or superseded), or use the item as provided by section 46-96 of this division. 
(b)  Proper notice of the auction shall be given. A garagekeeper who has a garagekeeper's lien shall be notified of the time and place of the auction. 
(c)  The purchase of an abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor: 
(1)  Takes title free and clear of all liens and claims of ownership; 
(2)  Shall receive a sales receipt from the police department; and 
(3)  Is entitled to register the motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor and receive a certificate of title. 
(Ord. No. 778, § 3.F., 7-11-2006) 
Sec. 46-95. - Auction proceeds. 
(a)  The police department is entitled to reimbursement from the proceeds of sale of an abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor for: 
(1)  The cost of the auction; 
(2)  Towing, preservation, and storage fees resulting from the taking into custody; and 
(3)  The cost of notice or publication as required by sections 46-90, 46-91 and 46-92 of this division. 
(b)  After deducting the reimbursement allowed under subsection (a) of this section, the proceeds of the sale shall be held for 90 days for the owner or lienholder of the item. 
(c)  After the 90-day period provided in subsection (b) of this section, proceeds unclaimed by the owner or lienholder shall be deposited in an account that may be used for the payment of auction, towing, preservation, storage, and notice and publication fees resulting from taking other vehicles, watercraft, or outboard motors into custody if the proceeds from the sale of the other items are insufficient to meet those fees. 
(d)  The city may transfer funds in excess of $1,000.00 from the account described in subsection (c) of this section to the town's general revenue account to be used by the police department. 
(Ord. No. 778, § 3.G., 7-11-2006) 
Sec. 46-96. - Police department use of certain abandoned motor vehicles. 
(a)  The police department may use an abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor for department purposes if the item is not claimed as provided for in this article. 
(b)  If the police department discontinues the use of an abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor, the department shall auction the item. 
(c)  This section does not apply to a vehicle on which there is a garagekeeper's lien. 
(Ord. No. 778, § 3.H., 7-11-2006) 
Sec. 46-97. - Disposal of vehicle abandoned in storage facility. 
(a)  The police department shall take into custody an abandoned vehicle left in a storage facility (as described in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.031, as amended or superseded) that has not been claimed in the period provided by notice required under sections 46-90 and 46-91 of this division. 
(b)  The police department may use such a vehicle as authorized by section 46-96 of this division or sell the vehicle at auction as provided by section 46-94 of this division. If the vehicle is sold, the proceeds of the sale shall first be applied to a garagekeeper's charges for providing notice regarding the vehicle and for service, towing, impoundment, storage, and repair of the vehicle. 
(c)  As compensation for expenses incurred in taking the vehicle into custody and selling it, the police department shall retain: 
(1)  Two percent of the gross proceeds of the sale of the vehicle; or 
(2)  All the proceeds if the gross proceeds of the sale are less than $10.00. 
(d)  Surplus proceeds from the sale shall be distributed as provided by section 46-95 of this division. 
(e)  If the police department does not take the vehicle into custody before the 31st day after the date the vehicle was reported abandoned under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.031, (as amended or superseded), the police department may not take the vehicle into custody, and the storage facility may dispose of the vehicle as set forth in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.034(e), (as amended or superseded). 
(Ord. No. 778, § 3.I., 7-11-2006) 
Sec. 46-98. - Demolition of abandoned motor vehicles. 
    The procedures for handling the demolition of an abandoned motor vehicle shall be in accordance with V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, ch. 683, subch. D, as amended or superseded. 
(Ord. No. 778, § 3.J., 7-11-2006) 
Secs. 46-99-46-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SANITATION 

Sec. 46-110. - Bulk courtesy drop site. 
    There is established within the town a bulk courtesy drop site for the use and disposal by residents of the town of bulk items as provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 866, § 2, 11-6-2007) 
Sec. 46-111. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  Only residents of the Town of Little Elm may use the bulk courtesy drop site for disposal of bulk items. 
(b)  Contractors doing business within the town or owners of commercial or business establishments within the town may not use the bulk courtesy drop site for disposal of commercial waste or other waste from business related activities. This restriction specifically includes waste from construction or rehabilitation related activities. 
(Ord. No. 866, § 2, 11-6-2007) 
Sec. 46-112. - Prohibited items. 
    The following items are prohibited from being disposed at the bulk courtesy drop site: 
(1)  Household hazardous waste, including but not limited to: Oil, paint, chemicals; 
(2)  White goods: Refrigerators, freezers, air conditioners; and 
(3)  Other items, including but not limited to: Tires and batteries. 
(Ord. No. 866, § 2, 11-6-2007) 
Sec. 46-113. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this article, upon conviction, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and fined in an amount not to exceed $2,000.00. 
(b)  Unless otherwise specifically set forth herein allegation and evidence of culpable mental state are not required for the proof of an offense of this article. 
(Ord. No. 866, § 2, 11-6-2007) 
Secs. 46-114-46-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PUBLIC TREES 

Sec. 46-141. - Tree care. 
    There is hereby created and established a tree care program to provide full power and authority over the care of all trees, plants, and shrubs located within public rights-of-way, parks, and public places; and to aid in the proper growth of a landscape program to enhance the beauty of the town. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 2, 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 46-142. - Maintenance responsibility. 
(a)  The development services director and/or his designees shall have the responsibility to plant, prune, maintain, and remove trees, plants, and shrubs within the public right-of-way of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares, parks, and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. This shall include the removal of trees that may threaten electrical, telephone, gas, or any municipal water or sewer line, or any tree that is affected by fungus, insect, or other pest and disease. 
(b)  Every owner of any tree or shrub overhanging any street or right-of-way within the town shall, in accordance to industry pruning guidelines, prune the branches so that such branches shall not severely obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection; will not obstruct the passage of pedestrians on sidewalks; will not obstruct vision of traffic signs; and will not obstruct the view of any street or alley intersection. If the property owner fails to do so, the development services director and/or his designee shall give ten days notice to the property owners to take action, otherwise the development services director shall have the right to remove or prune any tree or shrub on private property which threatens the safety of those who may use a town street or town street or town park. A fee shall be assessed for this service on an hourly basis. Fees will be based on the current hourly wages of town maintenance workers. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 2, 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 46-143. - Care of public trees. 
(a)  No person shall remove, destroy, or cause the removal or destruction of a tree on town property or in any town park without first having obtained written permission for such removal or destruction from the development services department. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to attach any cable, wire, rope, sign, or any object to any town tree, plant, or shrub without written permission from the development services director. 
(Ord. No. 1068, § 2, 9-6-2011) 
Secs. 46-144-46-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - LIQUID WASTE 
DIVISION 1. - LIQUID WASTE GENERATION, TRANSPORTATION AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 46-171. - Applicability and prohibitions. 
(a)  This article shall apply to all nondomestic users of the publicly owned treatment works (POTW), as defined in section 46-172 of this article. 
(b)  Grease traps or grease interceptors shall not be required for residential users. 
(c)  Facilities generating fats, oils, or greases as a result of food manufacturing, processing, preparation, or food service shall install, use and maintain appropriate grease traps or interceptors as required in this article. These facilities include, but are not limited to, restaurants, food manufacturers, food processors, hospitals, hotels and motels, prisons, nursing homes and any other facility preparing, serving or otherwise making any foodstuff available for consumption. 
(d)  No user may intentionally or unintentionally allow the direct or indirect discharge of any petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, mineral oil, or any fats, oils or greases of animal or vegetable origin into the POTW system in such amounts as to cause interference with the collection and treatment system, or as to cause pollutants to pass through the treatment works into the environment. 
(Ord. No. 1127, § 2, 12-18-2012) 
Sec. 46-172. - Definitions. 
    Act. Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq. 
    Approved. Accepted as satisfactory under the terms of this article and given formal and official sanction by the regulatory authority. 
    BOD. The value of the five-day test for biochemical oxygen demand, as described in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater." 
    COD. The value of the test for chemical oxygen demand, as described in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater." 
    Director. The director of the department designated by the town manager to enforce and administer this article. 
    Disposal. The discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of any solid or semi-solid grease trap waste, and/or grit trap waste into or on any land or water so that such waste or any constituent thereof may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including groundwaters. 
    Disposal site. A permitted site or part of a site at which grease trap waste, or grit trap waste, is processed, treated and/or intentionally placed into or on any land and at which said waste will remain after closure. 
    Disposer. A person who receives, stores, retains, processes or disposes of liquid waste. 
    EPA. The United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
    Fats, oils, and greases (FOG). Organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures established in 40 CFR 136, as may be amended from time to time. All are sometimes referred to herein as "grease" or "greases". 
    Full-service grocery. A grocery store which may include, but is not limited to a deli, bakery or meat market. 
    Generator. A person who causes, creates, generates, or otherwise produces liquid waste. 
    Grease trap or interceptor. A watertight receptacle designed and constructed to intercept and prevent the passage of greasy, fatty liquid, semi-liquid, and/or solid wastes generated from commercial operations into the POTW to which the receptacle is directly or indirectly connected. 
    Grease trap waste. Greasy, fatty liquid, semi-liquid and/or solid wastes removed from commercial operations by a grease trap. 
    Hazardous materials. Any matter which is or may be reasonably expected to be dangerous to human health, the environment or property, and shall include but not be limited to those substances defined as hazardous materials or material by federal or state agencies. 
    Indirect discharge or discharge. The introduction of pollutants into a POTW from any nondomestic source. 
    Interference. A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal, or is a cause of a violation of the town's TPDES permit. 
    Liquid waste. Waterborne solids, liquids and gaseous substances derived from a grease trap, described as a grease trap waste. 
    Manager. The person conducting, supervising, managing or representing the activities of a generator, transporter or disposer. 
    Manifest system. A system consisting of a five-part trip ticket used to document the generation, transportation and disposal of liquid waste. 
    Owner. The person who owns a facility or part of a facility. 
    Permit. The formal written document issued to a person by the regulatory authority for the collection of grease trap waste. 
    Permittee. Person granted a permit under this article. 
    Person. An individual, corporation (including a government corporation) organization, government, governmental subdivision or agency, federal agency, state, political subdivision of a state, interstate agency or body, business or business trust, partnership, association, firm, company, joint stock company, commission or any other legal entity. 
    pH. The measure of the relative acidity or alkalinity of water and is defined as the negative logarithm (base 10) of the hydrogen ion concentration. 
    POTW or publicly owned treatment works. A treatment works which is owned by a state or municipality as defined by section 502(4) of the Clean Water Act. This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes all sewers, pipes and other conveyances that convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant. The term also means the municipality as defined in section 502(4) of the Act, which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works. For purposes of this article, the terms "sanitary sewer system" and "POTW" may be used interchangeably. 
    Regulatory authority. Any municipal officer or department of the town appointed by the town manager to administer this article. 
    Special wastes. Any waste or combination of wastes that, because of its quantity, concentration, physical or chemical characteristics or biological properties, required special handling and disposal to protect the human health or the environment. 
    Spill. The accidental or intentional loss or unauthorized discharge of grease trap waste, grit trap waste or other waste material. 
    State regulatory authority. The state's agencies which have the authority to adopt and enforce any rules necessary to carry out its powers and duties under the laws of Texas. 
    Tank. A device, designed to contain an accumulation of grease trap waste which is constructed primarily of non-earthen materials (e.g., concrete, steel, plastic) to provide structural support for the containment. 
    TCEQ. The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, and its predecessor and successor agencies. 
    Toxic waste. Any liquid, semi-liquid or solid material which has the ability to chemically produce injury once it reaches a susceptible site in or on the body. 
    Transporter. A person who is registered with and authorized by the TCEQ to transport sewage sludge, water treatment sludge, domestic septage, chemical toilet waste, grit trap waste or grease trap waste in accordance with 30 Texas Administrative Code section 312.142. 
    Trip ticket. The shipping document originated and signed by the transporter which contains the information required by the regulatory authority. 
    TSS. The value of the test for total suspended solids, as described in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater." 
    User. Any person, including those located outside the jurisdictional limits of the town, who contributes, causes or permits the contribution or discharge of wastewater into the POTW, including persons who contribute such wastewater from mobile sources. 
    Vehicle. A mobile device in which or by which liquid waste may be transported upon a public street or highway. 
(Ord. No. 1127, § 2, 12-18-2012) 
Sec. 46-173. - Permit required. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated a vehicle for the purpose of transporting liquid waste without an applicable permit. A permit shall be issued for transportation of the liquid waste and the regulatory authority shall designate on the permit the liquid waste authorized for transportation in the vehicle. A separate vehicle permit number is issued for each vehicle operated. 
(b)  A person who desires to obtain a permit shall make application on a form provided by the regulatory authority. 
(c)  A permit is not transferrable. 
(d)  A permit issued by the Town of Little Elm excludes the hauling of materials that are hazardous in nature. 
(e)  Each applicant shall specify the disposal site or sites to be used for the authorized disposal of liquid wastes. The regulatory authority shall be immediately notified of additional disposal sites used during the permit period. 
(f)  Waste materials to be recycled for other commercial uses, such as, but not limited to waste cooking oil, are not required to be manifested or permitted under this chapter, but shall be stored, collected and transported in and through the town in conditions that are sanitary, free from odors and which will not adversely affect the environment. 
(Ord. No. 1127, § 2, 12-18-2012) 
Sec. 46-174. - Fee and display of permit. 
(a)  The regulatory authority shall not issue a permit to an applicant until the appropriate established fee is paid. A person shall pay a fee for each vehicle operated by the person as set forth in the development services comprehensive fee schedule, and as may be amended. Each permit shall be renewed annually. 
(b)  Each permit holder shall cause to be displayed on each side of each vehicle in a color contrasting with the background in three-inch letters or larger the business name, TCEQ or other applicable state regulatory authority registration number and authorization sticker. 
(c)  Each permit holder shall cause to be displayed on the rear of each vehicle the approval authority's registration sticker. 
(Ord. No. 1127, § 2, 12-18-2012) 
Sec. 46-175. - Liquid waste vehicles-Maintenance. 
    A liquid waste hauler shall: 
(1)  Maintain hoses, tanks, valves, pumps, cylinders, diaphragms, pipes, connections, and other appurtenances on a vehicle in good repair and free from leaks. 
(2)  Provide a safety plug or cap for each valve of a tank. 
(3)  Provide a clean exterior and cause the vehicle to be odor-free at the beginning of each work day. 
(4)  Pass the state regulatory agency's safety inspection. 
(Ord. No. 1127, § 2, 12-18-2012) 
Sec. 46-176. - Responsibilities of a liquid waste transporter. 
(a)  Before accepting a load of liquid waste for transportation, a liquid waste transporter shall determine the nature of the material to be transported and that his equipment is sufficient to properly handle the job without spillage, leaks or release of toxic or harmful gases, fumes, liquids or other substances. Upon delivery of the waste to the disposer, the transporter shall inform the disposer of the nature of the waste. 
(b)  A transporter with a Town of Little Elm liquid waste transporter permit shall not transport materials that are hazardous as defined in section 46-172 in vehicles permitted by the town for transporting liquid waste. 
(c)  A transporter holding a Town of Little Elm permit shall use a disposal site permitted and approved by the town, state or federal government. 
(d)  A manifest system, consisting of a five-part trip ticket is used to document the generation, transportation and disposal of all applicable liquid waste generated in the Town of Little Elm and shall be used as follows: 
(1)  A transporter will complete one trip ticket for each location serviced. 
(2)  One part of the trip ticket shall have the generator and transporter information completed and shall be given to the generator at the time of waste collection. 
(3)  The remaining four parts of the trip ticket shall have all required information completely filled out and signed by the appropriate party before distribution of the trip ticket. 
(4)  One part of the trip ticket shall go to the receiving facility. 
(5)  One part of the trip ticket shall go to the transporter, who shall retain a copy of all trip tickets showing the collection and disposition of the waste. 
(6)  One part of the trip ticket shall be returned by the transporter to the person who generated the waste within 15 days after the waste is received at the disposal or processing facility. 
(7)  One part of the trip ticket shall go to the Town of Little Elm Health Services Department and shall be provided within 30 days of the disposal. 
(8)  A copy of all trip tickets shall be maintained for a period of two years and shall be made available for inspection by the regulatory authority. 
(e)  A transporter or any person cleaning or servicing a grease trap or grit trap shall remove the entire contents of the collection device. Skimming the surface layer of waste material, partial cleaning of the trap or use of any method which does not remove the entire contents of the collection device is prohibited. 
(f)  Any person wishing to make use of a mobile treatment process or of an on-site process to clean or service grease traps shall demonstrate the process to the satisfaction of the regulatory authority. Included with the demonstration shall be a written explanation of the treatment process. Any costs to the town associated with the demonstration such as, but not limited to, sampling and analysis shall be recovered. 
(g)  A transporter shall allow the director and his or her designee to inspect vehicles registered under a permit upon their request. 
(Ord. No. 1127, § 2, 12-18-2012) 
Sec. 46-177. - Accumulation of liquid waste. 
    A person commits an offense if he allows liquid waste that emits noxious or offensive odors or is unsanitary or injurious to public health to accumulate upon property under his control. 
(Ord. No. 1127, § 2, 12-18-2012) 
Sec. 46-178. - Disposal of liquid waste. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he unloads or offers for sale or exchange liquid waste, except at a place permitted by the town, state or federal government. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he deposits or discharges liquid waste at any site not approved for the disposal of such material. 
(Ord. No. 1127, § 2, 12-18-2012) 
Sec. 46-179. - Responsibilities of liquid waste generator. 
(a)  A generator of liquid waste shall have all liquid waste material picked up from his premises by a liquid waste transporter who holds a valid permit from the town and the liquid waste shall be transported to an approved site for disposal. 
(b)  A generator of liquid waste shall not have hazardous materials or liquid waste in combination with hazardous materials removed from his premises by a liquid waste hauler operating under a permit. 
(c)  A generator shall sign the trip ticket from the transporter when a load is picked up by the transporter and shall keep a copy of all trip tickets for a period of two years. The regulatory authority may inspect these records during normal business hours. 
(d)  A generator shall: 
(1)  Install or provide collection device of size and type specified by regulatory authority. If the director determines that a collection device is insufficient in size or design, he or she may require the generator to upgrade their collection device. 
(2)  Supervise the servicing of the generator's liquid and generator's liquid waste facilities, and shall ensure that they are completely emptied by the transporter during such servicing. 
(3)  Maintain collection devices in continuous, proper operation. 
(4)  Report spills and accidents involving collection device to regulatory authority immediately or through emergency dispatch after business hours. 
(5)  Clean up all spills and accidents immediately and have material disposed of by permitted transporter by proper means. 
(Ord. No. 1127, § 2, 12-18-2012) 
Sec. 46-180. - Schedule of service required for generators. 
(a)  All food manufacturers, meat markets, full-service groceries and full-service restaurants shall pump their interceptor at a minimum of once every 90 days. 
(b)  All other facilities, including child care centers, schools and groceries with pre-packaged foods and minimal food preparation as determined by the director or his or her designee shall pump their interceptor at a minimum of once semi-annually. 
(c)  The director and/or his or her designee may require more frequent pumping upon assessment or at his or her discretion. 
(d)  The director may change the frequency required upon formal written request. 
(Ord. No. 1127, § 2, 12-18-2012) 
Sec. 46-181. - Responsibilities of disposers. 
(a)  A liquid waste disposer commits an offense if he allows accumulation of liquid waste on his premises so that rainfall could carry the material to storm sewers or adjacent property or create a noxious odor or potential health hazard. 
(b)  A liquid waste disposer shall: 
(1)  Obtain and maintain compliance with all licenses and/or permits required by local, state or federal law. 
(2)  Accept waste only from a permitted transporter. 
(3)  Maintain trip ticket copies as required by TCEQ or other applicable state regulatory authority. 
(4)  Accept only those classes of wastes authorized by license or permit. 
(5)  Make available all records required to be kept for inspection by the regulatory authority during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 1127, § 2, 12-18-2012) 
Sec. 46-182. - Denial, suspension, revocation of permit. 
(a)  The regulatory authority may deny a permit if it is determined that an applicant is not qualified under this article and may suspend or revoke a permit if it is determined that a permitee: 
(1)  Is not qualified under this article. 
(2)  Has violated a provision of this article. 
(3)  Has failed to pay a required fee. 
(4)  Has failed to comply with maintenance requirements. 
(5)  Has failed to deliver trip tickets to the regulatory authority. 
(6)  The applicant, a partner of the applicant, a principal in the applicant's business, or applicant's manager or operator has: 
a.  Within the five years preceding the date of the application been convicted of a misdemeanor that is punishable by confinement and/or by a fine exceeding $500.00, and which relates directly to the duty or responsibility in operating a liquid waste transportation business; or 
b.  Been convicted of a felony which relates directly to the duty or responsibility in operating a liquid waste transportation business. 
(7)  The applicant fails to provide evidence of liability insurance or self-insurance. 
(8)  The application contains a false statement of a material fact. 
(b)  After suspension under this section, a permittee may file a request for re-instatement of the permit. When the regulatory authority determines that the permittee is again qualified, all violations have been corrected, precautions have been taken to prevent future violations, and all required fees have been paid, he shall re-instate the permit. 
(c)  The regulatory authority may revoke for a period of one year or less all permits held by a liquid waste transporter if the transporter or an employee of the transporter violates any of the provisions of this article, or applicable provisions of the Town Code or state law. 
(d)  A permittee whose permit is suspended or revoked shall not collect, transport, or dispose of any waste materials within the jurisdiction of the regulatory authority. 
(e)  Any denial, revocation, or suspension of a permit by the town shall be reported to the state regulatory authority. The town shall also report any violation notices or illegal operations to said department. 
Any applicant aggrieved by the action of the regulatory authority with reference to the revocation of a permit as provided in section 46-182 of this article shall have the right to appeal to the director of development services. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the director of development services, within 14 days after notice of the action complained of has been delivered in person or mailed to such person's address given in the application, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The director of development services shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant for notice of hearing on revocation. The decision and order of the director of development services on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. No. 1127, § 2, 12-18-2012) 
Sec. 46-183. - Right of entry. 
(a)  The town's representative(s) shall have the right to enter the premises of any person to determine whether that person is in compliance with all requirements of this article. Persons shall allow inspecting or monitoring personnel ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, monitoring, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. Any information concerning a requirement under this article shall be made readily available upon request. 
(b)  Where security measures are in force which requires proper identification and clearance before entry into the premises, that person shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the town's representative will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(c)  The town's representatives shall have the right to set up on any person's property such devices as are necessary to conduct monitoring of any person's operations. 
(d)  Unreasonable delays in allowing inspections or monitoring personnel access to any person's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1127, § 2, 12-18-2012) 
Sec. 46-184. - Abatement by town. 
(a)  In the event that an owner shall fail to comply with this article, the director or designee may notify such owner by letter addressed to such owner at such owner's post office address, or by publication as many as two times within ten consecutive days in a local newspaper, if personal service may not be had on the owner, or the owner's address is not known. The notification shall contain in brief terms the condition or conditions which exist on such owner's premises which fail to comply with this article. At the expiration of ten days after the final date of publication, the town may enter upon such premises and may do such work as necessary, or cause the same to be done, to abate the unlawful condition of the premises in order that the premises may comply with the requirements of this article. A statement of the cost incurred by the town to abate such condition shall be mailed to the owner of the premises and such statement shall be paid within 30 days of the date of the mailing of the statement of costs. 
(b)  In the event that an owner shall have an emergency condition, the director or his designee may enter upon such premises and may do such work as necessary, or cause the same to be done, to abate the condition in order that the premises may comply with the requirements of this article. For the purposes of this section, "emergency condition" shall be defined as any condition or conditions which are or reasonably could be considered an immediate threat to the health, safety or welfare of the citizens of the town or to the environment. A statement of the cost incurred by the town to abate such condition shall be mailed to the owner of the premises and such statement shall be paid within 30 days of the date of the mailing of the statement of costs. 
(c)  Any person found to be guilty of violating provisions of this article shall become liable to the town for any expense, loss or damage incurred by the town for reason of appropriate cleanup and proper disposal of said waste materials. Additionally, an administrative fee equal to one-half of assessed cleanup costs shall be levied by the town against the guilty party. 
(Ord. No. 1127, § 2, 12-18-2012) 
Sec. 46-185. - Punishment for violations; other remedies. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this article or violates any requirement established is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable by a fine of up to $2,000.00 for each act of violation and for each day of violation. 
(b)  Any person, firm or corporation, who obstructs, impedes or interferes with a representative of the town or with a representative of a town department, is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable by a fine of up to $2,000.00 for each act of violation and for each day of violation. 
(c)  In addition to proceeding under authority of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the town is entitled to pursue all criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes or other ordinances against a person, firm, or corporation that remains in violation of this article. 
(d)  The regulatory authority may cause to be impounded a vehicle which is being operated in violation of this article, and may authorize the holding of the vehicle until the violation is corrected. The regulatory authority may also revoke the permit for the improperly operated vehicle. If a vehicle is impounded or if a permit is revoked an appeal may be filed by the transporter pursuant to section 46-182. 
(e)  In addition to prohibiting certain conduct by any person, it is the intent of this article to hold a corporation or association legally responsible for prohibited conduct performed by an agent acting in behalf of a corporation or association and within the scope of his office or employment. 
(Ord. No. 1127, § 2, 12-18-2012) 
Sec. 46-186. - Administrative liability. 
(a)  No officer, agent or employee of the town shall be personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of such person's duties under this article. 
(b)  Any suit brought against any officer, agent or employee of the town as a result of any act required or permitted in this discharge of such duties under this article shall be defended by the town attorney until the final determination of the proceedings therein. 
(Ord. No. 1127, § 2, 12-18-2012) 
Secs. 46-187-46-210. - Reserved. 
Chapter 50 - FIRE PREVENTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Arson information reward. 
    The town will pay a reward of $250.00 to any person furnishing and providing the town with information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person for the offense of arson committed within the corporate limits of the town. 
(Ord. No. 7, § I, 11-17-1966; Ord. No. 9, 12-29-1966) 
Sec. 50-2. - Fire limits. 
    Fire limits of the town are hereby established as the entire corporate limits of the territory included within the boundaries of the town, and all provisions of any building or fire code of the town and any other ordinance of the town or law of the state referring to regulations within fire limits shall be applicable to the entire area included within the corporate limits of the town. 
(Ord. No. 7, § V, 11-17-1966; Ord. No. 9, 12-29-1966) 
Secs. 50-3-50-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Home rule municipality, fire department, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 342.011; appointment of fire protection personnel, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 410.032. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 50-29. - Fire department created. 
    There is hereby created and established a fire department in and for the town, for the purpose of preservation of life and property from the ravages of fire, injury, and sudden illness. The fire department is and shall be a full, bona fide department of the town. The department head, entitled as fire chief, shall be immediately subordinate and accountable to the town council. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1, 7-6-1992) 
Sec. 50-30. - Department personnel. 
    The fire department of the town shall be composed of volunteer and paid members. All members shall obey all superior officers and shall comply with all rules and regulations of the department. All officers shall ensure fair and impartial direction, leadership, and discipline is administered to members according to the department's rules and procedures. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 2, 7-6-1992) 
Sec. 50-31. - Fire chief, duties and powers. 
    The fire chief shall be the chief executive officer of the fire department and shall fulfill all responsibilities pertaining to his department including, but not limited to personnel management, planning and organization, budget preparation and control, establishing policies and procedures, training of personnel, vehicle and facility maintenance, fire service communications, inventory control, emergency scene management/coordination, fire prevention and education activities, and submitting necessary records and reports pertaining to the fire department. The fire chief shall be appointed by the town council and town manager. The chief of the department shall have full authority to reprimand, suspend, or discharge any member who fails to comply with the department rules, regulations, or procedures. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 3, 7-6-1992) 
Sec. 50-32. - Organization of department, rules and regulations. 
(a)  The chief shall organize the fire department in a logical manner to facilitate the accomplishment of the department's goals and objectives in a safe, orderly, and efficient manner. The chief may establish bureaus, divisions, sections, etc., as he deems appropriate, and shall designate officers to head each of those subunits and specify the chain of command of those officers as well as the duties of each. The chief shall designate the order of succession of the assistant chiefs. 
(b)  The chief shall establish, publish, and maintain written procedures, rules and regulations to insure safe and efficient operations of the department. He shall routinely ensure that all members and employees of the department are trained on said procedures, and that all officers actively encourage compliance with and enforce these procedures, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 4, 7-6-1992) 
Sec. 50-33. - Badges. 
    The town council shall provide each member of said fire department a badge descriptive of the office in which said fireman is serving. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 5, 7-6-1992) 
Sec. 50-34. - Chain of command during emergency. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief of the department or his officers whenever an emergency shall occur in the town to immediately report to the place of such fire and take proper measures for placing apparatus in the most advantageous position. The assistant chiefs, captains and lieutenants of the respective companies on arrival at an emergency shall immediately report to the chief, provided that in the absence of the chiefs or assistant chief, the first officer to arrive at the fire shall be the person in command. When the chief shall arrive at a fire, he shall have sole command over all other officers, all members of the department and all other persons who may be present at the fire. The chief shall take all proper measures for extinguishing the fires and protection of property and for preservation of the laws of the state and ordinances of the town and regulations respecting fires. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 6, 7-6-1992) 
Sec. 50-35. - Authority to destroy property during fire. 
    Whenever any building in the town is on fire, it shall be lawful for the chief, or his assistant or acting chief, to direct such building, or other building, or building erection, fence or fences which they may deem hazardous or likely to catch fire and communicate to other buildings, to be torn down or blown up or otherwise destroyed for the purpose of checking or otherwise extinguishing such fire, and neither the town council or any individual member thereof, nor the chief of the department, assistant chief, or any member of the department, shall in any wise be held responsible for the damaging of property or the destruction thereof, that may occur by reason of the attempt of the department to extinguish any fire. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 7, 7-6-1992) 
Sec. 50-36. - Absolute right-of-way for department vehicles during emergency. 
    All moving apparatus under the fire department shall have the paramount right-of-way through all streets, thoroughfares, lanes, alleys, places and courts of the town when en route to an emergency and such apparatus, together with all other vehicles contiguous thereto shall take and keep to the right hand side of the street unless the same be obstructed, in order to give the apparatus of the fire department the unobstructed use of the streets for the time being. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 8, 7-6-1992) 
Sec. 50-37. - Authority to block streets during emergency. 
    The fire department shall have the right, in time of emergency, to place ropes or guards across all streets, thoroughfares, lanes or alleys on which shall be situated any emergency and at such other points as it may deem expedient and necessary and the members of said department who have been assigned by the chief for policing purposes shall prevent any and all persons, except officers and members of the fire department and owners and occupants of such buildings, endangered by the existing emergency, from entering the lines designated by ropes or guards. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 9, 7-6-1992) 
Sec. 50-38. - Care of town-owned fire equipment. 
    The fire apparatus belonging to the town shall be kept in such place as the town council shall from time to time provide, and the company to which same may be assigned shall keep the equipment in constant readiness for use. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 10, 7-6-1992) 
Sec. 50-39. - Authority to detain suspects and to command persons to assist fire department. 
(a)  Authority to detain suspects. During the progress of a fire within the town limits and for 24 hours after its extinguishments, it shall be lawful for the chief of police or any policeman of the town, or captain or other officer in command of any fire company, to arrest and keep in custody all suspected persons and persons who conduct themselves in a noisy or disorderly manner, or hinder, resist or refuse to obey any such officers while acting in the discharge of their duties. 
(b)  Authority to command persons to assist fire department. The officers shall be vested with full power and authority to command all persons present at any fire in the town to assist in the discharge of any duty under the supervision of the fire department in the extinguishment of same, or the removal and preservation of property, provided that the persons shall not be bound to obey such officers unless the officers shall wear their badge of office, or unless their official title be known, or be made known to such persons. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 11, 7-6-1992) 
Sec. 50-40. - Interference by nondepartmental persons, unlawful. 
(a)  Interference in discharge of department duties. It shall be unlawful for any person not a member of the fire department to interfere with, or in any manner hinder any member or employee of the fire department in the discharge of their duties as such. 
(b)  Interference in handling departmental property. It shall be unlawful for any person not a member of said fire department to handle, or in any way interfere, with any of the apparatus belonging to or used by said fire department, either at a fire or while traveling to or returning from a fire, or while standing in the fire department quarters, or at any time, unless such person is requested to do so by an officer of said department. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 12, 7-6-1992) 
Secs. 50-41-50-68. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FIRE MARSHAL 

Sec. 50-69. - Fire marshal position created. 
(a)  The office of fire marshal is hereby created. Such office shall be under the direction of the fire chief; the fire marshal reporting directly to the fire chief. The fire marshal shall carry out those duties as enumerated in the International Fire Code, including, but not limited to the inspection of all new commercial construction. 
(b)  The office of fire marshal shall be the arson investigating unit of the town, and the fire marshal shall be designated an arson investigator as that term is used in Vernon's Ann. C.P.P. art. 2.12(7). The fire marshal/arson investigator must obtain and maintain certification and license as a peace officer from the commission on law enforcement standards and education as set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 415. 
(Ord. No. 509, § 1, 11-6-2000) 
Sec. 50-70. - Investigation by marshal. 
    The fire marshal shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring within the town by which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall be begun within 24 hours, not including Sunday, of the occurrence of such fire. The fire marshal shall keep in his office a record of all fires, together with all facts, statistics and circumstances, including the origin of the fires and the amount of the loss, which may be determined by the investigation required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 503, § 2, 9-5-2000) 
Sec. 50-71. - Marshal may take testimony. 
    The fire marshal, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the testimony, on oath, of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in relation to the matter under investigation, and shall cause the same to be reduced in writing; and if he shall be of the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson, or with the attempt to commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud, or criminal conduct in connection with such fire, he shall cause such person to be lawfully arrested and charged with such offense or either of them, shall furnish to the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the names of witnesses and all of the information obtained by him, including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case. 
(Ord. No. 503, § 3, 9-5-2000) 
Sec. 50-72. - Power to summon witnesses. 
    The fire marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which is by the provisions of this article a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any book, paper or document deemed pertinent thereto. The said fire marshal is hereby authorized and empowered to administer oaths and affirmations to any persons appearing as witnesses before him. 
(Ord. No. 503, § 4, 9-5-2000) 
Sec. 50-73. - Witness refusal to cooperate. 
    Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear or testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of said fire marshal, or who fails or refuses to produce any book, paper or document touching any matter under examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the proceedings of the fire marshal in the matter of said investigation or inquiry, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter under investigation as aforesaid, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor; it shall be the duty of the fire marshal to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted. Any person being convicted of any such misdemeanor shall be fined a sum not exceeding $2,000.00. Provided, however, that any person convicted shall have the right to appeal. 
(Ord. No. 503, § 5, 9-5-2000) 
Sec. 50-74. - Classification of investigations. 
    All investigations held by or under the direction if the fire marshal may, at his discretion, be private, and persons other than those required to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held, and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other until they have been examined. 
(Ord. No. 503, § 6, 9-5-2000) 
Sec. 50-75. - Authority to examine premises. 
    The fire marshal shall have the authority at all times of day or night, when necessary, in the performance of the duties imposed upon him by the provisions of this article, to enter upon and examine any building or premises where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the same, which authority shall be exercised only with reason and good discretion. 
(Ord. No. 503, § 7, 9-5-2000) 
Sec. 50-76. - Power of examination, upon complaint. 
(a)  The fire marshal, upon complaint of any person having an interest in any building or property adjacent and without complaint, shall have a right at all reasonable hours for the purpose of examination, to enter into and upon all buildings and premises within the town, and it shall be his duty, monthly, or more often, to enter upon and make or cause to be entered and made, a thorough examination of all mercantile, manufacturing and public buildings or other structures which, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger persons or property therein, and whenever he shall find an improper or dangerous arrangement of stoves, ranges, furnaces or other heating appliances of any kind whatsoever, including chimneys, flues, and pipes with which the same may be connected, or a dangerous arrangement of lighting devices or systems, or a dangerous or unlawful storage of explosives, compounds, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, dangerous chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustible, inflammable and refuse materials, or other conditions which may be dangerous in character or liable to cause or promote fire or create conditions dangerous to the firemen or occupants, he shall order the same to be removed or remedied, and such order shall be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant of such building or premises. 
(b)  Provided, however, that if said owner or occupant deems himself aggrieved by such order, he may, within five days, appeal to the town manager, who shall investigate the cause of the complaint and unless by their authority the order is revoked, such order shall remain in force and be forthwith complied with by said owner or occupant. At the end of each month, the fire marshal shall report to the state fire marshal all existing hazardous conditions, together with a separate report on each fire in the town during the month. 
(Ord. No. 503, § 8, 9-5-2000) 
Sec. 50-77. - Owner and occupant responsibility for condition of premises. 
    Any owner or occupant of a building or other structure or premises, who shall keep or maintain the same when, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, it is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger buildings or property of others, or is especially liable to fire and which is so occupied that fire would endanger other persons or their property therein, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 503, § 9, 9-5-2000) 
Sec. 50-78. - Improper arrangement of heating appliances. 
    Any owner or occupant of any building or other structure, or premises, who shall keep or maintain the same with an improper arrangement of a stove, range, furnace, or other heating appliance of any kind whatever, including chimneys, flues, and pipes with which the same may be connected, so as to be dangerous in the matter of fire, or health or safety of persons or property of others; who shall keep or maintain any building, other structure or premises with an improper arrangement of a lighting device or system or with a storage of explosives, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustibles, inflammable materials, refuse, or with any other condition which shall be dangerous in character to the persons, health or property of others; or which shall be dangerous in the matter of promotion, augmenting or causing fires; or which shall create conditions dangerous to firemen, or occupants of such buildings, structures or premises other than the maintenance thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 503, § 10, 9-5-2000) 
Sec. 50-79. - Prosecution limited to certain circumstance. 
    No prosecution shall be brought under sections 50-77 and 50-78 until the order provided for in section 50-76 be given, and the party notified shall fail or refuse to comply with same. 
(Ord. No. 503, § 11, 9-5-2000) 
Sec. 50-80. - Penalties. 
    The penalties provided for herein shall be recovered by the town in the same manner as provided by law for the enforcement of fines, forfeitures, and punishments for offenses against the town. 
(Ord. No. 503, § 12, 9-5-2000) 
Sec. 50-81. - Each day's offense is separate offense. 
    Every day's maintenance of any of the conditions prohibited in any of the foregoing section shall be a distinct and separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 503, § 13, 9-5-2000) 
Sec. 50-82. - Prosecution and remedies. 
    All misdemeanors herein provided for shall be prosecuted, and all fines and forfeitures herein provided for shall be recovered and enforced, in the same manner as provided by law for the enforcement of fines, forfeitures, penalties and punishments for the offenses generally against the town. 
(Ord. No. 503, § 14, 9-5-2000) 
Secs. 50-83-50-107. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE 

Sec. 50-108. - International Fire Code amendments. 
The following noted portions of the International Fire Gas Code are hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 101.1; change to read as follows: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of Little Elm, Texas, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
Section 102.4; change to read as follows: 
102.4 Application of other codes. The design and construction of new structures shall comply with the International Building Code, this code, and other codes as applicable, and any alterations, additions, changes in use or changes in structures required by this code, which are within the scope of the International Building Code, this code, and other codes as applicable, shall be made in accordance therewith. 
Section 102.7; changed to read as follows: 
102.7 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those listed in Chapter 80, and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference and as further regulated in Sections 102.7.1 and 102.7.2. 
102.7.1 Conflicts. Where conflicts occur between provisions of this code and referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. 
102.7.2 Provisions in referenced codes and standards. Where the extent of the reference to a referenced code or standard includes subject matter that is within the scope of this code and any adopted amendments, the provisions of this code and any adopted amendments, as applicable, shall take precedence over the provisions in the referenced code or standard. 
Section 103.1, 103.2, and 103.3; change to read as follows: 
103.1 General. The Fire Code shall be enforced by the Division of Fire Prevention. The Division of Fire Prevention is hereby established as a division of the Fire Department of the Town of Little Elm, Texas and shall operate under the supervision of the Chief of the Fire Department. 
103.2 Appointment. The Fire Marshal is in charge of the Division of Fire Prevention and shall be appointed by the Chief of the Fire Department on the basis of proper qualifications. 
103.3 Deputies. The Chief of the Fire Department may detail such members of the Fire Department of proper qualification as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary and each member so assigned shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of this code. 
Section 104.12; add section to read as follows: 
104.12 Fire Marshal's Office Procedures and Specification Guide. References to the Little Elm Fire Department's Fire Marshal's Office Procedures and Specification Guide (aka: "Contractor's Guide" or "the Guide") will be made throughout this code and serves as a quick reference guide to assist developers and contractors in facilitating their responsibilities as they relate to the fire code. Any conflict between the guide, local amendments, and/or the International Fire Code shall be resolved at the discretion of the fire code official. 
Section 105.2.3; add a second paragraph to read as follows: 
Reinstatement of expired permits will require the applicant to resubmit application and required documents, and shall be liable for applicable permit fees. 
Section 105.4.6; change to read as follows: 
105.4.6 Retention of construction documents. One set of construction documents (printed or digital) shall be retained by the fire code official for a period of not less than 180 days from the date of the completion of the permitted work, or as required by state or local laws. One set of approved construction documents shall be returned to the applicant and said set, along with the fire department permit, and plan review comments, if any, shall be kept on the site of the building or work from the date issued and until the completion of the permits associated inspections and the Fire Department's Final Certificate of Occupancy Inspection, where applicable. 
Section 105.6.27; change to read as follows: 
105.6.27 LP-Gas. An operational permit is required for: 
1.  Storage and use of LP-Gas. 
Exception: a permit is not required for individual containers with a 20-gallon (75.7 L) water capacity or less serving occupancies in Group R-3. 
2.  Operation of cargo tankers that transport LP-Gas. 
Section 105.7; changed to read as follows: 
105.7 Required construction permits. The fire code official is authorized to issue construction permits for work set forth in Sections 105.7.1 to 105.7.20. 
Section 105.7; add sections 105.7.17, 105.7.18, 105.7.19, and 105.7.20 to read as follows: 
105.7.17 Smoke control or exhaust systems. Construction permits are required for smoke control or exhaust systems as specified in Section 909 and Section 910 respectively. Maintenance performed in accordance with this code is not considered a modification and does not require a permit. 
105.7.18 Electronic access control systems. Construction permits are required for the installation or modification of an electronic access control system, as specified in Section 503 and Section 1008. A separate construction permit is required for the installation or modification of a fire alarm system that may be connected to the access control system. Maintenance performed in accordance with this code is not considered a modification and does not require a permit. 
105.7.19 Gates and Barricades. Construction permits are required for the installation or modification of an electronic or manual control system specified in section 503.5 and 503.6. Maintenance performed in accordance with this code is not considered a modification and does not require a permit. 
105.7.20 Fire Lanes and traffic calming devices. Construction permits are required for the modification of any fire lane and/or for the installation or modification of any traffic calming device. Maintenance performed in accordance with this code is not considered a modification; unless such device is not in compliance with this code, and does not require a permit. 
Section 106.5; added to read as follows: 
106.5 Inspection of existing premises. The fire code official or designated representative shall inspect all buildings, premises, or portions thereof as often as may be necessary to ensure continued compliance with the provisions of this code. 
An initial inspection and one (1) re-inspection shall be made at no charge to the responsible party. If the fire code official or designated representative(s) are required to make follow-up inspections after the initial and first re-inspection to verify correction of noted violation(s) during the previous inspections, a fee shall be charged. The occupant, lessee, or person making use of the building or premises shall pay said fee(s), as established in Section 113.2, within thirty (30) days of being billed as a condition to continue lawful occupancy of the building or premises. Continued non-compliance may result in the issuance of a citation and subject to the penalties established in Section 109.4. 
Section 106.5.1; added to read as follows: 
106.5.1 Habitual violations. An occupant, lessee, or person making use of a building or premises that has been cited for a violation of this code, or previous code for the same violation over multiple initial maintenance inspections shall waive right to notice of violation in Section 109.3 and may be immediately issued a citation subject to the penalties as established by Section 109.4. 
Section 106.2.1; add second paragraph to read as follows: 
Inspection and their request shall comply with the Town of Little Elm's Fire Marshal's Office Inspection Procedures. 
Section 109.4; changed to read as follows: 
109.4 Violation penalties. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions or terms of this Article or Code adopted herein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction in the Municipal Court of the Town of Little Elm, shall be subjected to a fine not to exceed two thousand and no/100 dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense, and each and every day any such violation exist be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
Section 111.4; changed to read as follows: 
111.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe work condition, shall be liable to a fine of not more than two thousand and no/100 dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense, and each and every day such violation shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
Section 113.2; changed to read as follows: 
113.2 Schedule of Fees. A fee for each permit, inspection, or re-inspection shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule provided in Town of Little Elm Ordinance No. 900, or future ordinance(s) amending or repealing said ordinance. 
Section 113.3; add second paragraph to read as follows: 
Work commencing before permit issuance shall also be known as working without a permit and shall include non-compliance by the permit holder of Sections 105.3.5 and 105.4.6. Fees for working without a permit are established in Town of Little Elm Ordinance No. 900, or future ordinance(s) amending or repealing said ordinance. 
Section 202; amend and add definitions to read as follows: 
AMBULATORY CARE FACILITY. Buildings or portions thereof used to provide medical, surgical, psychiatric, nursing, or similar care on a less than 24-hour basis to persons who are rendered incapable of self-preservation by the services provided. This group may include but not limited to the following: 
-  Dialysis centers; 
-  Sedation dentistry; 
-  Surgery centers; 
-  Colonic centers; 
-  Psychiatric centers. 
ATRIUM. An opening connecting three or more stories ... (remaining text unchanged). 
FIRE WATCH. A temporary measure intended to ensure continuous and systematic surveillance of a building or portion thereof by one or more qualified individuals or standby personnel when required by the fire code official, for the purpose of identifying and controlling fire hazards, detecting early signs of unwanted fire, raising an alarm of fire and notifying the fire department. 
FIREWORKS. Any composition or device for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect for entertainment purpose by combustion, deflagration, detonation, and/or activated by ignition with a match or other heat producing device that meets the definition of 1.4G fireworks or 1.3G fireworks as set forth herein ...(remainder of text unchanged). 
HIGH-PILED COMBUSTIBLE STORAGE. (add second paragraph) Any building classified as a group S Occupancy or Speculative Building exceeding 5,000 sq. ft. that has a clear height in excess of 14 feet, making it possible to be used for storage in excess of 12 feet, shall be considered to be high-piled storage. When a specific product cannot be identified, a fire protection system and life safety features shall be installed as for Class IV commodities, to the maximum pile height. 
HIGH-RISE BUILDING. A building with an occupied floor located more than 55 feet (16,764 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access. 
REPAIR GARAGE. A building, structure or portion thereof used for servicing or repairing motor vehicles. This occupancy shall also include garages involved in minor repair, modification and servicing of motor vehicles for items such a lube changes, inspections, windshield repair or replacement, shocks, minor part replacement and other such minor repairs. 
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY. Real property designed and used for the purpose of renting or leasing individual storage spaces to customers for the purpose of storing and removing personal property on a self-service basis. 
STANDBY PERSONNEL. Qualified fire service personnel approved by the Fire Chief. When utilized, the umber [number] required shall be as directed by the Fire Chief. Charges for utilization shall be as normally calculated by the jurisdiction. 
Section 307.2; change to read as follows: 
307.2 Permit required. A permit shall be obtained from the fire code official in accordance with Section 105.6 prior to kindling a fire for recognized silviculture or range or wildlife management practices, prevention or control of disease or pests, or open burning. Application for such approval shall only be presented by and permits issued to the owner of the land upon which the fire is to be kindled. 
Examples of state or local law, or regulations referenced elsewhere in this section may include but not be limited to the following: 
1.  Texas Commission on Environmental Quality guidelines and/or restrictions. 
2.  State, County, or local temporary or permanent bans on open burning. 
3.  Local written policies as established by the fire code official. 
Section 307.2.2; add to read as follows: 
307.2.2 Acceptable material. Materials acceptable to burn are trees, brush, grass, and other dry plant growth for land clearing operations where no practical alternative to burning exists and the materials being burned are only from that property. 
Section 307.4; change to read as follows: 
307.4 Location. The location for open burning shall not be less than 300 feet (91,440 mm) from any structure, and provisions shall be made to prevent the fire from spreading to within 300 feet (91,440 mm) of any structure. 
Exceptions: (no change). 
Section 307.4.3; add exception #2 to read as follows: 
307.4.3 Portable outdoor Fire Places (text unchanged]. 
Exceptions: Except in one- or two-family dwellings when used on a non-combustible or limited combustible surface (i.e.; concrete pad or maintained lawn). 
Section 307.4.4; added to read as follows: 
307.4.4 Permanent outdoor firepit. Permanently installed outdoor firepits for recreational fire purposes shall not be installed within 10 feet of a structure or combustible material. 
Exception: Permanent installed outdoor fireplaces constructed in accordance with the International Building Code. 
Section 307.4.5; added to read as follows: 
307.4.5 Trench Burns. Trench burns shall be conducted in air curtain trenches and in accordance with Section 307.2. 
Section 307.5; changed to read as follows: 
307.5 Attendance. Open burning, trench burns, bonfires or recreational fires shall be constantly attended until the . . . (remainder of section unchanged). 
Section 308.1.4 is amended to read as follows: 
308.1.4 Open-flame cooking devices. Open-flame cooking devices, charcoal grills and other similar devices used for cooking shall not be located or used on combustible balconies, decks, or within 10 feet (3,048 mm) of combustible construction. 
Exceptions: 
1.  One- and two-family dwellings, except that LP-gas containers are limited to a water capacity not greater than 50 pounds (22.68 kg) [nominal 20 pounds (9.08 kg) LP-gas capacity] with an aggregate LP-gas capacity not to exceed 100 lbs. (5 containers). 
2.  Where buildings, balconies and decks are protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system except that LP-gas containers are limited to a water capacity not greater than 50 pounds (22.68 kg) [nominal 20 pound (9.08 kg) LP-gas capacity], with an aggregate LP-gas capacity not to exceed 40 lbs. (2 containers). 
3.  (no change). 
Section 308.1.6.2, Exception #3; changed to read as follows: 
Exceptions: 
3.  Torches or flame producing devices in accordance with Section 308.1.3. 
Section 311.5; changed to read as follows: 
311.5 Placards. The fire code official is authorized to require marking of any vacant or abandon buildings or structures determined to be unsafe pursuant to Section 110 of this code relating to structural or interior hazards as required by Section 311.5.1 through 311.5.5. 
Section 319; added and titled "Burn Ban" to read as follows: 
319.1 General. In the event that a fire emergency declaration (burn ban) is issued by the County of Denton, Texas, through proclamation or Executive Order of the Denton County Commissioners Court; that ban shall become enforceable within the Town limits of Little Elm and be in effect from the date executed until such time the declaration/ban expires or is terminated. 
319.2 Definition. The definition of combustible materials in the section shall include but not limited to, the use of all fireworks, discarding of cigarettes or other flammable materials, materials used in activities such as welding and any other activity that could result in fire. 
319.3 Violation. The use of a combustible material or knowingly and willingly allowing the use of a combustible material on private property or in any outdoor environment by any person is prohibited while this section is in effect. A violation of this section is a separate and distinct offense of other provisions of this code. 
319.4 Outdoor cooking. All outdoor cooking or open flame device while this section is in effect are prohibited. 
Exceptions: 
1.  The cooking device is propane or natural gas and has a complete and full enclosure that is utilized at all times. 
2.  The cooking device is wood or charcoal and has a complete and full enclosure that is utilized, and all areas around the cooking device shall be clear of vegetation and/or combustible materials or debris for a 5' radius. 
319.5 Hot work/Welding. Where welding must be performed in the field, the following mitigating efforts will be in force while this section is in effect. 
319.5.1 Open hot-work. 
1.  All areas where welding, cutting or grinding operations are being performed will be free of vegetation and/or combustibles for at least thirty feet in all directions; 
2.  Winds speed must be no more than 20 miles per hour while performing welding, cutting or grinding operations outside of approved barriers or enclosures; 
3.  Relative humidity must be above 25%; 
4.  Each site will have the ability to call 911 for emergency response; 
5.  A dedicated fire watch person will attend each welder, cutter, grinder or any activity that causes a spark; 
6.  A minimum of one (1) water pressure fire extinguisher or pressurized water source per fire watch person is required; 
7.  If an emergency exists where welding has to be performed, the Fire Marshal may issue a temporary exception to the order; 
8.  All persons must report the intent to perform hot work to the Town of Little Elm Fire Marshal's Office prior to work commencing. Unreported hot work is in violation of this order. 
319.5.2 Enclosed hot-work. 
1.  All welding, cutting and grinding operations may be performed in a total welding enclosure, or "welding box", that is sufficiently high to control sparks and includes a fire retardant cover over the top. 
2.  All areas where welding, cutting or grinding operations are being performed will be free of vegetation and/or combustibles for at least twenty feet in all directions; 
3.  Winds speed must be no more than 22 miles per hour while performing welding, cutting or grinding operations; 
4.  Relative humidity must be above 20%; 
5.  Each site will have the ability to call 911 for emergency response; 
6.  A dedicated fire watch person will attend each welder, cutter, grinder or any activity that causes a spark; 
7.  A minimum of one (1) water pressure fire extinguisher or pressurized water source per fire watch person is required; 
8.  Where welding (above ground and sub-surface) is required in an area where there is a potential for a hazardous atmosphere, barriers will be substituted for total enclosures (e.g.; "wind walls") to prevent sparks from coming in contact with any combustible material and/or vegetation; 
9.  The barriers will be installed to allow ventilation of the work area and ingress and egress to the work area for personnel safety; 
10.  Sub-surface, or "bell hole", welding and grinding operations within approved excavations are allowed if all other "enclosed" mitigation efforts are in compliance; 
11.  If an emergency exists where welding has to be performed, the Fire Marshal may issue a temporary exception to the order; 
12.  All persons must report the intent to perform hot work to Little Elm Fire Marshal's Office prior to work commencing. Unreported hot work is in violation of this order. 
319.6 Burn Permits. All burn permits, regardless of whether previously issued shall be suspended for the duration of the burn ban. 
319.7 Penalty. Penalty for violation(s) of the section are established in Section 109.3 of this code as adopted. 
Section 401.9; add section 401.9 to read as follows: 
401.9 False Alarms and Nuisance Alarms. False alarms and nuisance alarms shall not be given, signaled or transmitted or caused or permitted to be given, signaled or transmitted. 
Section 401.3.2; changed to read as follows: 
401.3.2 Alarm activation. Upon activation of a fire alarm signal, employees or staff shall immediately notify the fire department. All occupants of that facility shall follow their fire department approved evacuation plan or immediately evacuate the facility and shall not return until authorized by fire department personnel. 
Section 501.4; change to read as follows: 
501.4 Timing of installation. When fire apparatus access roads or a water supply for fire protection is required to be installed for any structure or development, they shall be installed, tested and approved prior to the time of which construction has progressed beyond completion of the foundation of any structure. 
Section 503.1.1; add paragraph to read as follows: 
Fire lane measurements shall be as the hose lays, begin from the centerline of the fire lane and unobstructed by any barriers. Except for one- or two-family dwellings, the path of measurement shall be along a minimum of a ten feet (10') wide unobstructed path around the external walls of the structure. A five-foot wide level pathway shall be provided unobstructed through all barriers. A continuous row of parking between the fire lane and the structure shall be considered a barrier. 
Section 503.2; add paragraph to read as follows: 
Fire lanes provided during the platting process shall be so indicated on the plat as an easement. Where fire lanes are provided and a plat is not required, the limits of the fire lane shall be shown on a site plan and placed on permanent file with the Town's Planning Department. 
Section 503.1.2; add paragraph to read as follows: 
All structures and subdivisions shall provide two points of access. Two points shall be a minimum of 140 feet apart. The maximum block length shall be 1000' and the maximum cul-de-sac length shall not exceed 500' as measured from centerline of the intersecting street to the center of the radius. 
Section 503.2.1; change to read as follows: 
503.2.1 Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 24 feet (7,315 mm), except for approved security gates in accordance with Section 503.6, and an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 14 feet (4,267 mm). 
When servicing a structure of greater than two stories in height, a 26-foot fire lane is required. Any such fire lane easement shall either connect both ends to a dedicated street or be provided with a turnaround having a minimum outer radius of 50 feet. 
Section 503.2.1.2; add to read as follows: 
503.2.1.2 Radius. All curve or turn radii must be sufficient to accommodate the turning profile of the largest first-alarm emergency apparatus provided by or available to the Little Elm Fire Department through mutual/automatic aid agreement. 
This may be accomplished by use of minimum turn requirements for an AASHTO WB-50 vehicle. Twenty-foot (20') minimum radius is preferred. Conformance must be demonstrated by including a scale illustration on the submitted site plan showing the turning of an AASHTO WB-50 vehicle within the proposed fire lanes. 
Fire lane designs shall be provided during the site plan process or when appropriate if site plan approval is not required. 
Section 503.2.2; change to read as follows: 
503.2.2 Authority. The fire code official shall have the authority to require an increase in the minimum access width, vertical clearances, and radii where they are inadequate for fire or rescue operations. 
Section 503.2.3; changed to read as follows: 
Section 503.2.3 Surface. Fire Lane and fire apparatus access roads shall be constructed to meet the Town of Little Elm Engineering Standards. 
All fire lanes shall be maintained and kept in good state of repair at all times by the owner and the Town of Little Elm shall not be responsible for maintenance thereof. It shall further be the responsibility of the owner to ensure that all fire lane markings required by Sec. 503.3 be kept so that they are easily distinguishable to the public. 
Section 503.2.5; change to read as follows: 
Section 503.2.5 Dead-ends. Dead-end fire apparatus roads are not permitted. An approved fire department turn around shall be required. 
Section 503.3; change to read as follows: 
503.3 Marking. Striping, signs, or other markings, when approved by the code official, shall be provided for fire apparatus access roads to identify such roads or prohibit the obstruction thereof. Striping, signs and other markings shall be maintained in a clean and legible condition at all times and be replaced or repaired when necessary to provide adequate visibility. 
1.  Striping. Fire apparatus access roads shall be continuously marked by painted lines of red traffic paint six inches (6") in width to show the boundaries of the lane. The words "NO PARKING FIRE LANE" or "FIRE LANE NO PARKING" shall appear in four inch (4") white letters at 25 feet intervals on the red border markings along both sides of the fire lanes. Where a curb is available, the striping shall be on the vertical face of the curb. 
2.  Sign. Signs shall read "NO PARKING FIRE LANE" or "FIRE LANE NO PARKING" and shall be 12" wide and 18" high. Signs shall be painted on a white background with letters and borders in red, using not less than 2" lettering. Signs shall be permanently affixed to a stationary post and the bottom of the sign shall be six feet, six inches (6'6") above finished grade. Signs shall be spaced not more than fifty feet (50') apart. Signs may be installed on permanent buildings or walls or as approved by the Fire Chief. 
Section 503.4; change to read as follows: 
503.4 Obstruction of fire apparatus access roads. Fire apparatus roads shall not be obstructed in any manner, including the parking of vehicles, whether attended or unattended for any period of time. Persons in charge of a construction project, such as, but not limited to, a General Contractor, are responsible to ensure that fire lanes are kept clear of vehicles and other obstructions at all times and may be issued a citation for non-compliance under this section. The minimum widths and clearances established in Section 503.2.1 and any area marked as a fire lane as described in Section 503.3 shall be maintained at all times. The Fire Chief and Police Chief, and their designated representatives are authorized to remove or cause to be removed any material, vehicle or object obstructing a fire lane at the expense of the owner of such material, vehicle or object. 
Section 503.4.1; change to read as follows: 
503.4.1 Traffic Calming Devices. Traffic calming devices shall be prohibited unless approved by the fire code official. A permit shall be required as per Section 105.7 of this code and the construction of such devices shall comply with the Fire Marshal's Office's Procedures and Specification Guide. 
Section 503.4.2; add section to read as follows: 
503.4.2 Obstruction and Control. No owner or person in charge of any premises served by a fire lane or access easement shall abandon, restrict or close any fire lane or easement without first securing a permit as required in 105.7 of this code and securing from the Town of Little Elm approval of an amended plat or other acceptable legal instrument showing the removal of the fire lane. 
Section 503.6; add a paragraph to read as follows: 
The installation of security gates or other devices intended to limit the access of vehicles or persons shall require a permit as established in Section 105.7 and shall comply with the Fire Marshal's Office's Procedures and Specification Guide. 
Section 505.1; change and add Sections 505.1.1-505.1.5 to read as follows: 
505.1 Address numbers. New and existing buildings shall have approved address numbers, building numbers or approved building identification placed in a position that is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall be substantially contrasting with their background. Where required by the fire code official, address numbers shall be provided in additional approved locations to facilitate emergency response. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Address numbering shall comply with Sections 505.1.1-505.1.5. 
505.1.1 Single-family homes. Minimum 4" high, 5/8 " stroke. 
505.1.2 Multifamily Communities. Street Address shall be a minimum of 12 inches high with a 2" stroke. Individual building numbers shall be a minimum of 18" high with a 3" stroke. Buildings over 100 feet in length require a minimum of two (2) numbers per building. Apartment spread numbers shall be a minimum of 7" high with a one-inch stroke and corridor spread numbers shall be a minimum of 4" high with a 5/8 -inch brush stroke. Individual apartment unit numbers shall be a minimum of 4" in height with a 5/8 -inch stroke. 
505.1.3 Large Office and Warehouse Buildings. Address must be visible from all access directions. Number shall be a minimum of 24 inches in height with a 4-inch stroke. Buildings over 500 feet long shall have two address locations if more than one access point is visible. Suite numbers shall be required for multi-tenant complexes and shall be located over the front door and on the rear door, six inches in height with a one-inch brush stroke. 
505.1.4 Shopping Centers, High Rise Buildings and Other Applications. A minimum of 10-inch high numbers with a 2" brush stroke shall be visible from all access directions. Suite numbers are required over the door with 4" high numbers with a 5/8; -inch brush stroke. Buildings beyond 100 feet from the street and 10,000 square feet shall install 12 to 18-inch numbers as determined by the fire code official. 
505.1.5 Marquee and Monument. Addresses installed on a marquee located next to the street will require numbers 8 inches high with a two-inch brush stroke to be located a minimum of 3 feet above grade. Marquee and Monument signs must also comply with other Town of Little Elm Sign Ordinance Requirements. 
Section 505.3; is added to read as follows: 
505.3 Directional/Equipment ID Signage. Directional and equipment identification signage shall be provided by the building owner on all new and existing buildings where required by the fire code official and shall meet the requirements as set forth in the Fire Marshal's Office's Procedures and Specification Guide. 
Section 506.1 is amended by adding a paragraph to read as follows: 
All new and existing occupancies, except one- and two- family residences, shall provide (a) lock box(es) as specified in the Fire Marshal's Office's Procedures and Specification Guide. Existing properties that are equipped with a lockbox that is of inadequate size shall be upgraded to a size appropriate. 
Section 507.1.1 is added to read as follows: 
507.1.1 Water Distribution Systems. Water distribution systems shall be designed meeting the minimum criteria in sections 507.1.1.1 through 507.1.1.4 and approved by the AHJ. 
507.1.1.1 Fire Protection and Hydrants. The minimum size of water mains, for providing fire protection and serving fire hydrants shall be 6 inches in diameter. 
507.1.1.2 Minimum Standards for Distribution Piping. Distribution piping shall be sized to meet design flow as determined by hydraulic analysis on water system flow gradients. The minimum size in a distribution system shall be 6 inches in diameter. Larger main sizes may be necessary to achieve required fire flow and maintain residual pressure specified for both domestic consumption and fire flow. The piping sizes must meet standards specified in Table 507.1.1.2. 
TABLE 507.1.1.2. Minimum Standards for Distribution Piping 
Appurtenance Minimum Standard Smallest pipe for hydrant feed 1 6 inches Smallest pipe in distribution system 8 inches Smallest branching pipes that are dead ends 8 inches Smallest pipe in high value district 8 inches Smallest pipe on principal streets in business, commercial, multifamily districts or complexes 12 inches Main supplying 3 or more hydrants 1, 2 12 inches  
1 Fire suppression system supply mains are considered as a "hydrant" for pipe sizing. 
2 Does not apply to residential developments. 
507.1.1.3 Looped System Requirements for Secondary feeders. A looped secondary feeder system shall be installed to supply all buildings with a fire flow over 1,000 gpm or in high value, commercial, business, and multifamily districts, or as determined by the AHJ. 
507.1.1.4 Looped System Requirements for Distributor mains. Where a distributor main supplies 3 or more fire hydrants or fire suppression system supply mains, the distribution system shall be looped. 
507.1.1.5 Valves in Distribution Systems. Valves shall be installed along water distribution lines as required by the Town of Little Elm's Engineering Department and Fire Code Official. 
Section 507.4; change to read as follows: 
507.4 Water supply test date and information. The water supply test used for hydraulic calculation of fire protection systems shall be conducted in accordance with NFPA 291 "Recommended Practice for Fire Flow Testing and Marking of Hydrants" and within one year of sprinkler plan submittal. Test shall be conducted by Town of Little Elm Water Department only. Request and results may be obtained by contacting the Water Department directly. The exact location of the static/residual hydrant and the flow hydrant shall be indicated on the design drawings. All fire protection plan submittals shall be accompanied by a hard copy of the waterflow test report, or as approved by the fire code official. The report must indicate the dominant water tank level at the time of the test and the maximum and minimum operating levels of the tank, as well, or identify applicable water supply fluctuation. The licensed contractor must then design the fire protection system based on this fluctuation information, as per the applicable referenced NFPA standard. Reference Section 903.3.5 for additional design requirements. 
Section 507.5.1; change and add table 507.5.1 to read as follows: 
507.5.1 Where required. As properties develop, fire hydrants shall be located at all intersecting streets and at the maximum spacing indicated in Table 507.5.1. Distances between hydrants shall be measured along the route that fire hose is laid by a fire vehicle from hydrant to hydrant. 
TABLE 507.5.1 
MAXIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN HYDRANTS 
OCCUPANCY SPRINKLERED NOT SPRINKLERED Residential (1 & 2 Family) 600 feet 500 feet Residential (Multi-Family) 400 feet 300 feet All Other 500 feet 300 feet  
There shall be a minimum of two (2) fire hydrants serving each property within the prescribed distance listed in Table 507.5.1. 
Protected Properties. Fire Hydrants shall be installed along fire lanes with spacing as required for street installations specified in 507.5.1. In addition, hydrants required to provide supplemental water supply for automatic fire protection systems shall be within 100 feet of the fire department connection (FDC) for such systems. 
Section 507.5.4; changed to read as follows: 
Section 507.5.4 Obstruction. Unobstructed access to fire hydrants shall be maintained at all times. Post, fences, vehicles, growth, trash, storage and other materials or objects shall not be placed or kept near fire hydrants, fire department inlet connections or fire protection system control valves in a manner that would prevent such equipment or fire hydrant from being immediately discernible. The fire department shall not be deterred or hindered from gaining immediate access to fire protection equipment. The Fire Chief and Police Chief, and their designated representatives are authorized to remove or cause to be removed any material, vehicle or object obstructing a fire hydrant, fire department inlet connection or fire protection system control valves at the expense of the owner of such material, vehicle or object. 
Section 507.5.7 through 507.5.16; add new Sections 507.5.7 through 507.5.16 to read as follows: 
507.5.7 Fire Hydrant Type. All hydrants shall be of the three-way type with National Standard threads, breakaway construction, minimum 51/4" valve opening, and shall comply with the latest AWWA specification C-502. The hydrant shall have a 41/2" large connection with a 5" Hydra-Storz quick connection by Hydra-Shield and with two 21/2" side connections and shall be placed on water mains of no less than six inches (6") in size. Fire hydrants shall be Mueller "Centurion" or approved equal. 
507.5.8 Valves. Valves shall be placed on all fire hydrants leads. 
507.5.9 Breakaway point. Fire hydrants shall be installed so that the breakaway point is no less than three (3) inches, and no greater than five (5) inches above the grade surface. 
507.5.10 Curb line. Fire hydrants shall be located a minimum of two (2) feet and a maximum of six (6) feet behind the curb line. No fire hydrant shall be placed in a cul-de-sac or the turning radius of fire lanes. 
507.5.11 Positioning. All fire hydrants shall be installed so that the 41/2" connection will face the fire lane or street. 
507.5.12 Limiting access obstruction. Fire hydrants, when placed at intersections or access drives to parking lots, shall be placed so that the minimum obstruction of the intersection or access drive will occur when the hydrant is in use. 
507.5.13 Private property. Fire hydrants located on private property shall be accessible to the fire department at all times. 
All fire hydrants placed on private property shall be adequately protected by either curb stops or concrete post or other approved methods. Such stops shall be the responsibility of the landowner on which the fire hydrant is installed. 
507.5.14 Location to building. No fire hydrant shall be located closer than 40 feet to a non-residential building or structure. 
507.5.15 Identification. An approved blue, two-sided reflector shall be utilized to identify each hydrant location. The reflector shall be affixed to the center line of each roadway or fire access lane opposite fire hydrants. 
507.5.16 Color. Fire hydrant caps and bonnet shall be painted according Little Elm Engineering Department Standards. 
Section 509.1; change to read as follows: 
509.1 Identification. Fire Protection equipment shall be identified in accordance Fire Marshal's Office's Procedures and Specification Guide. Rooms containing control valves for air-conditioning systems, sprinkler risers and valves, or other fire detection, suppression or control elements shall be identified for use of the fire department. Approved signs required to identify fire protection equipment and equipment locations shall be constructed to the Fire Marshal's Office's Procedures and Specification Guide. 
Section 603.3.2.1, Exception; change exception to read as follows: 
Exception: The aggregate capacity limit shall be permitted to be increased to 3,000 gallons (11,356 L) in accordance with all requirements of Chapter 57 (delete remainder of Exception). 
Section 603.3.2.2; change to read as follows: 
603.3.2.2 Restricted use and connection. Tanks installed in accordance with Section 603.3.2 shall be used only to supply fuel oil to fuel-burning equipment installed in accordance with Section 603.3.2.4. Connections between tanks and equipment supplied by such tanks shall be made using closed piping systems. 
Section 604; change to read as follows: 
SECTION 604 EMERGENCY AND STANDBY POWER SYSTEMS 
604.1 Installation. Emergency and standby power systems required by this code or the International Building Code shall be installed in accordance with this code, NFPA 110 and 111. Existing installations shall be maintained in accordance with the original approval, except as specified in Chapter 11. 
604.1.1 Stationary generators. Stationary emergency and standby power generators required by this code shall be listed in accordance with UL 2200. 
604.1.2 Critical Operations Power Systems (COPS). For Critical Operations Power Systems necessary to maintain continuous power supply to facilities or parts of facilities that require continuous operation for the reasons of public safety, emergency management, national security, or business continuity, see NFPA 70. 
604.2 Where required. Emergency and standby power systems shall be provided where required by Sections 604.2.1 through 604.2.24 or elsewhere identified in this code or any other referenced code. 
604.2.1 Emergency voice/alarm communications systems. Emergency power shall be provided for emergency voice/alarm communications systems in the following occupancies, or as specified elsewhere in this code, in accordance with Section 907.5.2.2.5: 
Covered and Open Malls, Section 604.2.13; 
Group A occupancies, Sections 907.2.1.1 and 907.5.2.2.4; 
Special Amusement buildings, Section 907.2.12.3; 
High rise buildings, Section 907.2.13; 
Atriums, Section 907.2.14; 
Deep Underground buildings, Section 907.2.19. 
604.2.2 Smoke control systems. Standby power shall be provided for smoke control systems in the following occupancies, or as specified elsewhere in this code, in accordance with Section 909.11: 
Covered mall building, IBC, Section 404.5; 
Atriums, IBC, Section 404.7; 
Underground buildings, IBC, Section 405.5; 
Group I-3, IBC, Section 408.9 Stages, IBC, Section 410.3.7.2; 
Special Amusement buildings (as applicable to Group A's), IBC, Section 411.1; 
Smoke protected seating, Section 1028.6.2.1. 
604.2.3 Exit signs. Emergency power shall be provided for exit signs in accordance with Section 1011.6.3 (90 minutes). 
604.2.4 Means of egress illumination. Emergency power shall be provided for means of egress illumination in accordance with Section 1006.3 (90 minutes). 
604.2.5 Accessible means of egress elevators. Standby power shall be provided for elevators that are part of an accessible means of egress in accordance with Section 1007.4. 
604.2.6 Accessible means of egress platform lifts. Standby power in accordance with this section or ASME A18.1 shall be provided for platform lifts that are part of an accessible means of egress in accordance with Section 1007.5. 
604.2.7 Horizontal sliding doors. Standby power shall be provided for horizontal sliding doors in accordance with Section 1008.1.4.3. 
604.2.8 Semiconductor fabrication facilities. Emergency power shall be provided for semiconductor fabrication facilities in accordance with Section 2703.15. 
604.2.9 Membrane structures. Emergency power shall be provided for exit signs in temporary tents and membrane structures in accordance with Section 3103.12.6.1 (90 minutes). Standby power shall be provided for auxiliary inflation systems in permanent membrane structures in accordance with the International Building Code (4 hours). 
604.2.10 Hazardous materials. Emergency or standby power shall be provided in occupancies with hazardous materials in accordance with Sections 5004.7 and 5005.1.5. 
604.2.11 Highly toxic and toxic materials. Emergency power shall be provided for occupancies with highly toxic or toxic materials in accordance with Sections 6004.2.2.8 and 6004.3.4.2. 
604.2 12 Organic peroxides. Standby power shall be provided for occupancies with organic peroxides in accordance with Section 6204.1.11. 
604.2.13 Covered and open mall buildings. (no change). 
604.2.14 High-rise buildings. (no change). 
604.2.15 Underground buildings. (no change). 
604.2.16 Group I-3 occupancies. (no change). 
604.2.17 Airport traffic control towers. (no change). 
604.2.18 Elevators. (no change). 
604.2.19 Smokeproof enclosures and Stair Pressurization Alternative. Standby power shall be provided for smokeproof enclosures, stair pressurization alternative and associated automatic fire detection systems as required by the International Building Code, Section 909.20.6.2. 
604.2.20 Elevator pressurization. Standby power shall be provided for elevator pressurization system as required by the International Building Code, Section 909.21.5. 
604.2.21 Elimination of Smoke Dampers in Shaft Penetrations. Standby power shall be provided when eliminating the smoke dampers in ducts penetrating shafts in accordance with the International Building Code, Section 717.5.3, exception 2.3. 
604.2.22 Common exhaust systems for clothes dryers. Standby power shall be provided for common exhaust systems for clothes dryers located in multistory structures in accordance with the International Mechanical Code Section 504.8, item 7. 
604.2.23 Hydrogen Cutoff Rooms. Standby power shall be provided for mechanical ventilation and gas detection systems of Hydrogen Cutoff Rooms in accordance with the International Building Code, Section 421.8. 
604.2.24 Means of Egress Illumination in Existing Buildings. Emergency power shall be provided for means of egress illumination in accordance with Sections 1104.5 and 1104.5.1 when required by the fire code official. (90 minutes in I-2, 60 minutes elsewhere.) 
604.3 Energy time duration. Unless a time limit is specified by the fire code official, in this chapter or elsewhere in this code, or in any other referenced code or standard, the emergency and standby power system shall be supplied with enough fuel or energy storage capacity for not less than 2-hour full-demand operation of the system. 
Exception: Where the system is supplied with natural gas from a utility provider and is approved. 
604.4 Maintenance. (no change). 
604.5 Operational inspection and testing. (no change). 
604.6 Emergency lighting equipment. (no change). 
604.7 Supervision of maintenance and testing. (no change). 
Section 704.1; change to read as follows: 
704.1 Enclosure. Interior vertical shafts, including but not limited to stairways, elevator hoistways, service and utility shafts, that connect two or more stories of a building shall be enclosed or protected in accordance with the codes in effect at the time of construction but, regardless of when constructed, not less than as required in Chapter 46. New floor openings in existing buildings shall comply with the International Building Code. 
Section 807.4.3; change to read as follows: 
807.4.3.2 Artwork. Artwork and teaching materials shall be limited on the walls of corridors to not more than 20 percent of the wall area and on the walls of classrooms to not more than 50 percent of each wall area. Such material shall not be continuous from floor to ceiling or wall to wall. 
Curtains, draperies, wall hangings and other decorative material suspended from the walls or ceiling shall meet the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701 in accordance with Section 807 or be noncombustible. 
Exception: Corridors protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 shall be limited to 50 percent of the wall area. 
Section 807.4.4.2; change to read as follows: 
807.4.4.2 Artwork. Artwork and teaching materials shall be limited on the walls of corridors to not more than 20 percent of the wall area and on the walls of classrooms to not more than 50 percent of each wall area. Such material shall not be continuous from floor to ceiling or wall to wall. 
Curtains, draperies, wall hangings and other decorative material suspended from the walls or ceiling shall meet the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701 in accordance with Section 807 or be noncombustible. 
Exception: Corridors protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 shall be limited to 50 percent of the wall area. 
Section 901.4.3; changed to read as follows: 
901.4.3 Fire areas. Separation of buildings or portion of buildings into separate fire areas shall not be used for the purpose of.... 
Section 901.4.6; add Sections 901.4.6.1, 901.4.6.2, 901.4.6.3, 903.7.3, and 903.7.4 to read as follows: 
901.4.6.1 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Control Room (Riser Rooms). Riser rooms shall be used for the purpose of fire suppression, fire alarm and control systems only. The following are prohibited equipment and/or facilities in a riser room: mop sinks, roof access, electrical equipment and all storage. 
901.4.6.2 Riser Room Size. Riser rooms shall be so constructed to a size that facilitates maintenance and where fire operations can be performed. Minimum riser room size for a "shotgun" riser is 6 feet by 6 feet. 
901.4.6.3 Lighting. Riser rooms shall be provided with an emergency light. 
901.4.6.4 Temperature of riser room. Riser rooms shall be provided with a suitable means for maintaining the temperature above 40 degrees Fahrenheit (5 degrees Celsius). 
901.4.6.5 Riser room access. All Riser rooms shall be directly and only accessible from the exterior of the structure. All new and existing riser rooms shall be identified in accordance to the Fire Marshal's Office's Procedures and Specification Guide. 
Section 901.6.1.1; Add Section 901.6.1.1 to read as follows: 
901.6.1.1 Standpipe testing. Building owners/managers must maintain and test standpipe systems as per NFPA 25 requirements. The following additional requirements shall be applied to the testing that is required every 5 years: 
1.  The piping between the Fire Department Connection (FDC) and the standpipe shall be hydrostatically tested for all FDC's on any type of standpipe system. Hydrostatic testing shall also be conducted in accordance with NFPA 25 requirements for the different type of standpipe systems. 
2.  For any manual (wet or dry) standpipe system not having an automatic water supply capable of flowing water through the standpipe, the tester shall connect hose from a fire hydrant or portable pumping system (as approved by the fire code official) to each FDC, and flow water through the standpipe system to the roof outlet to verify that each inlet connection functions properly. Confirm that there are no open hose valves prior to introducing water into a dry standpipe. There are no required pressure criteria at the outlet. Verify that check valves function properly and that there are no closed control valves on the system. 
3.  Any pressure relief, reducing or control calves [valves] shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of NFPA 25. All hose valves shall be exercised. 
4.  If the FDC is not already provided with approved caps, the contractor shall install such caps for all FDC's as required by the fire code official. 
5.  Upon successful completion of standpipe test, place a blue tag (as per Texas Administrative Code, Fire Sprinkler Rules for Inspection, Test and Maintenance Service (ITM) Tag) at the bottom of each standpipe riser in the building. The tag shall be check-marked as "Fifth-Year" for Type ITM, and the note on the back of the tag shall read "5 year Standpipe Test" at a minimum. 
6.  The procedures required by Texas Administrative Code Fire Sprinkler Rules with regard to Yellow Tag and Red Tags or any deficiencies noted during the testing, including the required notification of the local Authority Having Jurisdiction (fire code official) shall be followed. 
7.  Additionally, records or the testing shall be maintained by the owner and contractor, if applicable, as required by the State Rules mentioned above and NFPA 25. 
8.  Standpipe system tests where water will be flowed external to the building shall not be conducted during freezing conditions or during the day prior to expected night time freezing conditions. 
9.  Contact the fire code official for request to remove existing fire hose from Class II and III standpipe systems where employees are not trained in the utilization of this firefighting equipment. All standpipe hose valves must remain in place and be provided with an approved cap and chain when approval is given to remove hose by the fire code official. 
Section 901.7; change to read as follows: 
901.7 Systems out of service. Where a required fire protection system is out of service or in the event of an excessive number of activations, the fire department and the code official shall be notified immediately and, where required by the code official, the building shall either be evacuated or an approved fire watch shall be provided for all occupants left unprotected by the shutdown until the fire protection system has been returned to service (remainder of text unchanged). 
Section 901.9; change to read as follows: 
901.10 Discontinuation or change of service. Notice shall be made to the fire code official whenever contracted alarm services for monitoring of any fire alarm system is terminated for any reason, or a change in alarm monitoring provider occurs. Notice shall be made in writing to the fire code official by the building owner and alarm service provider prior to the service being terminated. 
Section 903.1.1; change to read as follows: [Ref. IBC 903.1.1] 
903.1.1 Alternative protection. Alternative automatic fire-extinguishing systems complying with Section 904 shall be permitted in addition to automatic sprinkler protection where recognized by the applicable standards or as approved by the fire code official. 
Section 903.2; add paragraph to read as follows: [Ref. IBC 903.2] 
Automatic sprinklers shall not be installed in elevator machine rooms, elevator machine spaces, and elevator hoistways, other than pits where such sprinklers would not necessitate shunt trip requirements under any circumstances. Storage shall not be allowed within the elevator machine room. Signage shall be provided at the entry door to the elevator machine room indicating "ELEVATOR MACHINERY - NO STORAGE ALLOWED." 
Section 903.2; delete the exception. [Ref. IBC 903.2, Exception] 
Section 903.2.9; add section 903.2.9.3 to read as follows: [Ref. IBC 903.2.9.3] 
903.2.9.3 Self-service storage facility. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all self-service storage facilities. 
A screen shall be installed at eighteen (18") inches below the level of the sprinkler heads to restrict storage above that level. This screen shall be a mesh of not less than one (1) inch not greater than six (6") inches in size. This screen and its supports shall be installed such that all elements are at least eighteen (18") inches below any sprinkler head. 
Exception: One-story self-service storage facilities that have no interior corridors, with a one-hour fire barrier separation wall installed between every storage compartment. 
Section 903.2.11; change 903.2.11.3 and add 903.2.11.7, 903.2.11.8, and 903.2.11.9 as follows: [Ref. IBC Section 903.2.11] 
903.2.11.3 Buildings 35 feet or more in height. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout buildings with a floor level, other than penthouses in compliance with Section 1509 of the International Building Code that is located 35 feet (16,764 mm) or more above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access. 
Exceptions: # 2. Open parking structures in compliance with Section 406.5 of the International Building Code. 
903.2.11.7 High-Piled Combustible Storage. For any building with a clear height exceeding 12 feet (4,572 mm), see Chapter 32 to determine if those provisions apply. 
903.2.11.8 Spray Booths and Rooms. New and existing spray booths and spray rooms shall be protected by an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system. 
903.2.11.9 Buildings over 5,000 sq. ft. An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all buildings with a building area 5,000 sq. ft. or greater, in all existing buildings that are enlarged to be 5,000 sq. ft. or greater, and in all existing buildings that the cumulative remodel over any period of time that is equal to or greater than 5,000 sq. ft. For the purpose of this provision, fire walls shall not define separate buildings. 
Exception: Open parking garages in compliance with Section 406.5 of the International Building Code. 
Section 903.3.1.1.1; change to read as follows: [Ref. IBC 903.3.1.1.1] 
903.3.1.1.1 Exempt locations. When approved by the fire code official, automatic sprinklers shall not be required in the following rooms or areas where such . . . (text unchanged) . . . because it is damp, of fire-resistance-rated construction or contains electrical equipment. 
1.  Any room where the application of water, or flame and water, constitutes a serious life or fire hazard. 
2.  Any room or space where sprinklers are considered undesirable because of the nature of the contents, when approved by the code official. 
3.  Generator and transformer rooms, under the direct control of a public utility, separated from the remainder of the building by walls and floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies having a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours. 
4.  Elevator machine rooms, machinery space, and hoistways, other than pits where such sprinklers would not necessitate shunt trip requirements under any circumstances. 
Section 903.1.2.2; add section to read as follows: [Ref. IBC 903.1.2.2] 
Section 903.1.2.2 Attics, Open Breezeways, and Attached Garages. Sprinkler protection is required in attic spaces of such buildings two or more stories in height, open breezeways, and attached garages. 
Section 903.3.1.3; change to read as follows: [Ref. IBC 903.3.1.3] 
903.3.1.3 NFPA 13 D sprinkler systems. Where allowed, automatic sprinkler systems installed in one- and two- family dwellings and townhomes shall be installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13D or in accordance with state law. 
Section 903.3.5; add a second paragraph to read as follows: [Ref. IBC 903.3.5] 
Water supply as required for such systems shall be provided in conformance with the supply requirements of the respective standards; however, every fire protection system shall be designed with a 10 psi safety factor. 
Section 903.3.7; changed to read as follows: 
903.3.7 Fire Department Connections. The location of fire department connections shall be approved by the fire code official and shall be remote from the building (outside of the collapse zone), placed adjacent to the primary fire lane access for the building served and signed in accordance with the Fire Marshal's Office's Procedures and Specification Guide. 
FDC shall be five-inch (5") Storz connection with a 30-45 degree down elbow with chained cap. Traditional 2-way Siamese connection with caps may be used when approved by the Fire Department. 
Where the FDC is serving more than 500 GPM the building shall be provided with one 5-inch Storz connection and one 2-way Siamese connection. 
Section 903.4; add a second paragraph after the exceptions to read as follows: [Ref. IBC 903.4] 
Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for fire department hose connection valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the central station upon tampering. 
Section 903.4.2; add a second paragraph to read as follows: [Ref. IBC 903.4.2] 
The alarm device required on the exterior of the building shall be a weatherproof horn/strobe notification appliance with a minimum 75 candela strobe rating, installed as close as practicable to the fire department connection. 
Section 904.11.6; add to read as follows: 
904.11.6.4 Nozzle Caps. All new and existing automatic hood suppression systems shall use metal caps on nozzles that are located between the cooking surface and hood filters. 
Section 905.2; change to read as follows: [Ref. IBC 905.2] 
905.2 Installation standards. Standpipe systems shall be installed in accordance with this section and NFPA 14. Manual dry standpipe systems shall be supervised with a minimum of 10 psig and a maximum of 40 psig air pressure with a high/low alarm. 
Section 905.3; adding Section 905.3.8 and exception to read as follows: 
905.3.8 Building area. In buildings exceeding 10,000 square feet in area per story, Class I automatic wet or manual wet standpipes shall be provided where any portion of the building's interior area is more than 200 feet (60,960 mm) of travel, vertically and horizontally, from the nearest point of fire department vehicle access. Exception: Automatic dry and semi-automatic dry standpipes are allowed as provided for in NFPA 14. 
Section 905.4, item 5; change to read as follows: [Ref. IBC 905.4] 
5. Where the roof has a slope less than four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33.3-percent slope), each standpipe shall be provided with a two-way hose connection located to serve the roof or at the highest landing of a stairway with stair access to the roof provided in accordance with Section 1009.16. An additional hose connection shall be provided at the top of the most hydraulically remote standpipe for testing purposes. 
Section 905.4, Item 7; add to read as follows: [Ref. IBC 905.4] 
7. When required by this Chapter, standpipe connections shall be placed adjacent to all required exits to the structure and at two hundred feet (200') intervals along major corridors or as required by the code official. 
Section 905.9; add a second paragraph after the exception to read as follows: [Ref. IBC 905.9] 
Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds and not more than 90 seconds. All control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for fire department hose connection valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the central station upon tampering. 
Section 907.1; add Section 907.1.4 to read as follows: [Ref. IBC 907.1] 
907.1.4 Design standards. All alarm systems new or replacement shall be analog addressable unless approved by the fire code official. 
Exception: Existing systems need not comply unless the total building remodel or expansion exceeds 30% of the building or cumulative building remodel or expansion exceeds 50% of the original construction of the building. 
Section 907.2.1; change to read as follows: [Ref. IBC 907.2.1] 
907.2.1 Group A. A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.6 shall be installed in Group A occupancies having an occupant load of 300 or more persons or more than 100 persons above or below the lowest level of exit discharge. Group A occupancies not separated from one another in accordance with Section 707.3.10 of the International Building Code shall be considered as a single occupancy for the purpose of applying this section. Portions of Group E occupancies occupied for assembly purposes shall be provided with a fire alarm system as required for the Group E occupancy. 
Activation of fire alarm modification appliances shall: 
1.  Cause illumination of the means of egress with light of not less than 1 foot-candle (11 lux) at the walking surface level, and 
2.  Stop any conflicting or confusing sounds and visual distractions. 
Section 907.2.3; change to read as follows: [Ref. IBC 907.2.3] 
907.2.3 Group E. A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 90.6 shall be installed in Group E educational occupancies. When automatic sprinkler systems or smoke detectors are installed, such systems or detectors shall be connected to the building fire alarm system. An approved smoke detection system shall be installed in Group E day care occupancies. Unless separated by a minimum of 100' of open space, all buildings, whether portable buildings or the main building, will be considered one building for alarm occupant load consideration and interconnection of alarm systems. 
Section 907.2.3 is amended to change exception #1 and add exception #1.1 to read as follows: [Ref. IBC 907.2.3] 
Exceptions: 
1.  A manual fire alarm system is not required in Group E educational and day care occupancies with an occupant load of less than 30 when provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system. 
1.1  Residential In-Home day care with not more than 12 children may use interconnected single station detectors in all habitable rooms. (For care of more than five children 21/2 or less years of age, see Section 907.2.6.) 
Section 907.2.13 Exception #3 is amended to read as follows: [Ref. IBC 907.2.13] 
3.  Open air portions of buildings with an occupancy in Group A-5 in accordance with Section 303.1 of the International Building Code; however, this exception does not apply to accessory uses including but not limited to sky boxes, restaurants, and similarly enclosed areas. 
Section 907.5; add Section 907.5.3 to read as follows: 
907.5.3 Sound system shunt. Where a fire alarm is installed, any circuit in which a sound system is installed for the purpose of projecting voice (other than emergency voice communication systems), music, or other sound shall be provided with a shunt mechanism to disable the circuit eliminating any potential conflict of the audible notification devices of the alarm system. 
Section 907.1; add section 907.1.4 to read as follows: 
907.1.4 Signal Transmission. All signal transmissions from the protected facilities to the central station monitoring facility shall comply with NFPA 72 26.6.3.2.1.4; where referring to "one telephone-line" shall mean a hard-wired telephone line on a public switched telephone network (PSTN). 
Section 907.2.3; add section 907.2.3.1 to read as follows: 
907.2.3.1 Manual fire alarm box tamper covers. Where manual fire alarm boxes (pull stations are installed a tamper cover with a local audible alarm shall be installed. 
Section 907.2.6; add section 907.2.6.4 to read as follows: 
907.2.6.4 Manual fire alarm box tamper covers. Where pull stations are installed a tamper cover with a local audible alarm shall be installed. 
Section 907.5.2; add Section 907.5.2.6 to read as follows: [Ref. IBC 907.5.2] 
907.5.2.6 Type. Manual alarm actuating devices shall be an approved double action type. 
Section 907.6.1; add Section 907.6.1.1 to read as follows: [Ref. IBC 907.6.1] 
907.6.1.1. Wiring Installation. All fire alarm systems shall be installed in such a manner that a failure of any single initiating device or single open in an initiating circuit conductor will not interfere with the normal operation of other such devices. All signaling circuits (SLC) shall be installed in such a way tht [that] a single open will not interfere with the operation of any addressable device (Class A). Outgoing and return SLC conductors shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 72 requirements for Class A circuits and shall have a minimum of four feet separation horizontal and one foot vertical between supply and return circuit conductors. The initiating device circuit (IDC) from an addressable input (monitor) module may be wired Class B, provided the distance from the addressable module to the initiating device is ten feet or less. 
Section 907.6.5; add section 907.6.5.3 to read as follows: [Ref. IBC 907.6.5] 
Section 907.6.5.3 Communication requirements. All alarm systems, new or replacement, shall transmit alarm, supervisory and trouble signals descriptively to the approved central station as defined by NFPA 72, with the correct device designation and location of addressable device identification. Alarms shall not be permitted to be transmitted as a General Alarm or Zone condition. 
Section 907; add sections 907.10 and 907.11 to read as follows: 
907.10 Password protection prohibited. No fire alarm system shall be protected by a password or pin number that would hinder immediate silencing capabilities by the fire department. 
907.11 Occupant reset. Once an alarm is initiated and fire department is contacted, no person shall silence or reset an alarm prior to fire department arrival. 
Section 910.1; change Exception 2 to read as follows: [Ref. IBC 910.1] 
2. Where areas of buildings are equipped with early suppression fast-response (ESFR) sprinklers, only manual smoke and heat vents or manually activated engineered mechanical smoke exhaust systems shall be required within these areas. Automatic smoke and heat vents are prohibited. 
Section 910.2; add subsection 910.2.3 with exceptions and 910.2.4 to read as follows: [Ref. IBC 910.2] 
910.2.3 Group H. Buildings and portions thereof used as a Group H occupancy as follows: 
1.  In occupancies classified as Group H-2 or H-3, any of which are more than 15,000 square feet (1.394 m 2 ) in single floor area. 
Exception: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only noncombustible materials. 
2.  In areas of buildings in Group H used for storing Class 2, 3, and 4 liquid and solid oxidizers, Class 1 and unclassified detonable organic peroxides, Class 3 and 4 unstable (reactive) materials, or Class 2 or 3 water-reactive materials as required for a high-hazard commodity classification. 
Exception: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only noncombustible materials. 
Table 910.3; Change the title of the first row of the table from "Group F-1 and S-1" to include "Group H" and read as follows: [Ref. IBC Table 910.3] 
Group H, F-1, and S-1 
Section 910.3; replace Section 910.3.1 through 910.3.3, and add second paragraph to Section 910.3.2.2 as follows: [Ref. IBC 910.3] 
910.3.1 Design. Smoke and heat vents shall be listed and labeled to indicate compliance with UL793. 
910.3.2 Vent operation. Smoke and heat vents shall be capable of being operated by approved automatic and manual means. Automatic operation of smoke and heat vents shall conform to the provisions of Sections 910.3.2.1 through 91.3.2.3. 
910.3.2.1 Gravity-operated drop out vents. Automatic smoke and heat vents containing heat-sensitive glazing designed to shrink and drop out of the vent opening when exposed to fire shall fully open within 5 minutes after the vent cavity is exposed to a simulated fire represented by a time-temperature gradient that reaches an air temperature of 500°F (260°C) within 5 minutes. 
910.3.2.2 Sprinklered buildings. Where installed in buildings equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall be designed to operate automatically. The automatic operating mechanism of the smoke and heat vents shall operate at a temperature rating at least 100°F (approximately 38°) greater than the temperature rating of the sprinklers installed. 
910.3.2.3 Non-sprinklered buildings. Where installed in buildings not equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall operate automatically by actuation of a heat-responsive device rated at between 100°F (56°C) and 220°F (122°C) above ambient. 
Exception: Gravity operated drop out vents complying with section 910.3.2.1. 
910.3.3 Vent dimensions. The effective venting area shall not be less than 16 square feet (1.5 m 2 ) with no dimension less than 4 feet (1,219 mm), excluding ribs or gutters having a total width of not exceeding 6 inches (152 mm). 
Section 912.2; add a second paragraph to read as follows: [Ref. IBC 912.2] 
Fire department connections shall be remote (outside of the collapse zone) from the building and placed adjacent to the primary fire lane access for the building served. 
Section 912.2; add Section 912.2.3 to read as follows: [Ref. IBC 912.2] 
Section 912.2.3 Hydrant distance. An approved fire hydrant shall be located within 100 feet of the fire department connection as the fire hose lays along an unobstructed path. 
Section 912.2.2; change to read as follows: [Ref. IBC 912.2.2] 
912.2.2 Existing buildings. Existing buildings shall have the fire department connection identified by an approved sign in accordance with the Fire Marshal's Office's Procedures and Specification Guide. 
Section 912.4; change to read as follows: [Ref. IBC 912.4] 
Section 912.4 Signs. A sign shall be provided in accordance to the Fire Marshal's Office's Procedures and Specification Guide and shall be approved by the fire code official. The sign shall be mounted in an approved location and manner on all fire department connections serving automatic sprinklers, standpipes, or fire pump connections; or where required by the fire code official. Where the fire department connection does not serve the entire building, a sign shall be provided indicating the portion(s) of the building served. 
Section 913.1; add a second paragraph and exception to read as follows: [Ref. IBC 913.1] 
When located on the ground level at an exterior wall, the fire pump room shall be provided with an exterior fire department access door that is not less than 3 ft. in width and 6 ft. 8 in. in height, regardless of any interior doors that are provided. A key box shall be provided at this door as required by Section 506.1. 
Exception: When it is necessary to locate the fire pump room on other levels or not at an exterior wall, the corridor leading to the fire pump room access from the exterior of the building shall be provided with equivalent fire resistance as that required for pump room, or as approved by the fire code official. Access keys shall be provided in the key box as required in Section 506.1. 
Section 1007.1; add Exception 4 to read as follows: [Ref. IBC 1007.1] 
4. Buildings regulated under State Law and built in accordance with State registered plans, including any variances or waivers granted by the State, shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of Section 1007. 
Section 1007.5; change to read as follows: [Ref. IBC 1007.5] 
Section 1007.5 Platform lifts. Platform (wheelchair) lifts ... required accessible route in Section 1109.8, Items 1 through 10. Standby power... (remainder unchanged). 
Section 1008.1.9.4; change Exceptions 3 and 4 to read as follows: [Ref. IBC 1008.1.9.4] 
3. Where a pair of doors serves an occupant load of less than 50 persons in a Group B, F, M, or S occupancy (remainder unchanged). 
4. Where a pair of doors serves a Group A, B, F, M, or S occupancy (remainder unchanged). 
Section 1008.1.9.9; change to read as follows: [Ref. IBC 1008.1.9.9] 
1008.1.9.9. Electromagnetically locked egress doors. Doors in the means of egress that are not otherwise required to have panic hardware in buildings with an occupancy in Group A, B, E, I-1, I-2, M, R-1 or R-2 and doors to tenant spaces in Group A, B, E, I-1, I-2, M, R-1 or R-2 shall be permitted to be electromagnetically locked if equipped with listed hardware that incorporates a built-in switch and meet the requirements below: (remaining text unchanged). 
Section 1015.1; add Section 1015.1.2 to read as follows: 
1015.1.2 All exits and exit access doorways. All exits and exit access doorways shall be designed as though they are required exits. 
Section 1015; add new section 1015.7 to read as follows: [Ref. IBC 1015] 
1015.7 Electrical rooms. For electrical rooms, special exiting requirements may apply. Reference the electrical code as adopted. 
Section 1016; add new section 1016.2.2 to read as follows: [Ref. IBC 1016] 
1016.2.2 Group F-1 and S-1 increase. The maximum exit access travel distance shall be 400 feet (122 m) in Group F-1 and S-1 occupancies where all of the following are met: 
1.  The portion of the building classified as Group F-1 or S-1 is limited to one story in height; 
2.  The minimum height from the finished floor to the bottom of the ceiling or roof slab or deck is 24 feet (7,315 mm); and 
3.  The building is equipped throughout with an automatic fire sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. 
Section 1018.1; add exception 6 to read as follows: [Ref. IBC 1018.1] 
6. In Group B office buildings, corridor walls and ceilings within single tenant spaces need not be of fire-resistive construction when the tenant space corridor is provided with system smoke detectors tied to an approved automatic fire alarm. The actuation of any detector shall activate alarms audible in all areas served by the corridor. 
Section 1018.6; change to read as follows: [Ref. IBC 1018.6] 
1018.6 Corridor continuity. All corridors shall be continuous from the point of entry to an exit, and shall not be interrupted by intervening rooms. 
(Exception unchanged.) 
Section 1026.6; change Exemption 4 to read as follows; [Ref. IBC 1026.6] 
4. Separation from the open-ended corridors of the building... (remaining language unchanged). 
Section 1029.1; change and add Exception 4 to read as follows: [Ref. IBC 1029.1] 
1029.1 General. In addition to the means of egress required by this chapter, provisions shall be made for emergency escape and rescue openings in Group R and I-1 occupancies (remainder unchanged). 
Exceptions: (1 through 3 unchanged.) 
4. In other than Group R-3 occupancies, buildings equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Sections 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2. 
Section 1030.2; change to read as follows: 
1030.2 Reliability. Required exit accesses, exits or exit discharges shall be continuously maintained free from obstructions or impairments to full instant use in the case of fire or other emergency. An exit or exit passageway shall not be used for any purpose that interferes with means of egress. 
Section 1103.3; add sentence to end of paragraph as follows: 
Provide emergency signage as required by Section 607.2. 
Section 1103.5.3; add section 1103.5.3 to read as follows: 
1103.5.3 Spray booths and rooms. Existing spray booths and spray rooms shall be protected by an approved automatic fire extinguishing system in accordance with Section 2404. 
Section 2304.1; change to read as follows. 
2304.1 Supervision of dispensing. The dispensing of fuel at motor vehicle fuel-dispensing facilities shall be in accordance with the following: 
1.  Conducted by a qualified attendant; and/or 
2.  Shall be under the supervision of a qualified attendant; and/or 
3.  Shall be an unattended self-service facility in accordance with Section 2304.3. 
At any time the qualified attendant of item Number 1 or 2 is not present, such operations shall be considered as an unattended self-service facility and shall also comply with Section 2304.3. 
Section 2401.2; delete this section. 
Section 3204; add a paragraph to read as follows: 
Any building exceeding 5,000 square feet that has a clear height in excess of 12 feet, making it possible to be used for storage in excess of 12 feet, shall be considered to be high-piled storage and shall comply with the provisions of this section. When a specific product cannot be identified, a fire protection system shall be installed as for Class IV commodities, to the maximum pile height. 
Table 3206.2, footnote j; change text to read as follows: 
Where areas of buildings are equipped with early suppression fast response (ESFR) sprinklers, manual smoke and heat vents or manually activated engineered mechanical smoke exhaust systems shall be required within these areas. 
Section 3310.1; add sentence to end of paragraph to read as follows: 
When fire apparatus access roads are required to be installed for any structure or development, they shall be approved prior to the time of which construction has progressed beyond completion of the foundation of any structure. 
Chapter 50 is amended by adding Section 5006 titled "Hazardous Materials Route" to read as follows: 
Section 5006 Hazardous materials route. 
5006.1 General. Through vehicles carrying materials determined to be hazardous by the United States Department of Transportation are prohibited from transporting such materials over and upon public streets and thoroughfares of the Town of Little Elm except upon a designated Hazardous Materials Route. 
Section 5601.1.3; change to read as follows: 
5601.1.3 Fireworks. The possession, manufacture, storage, sale, handling and use of fireworks are prohibited. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Only when approved fireworks displays, storage and handling are allowed in Sections 5604 and 5608, 
2.  The use of fireworks for approved fireworks displays allowed in Section 5608. 
Section 5601.1.3, amended by adding Section 5601.1.3.1 and Section 5601.1.3.2 to read as follows: 
5601.1.3.1 Fireworks a public nuisance. The presence or use of any firework within the jurisdiction of the Town of Little Elm in violation of this ordinance is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor as well as a common and public nuisance. The Fire Chief is authorized and directed to seize and immediately cause to be safely destroyed any firework found within the jurisdiction or extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Town of Little Elm in violation of this Ordinance. Any member of the Little Elm Fire Department or any Police Officer of the Town of Little Elm is empowered to stop the transportation of and detain any fireworks found being transported illegally or to close any building where any fireworks are found stored illegally until the fireworks can be safely destroyed. 
5601.1.3.2 Territorial applicability. The restrictions of this Article shall be applicable and in fore [force] throughout the territory of the Town of Little Elm Texas and extending for a distance outside the town limits for a total of 5,000 feet; provided that this Article will not be in effect within any portion of such 5,000 feet area which is contained within the territory of any other municipal corporation. 
Section 5601.3; change to read as follows: 
5601.3 Prohibited explosives. Storage of explosive material and blasting agents are prohibited within the incorporated limits of the Town of Little Elm. 
Section 5703.6; add a sentence to read as follows: 
5703.6 Piping system. Piping systems, and their component parts, for flammable and combustible liquids shall be in accordance with Sections 5703.6.1 through 5703.6.11. An approved method of secondary containment shall be provided for underground tank and piping systems. 
Section 5704.2.9.5; change Section 5704.2.9.5 and add Section 5704.2.9.5.3 to read as follows: 
5704.2.9.5 Above-ground tanks inside of buildings. Above-ground tanks inside of buildings shall comply with Sections 5704.2.9.5.1 through 5704.2.9.5.3. 
5704.2.9.5.3 Combustible Liquid storage tanks inside of buildings. The maximum aggregate allowable quantity limit shall be 3,000 gallons (11,356 L) of Class II or III combustible liquid for storage in protected aboveground tanks complying with Section 5704.2.9.7 when all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  The entire 3,000 gallon (11,356 L) quantity shall be stored in protected above-ground tanks; 
2.  The 3,000 gallon (11,356 L) capacity shall be permitted to be stored in a single tank or multiple smaller tanks; 
3.  The tanks shall be located in a room protected by an automatic sprinkler system complying with Section 903.3.1.1; and 
4.  Tanks shall be connected to fuel-burning equipment, including generators, utilizing an approved closed piping system. 
The quantity of combustible liquid stored in tanks complying with this section shall not be counted towards the maximum allowable quantity set forth in Table 5003.1.1(1), and such tanks shall not be required to be located in a control area. Such tanks shall not be located more than two stories below grade. 
Section 5704.2.11.5; add a sentence to read as follows: 
5704.2.11.5 Leak prevention. Leak prevention for underground tanks shall comply with Sections 5704.2.11.5.1 and 5704.2.11.5.2 through 5704.2.11.5.3. An approved method of secondary containment shall be provided for underground tank and piping systems. 
Section 5704.2.11.5.2; change to read as follows: 
5704.2.11.5.2 Leak detection. Underground storage tank systems shall be provided with an approved method of leak detection from any component of the system that is designed and installed in accordance with NFPA 30 and as specified in Section 5704.2.11.5.3. 
Section 5704.2.11.5; add Section 5704.2.11.5.3 to read as follows: 
5704.2.11.5.3 Observation wells. Approved sampling tubes of a minimum 6 inches in diameter shall be installed in the backfill material of each underground flammable or combustible liquid storage tank. The tubes shall extend from a point 12 inches below the average grade of the excavation to ground level and shall be provided with suitable surface access caps. Each tank site shall provide a sampling tube at the corners of the excavation with a minimum of 4 tubes. Sampling tubes shall be placed in the product line excavation within 10 feet of the tank excavation and one every 50 feet routed along product lines towards the dispensers, a minimum of two are required. 
Section 5706.5.4; delete Section 5706.5.4.5 and replace with the following: 
5706.5.4.5 Commercial, industrial, governmental or manufacturing. Dispensing of Class II and III motor vehicle fuel from tank vehicles into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles located at commercial, industrial, governmental or manufacturing establishments is allowed where permitted, provided such dispensing operations are conducted in accordance with Sections 5706.5.4.5.1 through 5706.5.4.5.3. 
5706.5.4.5.1 Site requirements. 
1.  Dispensing may occur at sites that have been permitted to conduct mobile fueling. 
2.  A detailed site plan shall be submitted with each application for a permit. The site plan must indicate: a. all buildings, structures, and appurtenances on site and their use or function; b. all uses adjacent to the property lines of the site; c. the locations of all storm drain openings, adjacent waterways or wetlands; d. information regarding slope, natural drainage, curbing, impounding and how a spill will be retained upon the site property; and e. the scale of the site plan. 
3.  The Code Official is authorized to impose limits upon: the times and/or days during which mobile fueling operations are allowed to take place and specific locations on a site where fueling is permitted. 
4.  Mobile fueling operations shall be conducted in areas not generally accessible to the public. 
5.  Mobile fueling shall not take place within 15 feet (4.572 m) of buildings, property lines, or combustible storage. 
5706.5.4.5.2 Refueling Operator Requirements. 
1.  The owner of a mobile fueling operations shall provide to the jurisdiction a written response plan which demonstrates readiness to respond to a fuel spill, carry out appropriate mitigation measures, and to indicate its process to properly dispose of contaminated materials when circumstances require. 
2.  The tank vehicle shall comply with the requirements of NFPA 385 and Local, State and Federal requirements. The tank vehicle's specific functions shall include that of supplying fuel to motor vehicle fuel tanks. The vehicle and all its equipment shall be maintained in good repair. 
3.  Signs prohibiting smoking or open flames within 25 feet (7.62 m) of the tank vehicle or the point of fueling shall be prominently posted on 3 sides of the vehicle including the back and both sides. 
4.  A fire extinguisher with a minimum rating of 40:BC shall be provided on the vehicle with signage clearly indicating its location. 
5.  The dispensing nozzles and hoses shall be of an approved and listed type. 
6.  The dispensing hose shall not be extended from the reel more than 100 feet (30.48 m) in length. 
7.  Absorbent materials, non-water absorbent pads, a 10-foot (3.048 m) long containment boom, an approved container with lid, and a non-metallic shovel shall be provided to mitigate a minimum 5-gallon fuel spill. 
8.  Tanker vehicles shall be equipped with a fuel limit switch such as a count-back switch, limiting the amount of a single fueling operation to a maximum of 500 gallons (1,893 L) between resetting of the limit switch. Exception: Tankers utilizing remote emergency shut-off device capability where the operator constantly carries the shut-off device which, when activated, immediately causes flow of fuel from the tanker to cease. 
9.  Persons responsible for dispensing operations shall be trained in the appropriate mitigating actions in the event of a fire, leak, or spill. Training records shall be maintained by the dispensing company and shall be made available to the fire code official upon request. 
10.  Operators of tank vehicles used for mobile fueling operations shall have in their possession at all times an emergency communications device to notify the proper authorities in the event of an emergency. 
5706.5.4.5.3 Operational Requirements. 
1.  The tank vehicle dispensing equipment shall be constantly attended and operated only by designated personnel who are trained to handle and dispense motor fuels. 
2.  Prior to beginning dispensing operations, precautions shall be taken to assure ignition sources are not present. 
3.  The engines of vehicles being fueled shall be shut off during dispensing operations. 
4.  Night time fueling operations shall only take place in adequately lighted areas. 
5.  The tank vehicle shall be positioned with respect to vehicles being fueled so as to preclude traffic from driving over the delivery hose and between the tank vehicle and the motor vehicle being fueled. 
6.  During fueling operations, tank vehicle brakes shall be set, chock blocks shall be in place and warning lights shall be in operation. 
7.  Motor vehicle fuel tanks shall not be topped off. 
8.  The dispensing hose shall be properly placed on an approved reel or in an approved compartment prior to moving the tank vehicle. 
9.  The Code Official and other appropriate authorities shall be notified when a reportable spill or unauthorized discharge occurs. 
Section 6103.2.1; add Section 6103.2.1.8 to read as follows: 
6103.2.1.8 Jewelry Repair, Dental Labs and Similar Occupancies. Where natural gas service is not available and where approved by the fire code official, portable LP-Gas containers are allowed to be used to supply approved torch assemblies or similar appliances. Such containers shall not exceed 20-pound (9.0 kg) water capacity. Aggregate capacity shall not exceed 60-pound (27.2 kg) water capacity. Each device shall be separated from other containers by a distance of not less than 20 feet. 
Section 6104.2, Exception; add an exception 2 to read as follows: 
Exceptions: 
1.  (existing text unchanged.) 
2.  Except as permitted in 308 and 6104.3.2, LP-gas containers are not permitted in residential areas. 
Section 6104.3; add Section 6104.3.2 to read as follows: 
6104.3.2 Spas, Pool Heaters and other listed devices. Where natural gas service is not available and where approved by the fire code official, an LP-Gas container is allowed to be used to supply spa and pool heaters or other listed devices. Such container shall not exceed 250-gallon water capacity per lot. See Table 6104.3 for location of containers. 
Exception: Lots where LP can be off loaded wholly on the property where the tank is located may install 500 gallon above ground or 1,000 gallon underground approved containers. 
(Ord. No. 755, § 2A., 1-17-2006; Ord. No. 906, § 1, 8-19-2007; Ord. No. 1042, § 1, 3-15-2011; Ord. No. 1108, § 2, 9-18-2012; Ord. No. 1167, § 1, 9-17-2013; Ord. No. 1264, § 2, 2-3-2015) 
Sec. 50-109. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 906, § 1, adopted Aug. 19, 2007, repealed § 50-109, which pertained to the International Fire Code amendments and derived from Ord. No. 755, § 2B(1)-(61), adopted Jan. 17, 2006; and Ord. No. 831, § 1, Mar. 20, 2007. See subsection 50-108(b) for similar provisions. 
Secs. 50-110-50-125. - Reserved. 
Chapter 54 - FLOOD CONTROL AND PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Local governments must adopt ordinances necessary for jurisdiction to qualify for National Flood Insurance Program, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 16.3145; political subdivision to comply with federal requirements, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 16.315. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Statutory authorization. 
    The Legislature of the state has in V.T.C.A., Water Code § 16.3145 delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. 
(Ord. No. 384, art. I, § A, 3-17-1997) 
Sec. 54-2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the town are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazards areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 384, art. I, § B, 3-17-1997) 
Sec. 54-3. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 384, art. I, § C, 3-17-1997) 
Sec. 54-4. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 384, art. I, § D, 3-17-1997) 
Sec. 54-5. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
    Alluvial fan flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. 
    Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent chance or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE or V. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (belowground level) on all sides. 
    Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
    Development means any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building means a nonbasement building: (i) built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in Zones V1-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the floor of the water, and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of Zones V1-30, VE, or V, "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building," even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls if the breakaway walls met the standards of section 60.3(e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. The term "existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the: 
(1)  Overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  Unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study is the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the flood boundary-floodway map. 
    Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding). 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway (regulatory floodway) means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: (i) built on a single chassis; (ii) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (iv) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: (1) any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary conditions, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
    Variance is a grant of relief to a person from the requirement of this article when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. (For full requirements see section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.) 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 384, art. 2, 3-17-1997) 
Secs. 54-6-54-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD 

Sec. 54-29. - Lands to which this article applies. 
    This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard with the jurisdiction of the Town of Little Elm (community). 
(Ord. No. 384, art. 3, § A, 3-17-1997) 
Sec. 54-30. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Denton County, Texas and Incorporated Areas, dated April 18, 2011, with flood insurance rate map (FIRM), dated April 18, 2011; and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. 
(Ord. No. 384, art. 3, § B, 3-17-1997; Ord. No. 1035, § 2.1, 2-15-2011) 
Sec. 54-31. - Establishment of development permit. 
    A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 384, art. 3, § C, 3-17-1997) 
Sec. 54-32. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 384, art. 3, § D, 3-17-1997) 
Sec. 54-33. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 384, art. 3, § E, 3-17-1997) 
Sec. 54-34. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and (3) deemed neither to limit, nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 384, art. 3, § F, 3-17-1997) 
Sec. 54-35. - Warning and disclaimer or liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 384, art. 3, § G, 3-17-1997) 
Secs. 54-36-54-58. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 54-59. - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
    The town engineer is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance - National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Ord. No. 384, art. 4, § A, 3-17-1997; Ord. No. 1035, § 2.2, 2-15-2011) 
Sec. 54-60. - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
    Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Review permit application to determine whether proposed building site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this article. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is TNRCC, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(7)  Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 54-30, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of article IV. 
(9)  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
(10)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot, provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA. 
(Ord. No. 384, art. 4, § B, 3-17-1997) 
Sec. 54-61. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Application for a development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
(3)  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 54-84(2); 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; 
(5)  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 54-60(1). 
(b)  Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(3)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(4)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(5)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(6)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
(7)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(8)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(9)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
(10)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area. 
(Ord. No. 384, art. 4, § C, 3-17-1997) 
Sec. 54-62. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The appeal board as established by the community shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this article. 
(f)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in subsection (b)(2) of this section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(g)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this article. 
(h)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(i)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(j)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon: (i) a showing a good and sufficient cause; (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Any application to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(k)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: (i) the criteria outlined in subsections (a)-(i) of this section are met, and (ii) the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 384, art. 4, § D, 3-17-1997) 
Secs. 54-63-54-82. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 54-83. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements. 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and, 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 384, art. 5, § A, 3-17-1997) 
Sec. 54-84. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section 54-30, section 54-60(8), or section 54-85(c), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in section 54-61(a)(1), is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot abovegrade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes : 
a.  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.  Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites: (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
c.  Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of this subsection be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height abovegrade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either: (i) be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, (ii) be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or (iii) meet the permit requirements of section 54-61(a), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in subsection (4) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Ord. No. 384, art. 5, § B, 3-17-1997) 
Sec. 54-85. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with sections 54-2, 54-3, and 54-4. 
(b)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet development permit requirements of section 54-31, section 54-61, and the provisions of article IV. 
(c)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 54-30 or section 54-60(8). 
(d)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 384, art. 5, § C, 3-17-1997) 
Sec. 54-86. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH Zones). 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 54-30, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified). 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures: 
a.  Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified); or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 54-61(a)(1), are satisfied. 
(4)  Require within Zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 384, art. 5, § D, 3-17-1997) 
Sec. 54-87. - Floodways. 
    Floodways located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 54-30, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If subsection (1) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of article IV. 
(3)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM and floodway revision through FEMA. 
(Ord. No. 384, art. 5, § E, 3-17-1997) 
Secs. 54-88-54-117. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STORM DRAINAGE CONTROL 

Sec. 54-118. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  The purpose of policies and design standards set forth herein is to ensure adequate stormwater drainage and flood control within the town. The policies and standards herein are intended to protect public health and safety, to prevent property damage due to flooding, to equitably distribute the cost of necessary drainage improvements, and to minimize the maintenance cost of drainage facilities constructed. Any development or improvement of property affecting storm drainage and flood control in the town is subject to the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The development of land shall consider all drainage elements normally used in the engineering standards of design. 
(c)  Stormwater design shall consider the maximum results from a 100 year frequency storm. The release rate of stormwater shall be such that the flows of runoff water after the land development is completed shall not exceed the flows existing before land development is started. In cases where the land considered for development is adjacent to Lake Lewisville and a direct discharge system can be directed into the lake area, then the increased runoff may be allowed to flow without consideration of detention systems. 
(d)  Where existing development is in place upstream of the land area under consideration for development, provisions shall be made within the engineering design to provide capacities for the potential full flows which may be created by the upstream properties based on the result of a 100-year rainfall event. 
(e)  All standards of the Corps of Engineers established around Lake Lewisville will be followed. The developer or his designee shall certify that all standards of the Corps of Engineers around Lake Lewisville have been met. 
(Ord. No. 589, § II, 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 54-119. - Standard provisions for storm drainage. 
    All construction for storm drainage in the development or improvement of real property within the town shall conform to the following standards and requirements: 
(1)  Storm sewer inlets shall be provided along paved streets at such intervals as are necessary to limit the depth of flow as follows: 
SPREAD OF WATER 
Type of Street Allowable Speed Major thoroughfare One traffic lane in each direction to remain open Collector street One moving traffic lane to remain open Residential street Maximum depth for design storm as shown in section 54-122 herein (Fig. 2) is curb deep  
(2)  A closed storm sewer system shall be required to accommodate a run-off exceeding the street capacity, as provided above, up to and including the design capacity of a 72 inch concrete pipe. 
(3)  An open channel may be permitted to accommodate run-off exceeding the design capacity of a 72-inch pipe, as provided below: 
a.  Channels draining an area with a "CA" factor (coefficient of run-off and drainage area, as used in the hereinafter described "rational formula") of less than 600 shall be concrete lined to the design depth, plus six inch freeboard except that a closed system as provided above may be used. A 20-foot wide access easement shall be provided along at least one side parallel to channel. 
b.  Channels draining an area with a "CA" factor between 600 and 1,000 shall be improved to a capacity of the 100 year design discharge by excavation, straightening and realignment, as required, and also the construction of a concrete lined channel having a width of not less than the bottom width with concrete lined to a depth of at least two feet. Earthen side slopes shall be no steeper then 4:1, horizontal to vertical, and shall be sodded to prevent erosion. 
c.  The setback for the building line shall be based on a minimum of five to one setback so that as a minimum of 20 foot of width access and maintenance strip is provided parallel and adjacent to each side of the top bank of all drainage channels in this section. 
(4)  In lieu of the improvements of a channel draining an area with a "CA" factor in excess of 1,000, the town council may elect to accept the dedication of all land within the natural 100-year floodplain of the existing drainage channel as a permanent right-of-way. 
(5)  That the criteria for drainage improvements as hereinabove set forth in subsections (1) through (4) of this section shall be applicable to publicly owned lands solely at the discretion of the town. 
(6)  Excavation, fill and grading operations within the town limits shall be undertaken only after a proper permit has been obtained from the town. 
(Ord. No. 589, § III, 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 54-120. - Responsibility of owner or developer for storm drainage. 
(a)  The owner or developer of property to be developed or used shall be responsible for all storm drainage flowing through or abutting such property. This responsibility includes the drainage directed to that property by prior development as well as the drainage naturally flowing through the property by reason of topography. It is the intent of this article that provision be made for storm drainage in accordance with section 54-119, at such time as any property effected is proposed for development use. 
(b)  Where the improvement or construction of a storm drainage facility is required along a property line common to two or more owners, the owner hereafter proposing development or use of his property, shall be responsible for the required improvements at the time of development, including the dedication of all necessary right-of-way or easements, to accommodate the improvements. 
(c)  Where a property owner proposed development or use of only a portion of his property, provision for storm drainage in accordance with section 54-119 shall only be required in that portion of the property proposed for immediate development or use, except as construction or improvements of a drainage facility outside that designated portion of the property is deemed essential to the development or use of that designated portion. 
(d)  The owner shall dedicate to the town the required drainage easements. Determination of minimum easement required shall be made by the town engineer. 
(e)  In the event that an owner or developer desires to impound stormwater by excavation, filling or construction of a dam within a property, thereby creating a lake, pond, or lagoon as a part of the planned development of that property, the standard provisions for storm drainage as established in section 54-119 shall not be applicable, provided: 
(1)  That an engineering plan for such construction, accompanied by complete drainage design information, prepared by a registered professional engineer, shall have been approved by the town; 
(2)  That the owner or developer shall have agreed to retain under private ownership the lake, pond, or lagoon constructed, and to assume full responsibility for the protection of the general public from any health or safety hazards related to the lake, pond, or lagoon constructed; 
(3)  That the owner or developer shall have agreed to assume full responsibility for the maintenance of the lake, pond, or lagoon constructed; 
(4)  That the obligations herein shall run with the land and shall be a continuing obligation of the owner of such land; 
(5)  That the requirements of the Texas Water Code pertaining to impoundment of surface water are complied with including the design construction and safety of the impounding structure; 
(6)  On any existing structure, the owner will furnish a study proposed by a professional engineer for the town for approval. 
(Ord. No. 589, § IV, 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 54-121. - Responsibility and participation of the town in storm drainage improvements. 
(a)  The town may, in its sound discretion, participate in the cost of such improvements as are required by this article in an amount not to exceed 20 percent. 
(b)  The town may, in its sound discretion, participate in any project of improvements by the levy of a special assessment against the lands to be enhanced in value by such improvements. 
(c)  The town may acquire drainage easement necessary for such improvements by acceptance of dedication, purchase, or condemnation. 
(d)  The town shall, upon acquisition of the drainage easement and the completion of improvements as hereinabove provided, assume full responsibility for the maintenance of such drainage facilities. 
(Ord. No. 589, § V, 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 54-122. - Engineering design. 
    The design of all storm drainage facilities shall be in accordance with the following criteria: 
(1)  Design frequency: 
Drainage Facility Storm Frequency Closed storm sewer systems 10 year with emergency 100 year overflow Closed storm sewer system at street low point or sag 25 year with emergency 100 year overflow Culverts and bridges 100 year Concrete lined channels 50 year with emergency 100 year overflow Earthen channels 100 year  
(2)  Computation of stormwater run-off shall be by the "rational method", which is based on the principle that the maximum rate of run-off from a given drainage area for an assumed rainfall intensity occurs when all parts of the area are contributing to the flow at the point of discharge. The formula for calculation of run-off by the "rational method" is: 
Q = CIA, where 
Q = the maximum rate of discharge, expressed in cubic feet per second. 
C = a run-off coefficient which varies with the topography, land use and moisture content of the soil at the time the run-off producing rainfall occurs. This run-off coefficient shall be based on the ultimate use of the land as recommended by the master plan for the town and shall be selected from Table I herein on the basis of the use shown on land use and zoning map of the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance for the town, if an area has had a change of zoning to give the area land use for which the "C" in Table II is higher than use shown on land use and zoning maps, the higher "C" factor shall be used. 
For drainage areas where the use of the rational method does not provide reliable data, the use of a Unit Hydrograph Flow Determination shall be made. The use of a Unit Hydrograph calculation will be based upon standard and accepted engineering principles normally used in the profession subject to the approval of the town engineer. 
I = Rainfall intensity in inches per hour from the applicable curves of Figure 1. Time of Concentration or Duration of Rainfall for use in Figure 1 shall be calculated by data shown in Table 2. 
A = The drainage area, expressed in acres, contribution to the runoff at the point in question. Calculation of the drainage area shall be made from a topographic map, a copy of which shall be submitted with the engineering plans for approval. 
Computation of runoff shall be based on a fully developed drainage area, or watershed, in accordance with the land use projected in the then current comprehensive land use plan for the town. 
TABLE I 
Slope Land Use from Master Plan Value of "C" (Run-off Coefficient) Flat 0% to 1% Park areas-No developable land 0.20 Park and school land tract 0.30 Single-family residential 0.40 Duplex 0.45 Multiple family 0.50 Local business 0.60 Central business 0.75 Commercial 0.75 Industrial 0.70 Rolling 1% to 31/2% Park areas-No developable land 0.30 Park and school land tract 0.40 Single-family residential 0.50 Duplex 0.55 Multiple family 0.60 Local business 0.70 Central business 0.80 Commercial 0.80 Industrial 0.75 Rough 3.5% and over Park areas-No developable land 0.35 Park and school land tract 0.45 Single-family residential 0.60 Duplex 0.65 Multiple family 0.70 Local business 0.75 Central business 0.85 Commercial 0.85 Industrial 0.80  
AVERAGE VELOCITY FOR USE IN DETERMINING TIME OF CONCENTRATION 
TABLE II 
Description of Water Course 0% to 3% V in f.p.s. 4% to 7% V in f.p.s. 8% to 11% V in f.p.s. Over 12% V in f.p.s. Surface drainage 5 10 15 18 Channels Determine V by Manning's Formula Storm sewers Determine V by Manning's Formula  
Average velocity of the runoff for calculating time of concentration or duration of rainfall for use in Figure 1. These average velocities in this table shall be used unless the designer shows calculation of velocity by streets and/or storm sewers. 
Using the average velocities from this table the designer shall calculate the time of concentration by the following formula unless more data are shown on the plans for calculating time of concentration. 
T = "Inlet Time" + D/(V*60) Where: 
T = Time of concentration in minutes for use in Figure 1. 
D = Distance in feet from point of concentration to upper end of drainage area under consideration. 
V = Velocity in feet per second from this table or velocity calculated by designer by streets and/or storm sewers. "Inlet Time" = 5 minutes from property zoned for multiple family, local business, central business, commercial, or industrial. 
"Inlet Time" = 10 minutes for property zoned for parks, schools, single-family residential, and duplex. 
(3)  The capacity of storm sewers, culverts, bridges, and open channels shall be determined by the use of the Manning's Formula, and the design of the facility derived accordingly. The Manning's Formula is: 
Q = 1.486 R 2/3 S 1/2 * A Where: 
n 
Q = Discharge, expressed in cubic feet per second. 
n = Roughness coefficient, based on condition and type of conduit lining. 
S = slope of hydraulic gradient, expressed in feet of vertical rise per foot of horizontal distance. 
R = Hydraulic radius (area of flow divided by the wetted perimeter). 
A = Cross sectional area of flow in conduit, expressed in square feet. 
(4)  The construction of all concrete improvements shall be in accordance with the standards set forth in the paving and drainage specifications handbook of the town. The frequency chart in years (Figure 1), the Inlet Capacity for low point inlets (Figure 2), the drainage capacity road sections (Figure 3), are hereby adopted as a part of this article. 
(5)  Complete engineering plans for storm drainage facilities shall be prepared by a professional engineer, registered in the state, and experienced in civil engineering work. The total cost for such engineering plans and specifications shall be borne by the owner or the developer and shall be furnished to the town engineer for their review. 
(6)  In any development or improvement of property, the owner may be required to provide at their expense a preliminary drainage study for the total area to be ultimately developed. This study shall be submitted to the town engineer prior to approval of the engineering plans for the total development, or any increment thereof. 
(Ord. No. 589, § VI, 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 54-123. - Construction in areas subject to flooding. 
(a)  No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or relocated within the 100 year floodplains of the major drainageways, unless the finished floor elevation of such a building or structure is a minimum of two feet above the high water elevation calculated for the runoff from a rainfall having a design frequency of 100 years. In all other areas subject to flooding, the finished floor elevation shall be a minimum of the high water elevation calculated for the runoff from a rainfall having a design frequency of 50 years and shall not flood within the 100-year frequency. The owner or developer shall furnish, at their expense, to the town engineer sufficient engineering design information to confirm that the minimum floor elevation proposed is as required by this subsection. 
(b)  No building or structure shall be erected or relocated within a floodplain of drainage channel which will obstruct the natural flow of water within that floodplain or channel. 
(c)  No excavation, filling, or construction of embankment, or landscaping shall be permitted within a floodplain or channel which will obstruct the natural flow of the water within that floodplain or channel, unless sufficient engineering design information is furnished to the town engineer in order that they may determine that same will not adversely affect flow characteristics within that floodplain or channel, resulting in damage to that or any other property nearby. 
(Ord. No. 589, § VII, 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 54-124. - Building or structure setback requirement. 
    No building or structure shall hereafter be constructed, reconstructed, or relocated within 20 feet of any open drainage channel. It is the intent of this section to ensure that an unobstructed width of at least 20 feet is maintained between the top side slope of any such drainage channel and any building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 589, § VIII, 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 54-125. - Construction over drainage facilities. 
    No building or structure shall hereafter be constructed, reconstructed, or relocated over or across any storm drainage facility, unless specifically approved by the town engineer pursuant to that criteria established in subsections (1) and (2) of this section. 
(1)  Construction of buildings or structures may be permitted over or across closed drainage systems, to include concrete box culverts or reinforced concrete pipe. Engineering plans and specifications shall be prepared by a professional engineer registered in the state and experienced in civil engineering work. The total cost for such engineering plans and specifications shall be borne by the owner or the developer and shall be furnished to the town engineer for their review and approval. 
(2)  Construction of pedestrian bridges or small vehicular crossings may be permitted by the town engineer. Engineering plans and specifications shall be prepared by a professional engineer registered in the state and experienced in civil engineering work. The total cost for such engineering plans and specifications shall be borne by the developer and shall be furnished to the town engineer for their review and approval. 
STORAGE 
GENERAL 
Stormwater management programs aimed at controlling increased stream water runoff generated by development are a top priority in urban watershed planning. More frequent flooding, increased rates and volumes of stormwater runoff, increased stream channel erosion and degradation, increased sedimentation, and increased water pollution are all problems intensified by increased stormwater runoff resulting from development. Storage of excess urban storm runoff is one of the most promising methods available in preventing urban flood damage. 
Storm runoff storage with reduced release rates can hold downstream flood flows to within the safe conveyance capacity of the storm sewer and stream system. In most cases it can be shown that storage is more economical than increasing downstream conveyance capacity. Storage facilities should be planned and designed to assure an effective and efficient operation and maintenance program. 
Retention and detention are two generalized types of storm runoff storage used to control flooding. Retention storage refers to storm runoff collected and stored for a significant period and released or used after storm runoff has ended. Retention storage usually consists of "wet reservoirs" which often have agricultural, recreational, and/or aesthetic value. Detention storage consists of reducing the rate of runoff for a short period of time to reduce peak flows by controlling the discharge through an outlet structure and by extending the period of runoff. 
Skillful use of the procedures outlined in this section will provide reasonable solutions to drainage policy requirements. Individual and community experience in the use of these techniques will evolve into a methodology which will allow urban growth without the attendant drainage problems. 
STORAGE CLASSIFICATION 
Storage can be classified by location as follows: 
A.  Rainfall storage. The storage of water near the point of rainfall occurrence or before storm runoff accumulates significantly. Rainfall storage is usually accomplished by roof top ponding, parking lot ponding, property line swale ponding, and small on-site ponds. 
B.  Runoff storage. Water stored after storm runoff has accumulated significantly and begun to flow in a drainage system. Runoff storage is usually accomplished by off stream storage, channel storage, or on-stream storage. 
RAINFALL STORAGE 
A.  Roof tops. The building codes require roof load design for rain and snow. The design load may be converted to equivalent water depth in inches which can be safely contained on flat roofs. The maximum storage allowed for design purposes should not exceed this depth unless a building is designed to withstand a greater roof load. The depth of water can be controlled by proper sizing of downspouts and by constructing scuppers through the parapet walls. Another method of achieving roof top ponding involves placing loose gravel windrows or dikes a few inches in heights so that storm runoff is trapped as it moves toward the drainage outlet. Individual wedge-shaped ponds form behind the small dikes and slowly drain as the stormwater filters through the gravel. This solution is of limited value, however, as there is no way to assure its permanence. The possibility of overflows exist and will occur quite often during major storms. Overflow drains should be used to protect against roof overloading. Periodic inspection and proper maintenance will reduce the possibility and the hazards of overflows. Special attention must be given to the water tightness of the roof to assure that no leakage occurs due to the accumulation of water. 
B.  Parking lots. Considerable area in urban development is occupied by parking lots. If planned correctly, these paved areas can provide adequate detention with minimum inconvenience to the public and without functional interference. There are two general methods of stormwater detention that can be utilized on parking areas. One form involves the storage of runoff in depressions constructed near drains or outfall structures. The second method of stormwater detention on parking lots consists of using the paved parking areas to channel stormwater to grassed or gravel filled areas for maximum infiltration and decrease in overland flow. 
C.  Recreation areas. Recreation areas, such as sports fields, generally have a substantial area of grass cover which often has a high infiltration rate. Storm runoff from such fields is minimal. A secondary use of such recreation fields can be made by providing for limited detention storage of runoff from adjacent areas. Since these areas are not used during periods of precipitation, detention ponding should not seriously impede their primary use. To minimize after effects, the recreation area should be designed so that it will thoroughly drain. In addition, the vegetation used on the area should be tolerant of periodic inundation and wetness. 
D.  Property line swales. Subdivision planning and layout requires adequate surface drainage away from buildings. This is obtained by sloping the finished grade in all directions away from the building. The layout often calls for a swale to be located along the back property line, which then drains longitudinally through the block. Where this is used, the design shall include a concrete flume section with baffles to slow the flow of water yet maintain constant point for discharge. Temporary ponding facilities along the rear lot line may include small controlled discharges along the back property line or, if the subsoil conditions are favorable, several inches of rainfall could be expected to percolate into the ground during and after a storm. Prior to planning for property line swale ponding, the engineer should determine that saturation of the subsoil will not have an adverse effect on building foundations. In cases where significant subsoil problems exist, water should not be ponded or percolated into the ground. 
E.  Combinations. In many instances, one on-site detention method cannot conveniently or economically satisfy the required or needed amount of stormwater storage. Limitations in storage capacities, site development conditions, soils limitations and other related constraints may require that more than one method be utilized. For example, rooftop, parking lot, and surface pond storage might all be required to compensate for the increase in runoff due to development of a particular site. Whatever combinations are suitable may be incorporated into a site development plan. 
RUNOFF STORAGE 
A.  Off-stream storage. The storage of water in depressed open areas, in reservoirs, and on low lying recreation fields to which storm peak flows are routed in usually termed off-stream storage. It is usually characterized by a side channel spillway or overflow from the main channel. 
B.  Channel storage. Although all channels inherently store water, channels can be made to attenuate runoff by altering their hydraulic characteristics in a way that will reduce peak flows. Side channels that run essentially parallel to the main stream channel are also a means of temporarily storing water during excessive rainfall events. 
C.  On-stream storage. The construction of an embankment across a channel so that a storage pond is formed represents on-stream storage. Spillway considerations are important to pass large floods exceeding the storage capacity. Properly protected roadway embankments are well suited for this purpose. 
MULTIPURPOSE USE 
Rainfall storage and runoff storage systems are most practical when designed for multi-purpose use. For maximum land use efficiency the design engineer must consult early with the planning department and the parks and recreation department of the town. 
Lower cost recreation-Making use of detention storage areas as parks and greenbelts, ballfields and playing fields, satisfies two needs and reduces the cost of each. The mini-park concept, where small recreational areas are provided in neighborhoods within safe walking distances for children, can be a typical joint effort of the drainage design engineer and the planning and recreational staffs of the town. Provisions must be made for maintenance of such areas. 
Multi-use criteria-The multiple use of storage areas is a field of endeavor where the fervent disciplines should develop desirable and acceptable criteria fitting the needs of the local community. It is with storage, including both detention and retention storage, that an important potential exists for the reduction of flooding, drainage costs, and to some degree recreation costs. 
HYDRAULIC DESIGN CRITERIA 
A.  General. Hydraulic and hydrologic design criteria provide the guidelines for design and construction of stormwater storage facilities. These criteria are a necessary part of a stormwater management program needed to protect low-lying areas by preventing unacceptable increases in runoff rates as urban development progresses. The engineer should be familiar with the drainage policy of this article before considering the feasibility of a storm runoff detention facility. Existing land contours of the property should be a consideration in developing the drainage plan. In many instances, storage can be achieved economically by blocking the overland flow of stormwater runoff with various land forms, curbs, walls, terraces, and other means. The amounts to designing a drainage system that will minimize the reduction in the critical time of concentration as the property is developed. A drainage project located in a watershed that has a master plan may involve additional considerations which require review. Consultation with the town is essential to ensure compliance with the overall watershed master plan. 
B.  Design factors and procedures. Before proceeding with engineering design of an on-site storage facility, the physical and technical factors should be identified and the basic design procedures established. A discussion of design factors and procedures follow. 
1.  The drainage plans for a particular storage facility should include all property lines, topography, area, location, and all other items necessary to meet policy requirements outlined in the "Drainage Policy for the Town". 
2.  Care must be taken to locate, layout, and design the storage facility in a manner to ensure safety and ease of maintenance. 
3.  The rate of inflow to the storage facility (inflow hydrographs) and all hydrologic considerations must assume ultimate development of the site's contributing area. Several inflow hydrographs should be prepared to examine their effect on downstream flooding for the various design storm frequencies. The number of inflow hydrographs to be provided may vary but should always adequately describe the range of flows expected for the design storm frequencies. These various design storm inflow hydrographs and an acceptable flood routing procedure will be necessary in sizing the outlet works for the storage facility. An emergency spillway should be provided to pass runoff that exceeds the design capacity of the detention facility. 
4.  The maximum allowable release rate from a storage facility is selected after careful review of runoff rates for all pertinent storms. As a minimum, the pertinent design storm frequencies should include the ten-, 25-, and 100-year events. However, specific site conditions may require that additional consideration be given a particular area. The town engineering department should be contacted to identify special design conditions. The maximum allowable peak flow released from a particular site is selected to comply with the policy section of this manual. In all cases, the maximum release rate should be calculated using the hydraulic gradient created when the storage area is being utilized at full capacity. Key items to consider in determining the maximum allowable release rate are: (a) the peak flow rates for the various design storm frequencies prior to development, (b) the capacity of the downstream stormwater channel or storm sewer, (c) compliance with a master plan for the watershed (if one exists), (d) problems, if any, that are created onsite by the storage of stormwater runoff, (e) potential problems created downstream when the onsite storage capacity is fully utilized and the excess runoff flows overland into downstream areas. 
5.  The stormwater storage volume required is given by the maximum difference, at any time, between cumulative total inflow volume and cumulative outflow volume measured from the beginning of inflow for a 25-year storm. The maximum allowable release rate is not to be exceeded by the outflow peak discharge. 
6.  The outfall or outlet structures should be designed on the basis of inlet or outlet control, whichever is applicable. The structures should be capable of safely and properly passing the flow range of design storm frequencies including the 100-year storm without causing downstream flooding or exceeding the maximum allowable release rate. Outlet works must also pass all of the runoff from the 100-year design storm within a reasonable length of time or a permit may be required from the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). Wet ponds will in many cases also require a permit from the TCEQ. 
7.  Special attention should be given to the provision of an emergency or overflow spillway which would pass excess flows greater than those of the 25-year design storm and overflows caused by clogging of the principal outlets. Downstream watershed considerations such as the potential loss of life and damage to property due to overtopping or failure of the structure and the storage facilities, area and capacity dictate the emergency spillway design storm. It is advisable to contact the state agencies such as the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB) and the TCEQ when planning a storage facility in order to meet their criteria. 
HYDRAULIC DESIGN METHODS 
A.  General. The two basic methods suggested for predicting the volume of runoff with time and the peak flow rate are the rational method and the standard method. The standard method is best suited for storage analysis of urban runoff but for relatively small drainage areas some form of the rational method if generally acceptable. 
B.  Rational method storage analysis. When designing storage facilities for an area smaller than 400 acres, it is often justifiable to use the rational method to compute the design inflow hydrographs. This method relies heavily upon personal judgment but it is relatively simple and can give acceptable results if proper procedures are followed. There are several different techniques of employing the rational method that may be used. 
One of the rational method techniques has been utilized by the federal aviation agency in designing airport drainage facilities. The procedure is presented in "airport drainage", prepared by the Federal Aviation Agency (FAA, 1966). The FAA technique is basically a graphical procedure which represents the cumulative storm runoff volume and the cumulative volume released from the storage facility through an outlet structure as functions of time. The maximum difference between the two volume curves represents the required storage volume of the storage basin. The procedure will consistently result in under designed storage facilities if a constant release rate is assumed from time zero. This is caused by sizing the outlet pipe using the Manning Equation and not recognizing the stage-discharge relationship. A reservoir routing technique unitizing the stage-discharge relationship of the storage facility should be used. 
It is recommended that in most instances the contributing drainage area not be more than 25 acres when using this technique. 
A second technique that employs the rational method is referred to as the modified rational method analysis. This technique manipulates the rational method to reflect the fact that storms with durations greater than the normal time of concentration for a basin will result in a larger volume of runoff even though the peak discharge is reduced. Even though rainfall intensities and resulting peak discharges associated with longer duration storms are less than those for short duration storms, the inflow may still be considerably greater than the outflow thus requiring more storage than in the case of shorter, higher intensity storms. 
This approach becomes more valid on progressively smaller basins. The technique should, therefore, be limited to relatively small areas such as parking lots, roof tops, or other upstream facilities with contributing areas less than 25 acres. 
DETENTION FACILITIES 
INTENT 
The Town of Little Elm encourages the use of detention basins based on the multi-faceted benefits of the community outlined below: 
(1)  Control of flood discharges. The intent of detention basin (storage) design shall be to reduce flood discharges for the ultimate watershed development conditions without increasing peak discharges above the peak discharges for undeveloped watershed conditions. This storage method serves as a key strategy for the stormwater management plan. 
(2)  Environment. As development occurs, there is a loss of wildlife and bird life habitat. It is possible to create a natural micro-environment around ponds that can offset this loss of habitat. These "natural" environmental pockets in conjunction with natural open space areas can help maintain the rural setting of the town. 
Detention ponds also benefit downstream water quality by allowing the sedimentation of pollutants. 
(3)  Recreation. Detention basins offer many recreational opportunities in an urban setting; for example, a normally dry detention basin could be used for athletic fields or picnics areas, while the banks of the pond offer valuable park space. 
(4)  Aesthetics. As an integral part of the Town of Little Elm, a detention basin needs to blend into the landscape and into the community. Simple yet inexpensive measures, such as gentle side slopes, planting of trees and shrubs, and other landscaping features can transform the detention facility into an attractive amenity for the neighborhood. 
REQUIREMENTS 
(1)  Detailed engineering studies of the entire basin shall be required to evaluate the timing of hydrographs from regional and on-site facilities, as well as backwater calculations to determine the effect of the detention/retention facilities on upstream water surface elevations. 
(2)  All detention facility designs shall be performed by a professional engineer registered in the State of Texas and shall meet the requirements of Permanent Rule 31 Tex. Admin. Code ch. 299, and other requirements, as applicable. 
(3)  The minimum amount of storage volume of the detention basin shall be that volume required to reduce runoff rate to the undeveloped condition rate. Dedicated detention basins shall also include an additional one foot of freeboard and two feet of sediment storage. The volume of runoff storage for drainage areas greater than 160 acres shall be compared using unit hydrograph procedures. Acceptable unit hydrograph procedures include the Soil Conservation Service Dimension less Unit Hydrograph and Snyder's Unit Hydrograph. Manual methods or use of the computer programs TR20, HEC-1, and NUDALLAS are allowed for runoff hydrograph computation and flood routings. The criteria contained in this section shall serve as the minimum requirements for detention basin design. For drainage areas less than 160 acres, the above methods are recommended; however, an approximate routing method may be used subject to approval of the town engineer. 
(4)  The maximum allowable release rate from any site shall be equal to the 100-year peak runoff rate prior to site development. The maximum design release rate may be less. 
(5)  Where stormwater management improvements are required in the natural floodway or a permanent greenbelt or open space area, they should be incorporated into existing lakes, or they should be designed in as small an area as feasible to create natural contours. Note, however, that detention basins or retention ponds shall be a minimum of one acre in size to allow for proper maintenance, side slopes and outlet work operation. 
(6)  Retention/detention ponds shall resemble natural ponds; in addition: 
a.  The pond should expand gradually from the inlet towards the outlet, ensuring that there are no "dead zones". That is, water entering the pond gradually spread out and uniformly displaces the water already present in the pond. 
b.  The length-to-width ratio should be three to one or greater, to provide a long flow path. 
c.  The average permanent pond depth should be greater than five feet, where possible. 
d.  A ten to 20 foot wide shallow bench shall be provided along the shores of the permanent pond for safety and to encourage the development of bottom growth in these areas. This vegetation will enhance the biologic treatment characteristics of the pond and also enhance the "natural" appearance of the pond. 
(7)  If several ponds are required, they should vary in size and shape, and be separated by tree groves, vegetated berms, or similar screening of a natural appearance. 
(8)  Landscape materials should enhance wildlife habitat where feasible. 
(9)  Where slope erosion protection is needed for the side slopes of a pond, rock or geotextiles are required as approved by the town engineer. Exposed concrete surfaces shall be faced with embedded rock or aggregate masonry. Bare concrete shall only be permitted with the express written permission of the town council. Side slopes should be no steeper than 4:1 where feasible for reasons of public safety and maintenance. 
(10)  Detention facilities of less than ten acre-feet of flood storage shall have outlet structures designed for the 100-year frequency storm. Facilities greater than ten acre-feet of flood storage shall have outlet structures designed for the ten-year and 100-year frequency storms. The release rates shall be such that the flows after land development are no larger than the flows before land development. 
(11)  Outlets should be provided with a trash rack to prevent plugging with debris and to provide safety to the public. Due to unique design considerations, the town engineer may approve alternative outlet design. 
(12)  All federal, state and county laws pertaining to the impoundment of surface water shall have been compiled with, including the design, construction and safety of the impounding structure. Copies of any federal, state or county permits issued for the proposed impoundments shall be submitted to the town engineer. 
(13)  All detention/retention facilities shall include an additional one foot of freeboard and two feet of sediment in determining the design flood elevation. 
(14)  Provisions (such as emergency spillways or reinforcing of embankments) shall be made for the occurrence of overtopping or failure of the outlet structure. Under no circumstances should the emergency overflow have a direct path to any buildings or other structures used for human occupancy, commerce, or industry. Details of these provisions shall be supplied to the town engineer for approval. 
(15)  The flood storage volume of detention/retention facilities shall be designed to empty in a maximum of 12 hours if said facilities are to be considered an erosion/pollution control facility. 
(16)  Consideration should be given to the stocking of retention ponds with fish to control algae growth. 
(17)  Inlet structures shall be designed to both dissipate the flow energy and drop the inflow elevation to below that of the pond's water surface or basin's flow line. 
(Ord. No. 589, § IX, 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 54-126. - Duties of the town and appeal to the council. 
    The interpretation of the criteria hereinabove set forth in sections 54-119, 54-120, 54-121, 54-122, 54-123, 54-124, and 54-125 shall be made by the town engineer. Any person adversely effected by the decision of the town engineer may, within ten days from the date of such decision, file an appeal in writing to the town council. Such appeal shall be filed with the town engineer and the town secretary and shall define the specific areas of controversy. It shall be the duty of the town council to hear any such appeal within 30 days from the date it is received by the town engineer and town secretary. 
(Ord. No. 589, § X, 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 54-127. - Building permits to be withheld. 
    No building permit shall be issued, nor certificate of occupancy approved for any construction, reconstruction, or development upon any land where such construction, reconstruction or development is not in conformity with the requirements and intent of this article. Anyone who violates any of the terms and provisions of this article shall be denied a building permit, until the violation is corrected. 
(Ord. No. 589, § XI, 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 54-128. - Maintenance guarantee. 
(a)  The contractor shall guarantee the work which he does against defective workmanship and materials for a period of one year from the date of final acceptance for the work by the owner. 
(b)  Where defective workmanship and/or materials are discovered requiring repairs to be made under this guaranty, all such repair work shall be done by the contractor at this own expense within five days after written notice of such defect has been given to him by the owner. Should the contractor fail to repair leaks or correct such defective workmanship and/or materials within five days after being notified the owner may make the necessary repairs and charge the contractor with the actual cost of all labor and materials required. 
(c)  The contractor shall arrange to have his faithful performance bond run for a period of one year after the date of completion of the construction work to cover his guaranty as set forth above. 
(Ord. No. 589, § XIII, 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 54-129. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction therefore shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 589, § XIV, 2-4-2003) 
Chapter 58 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Home-rule municipality authority to provide police department, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.003; authority of peace officers to arrest without warrant, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P., Art. 14.03; qualifications for basic peace officer proficiency certificate, 37 Tex. Admin. Code § 221.3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 58-1-58-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE RESERVE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to establish police reserve force, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.012(a); governing authority may establish qualifications of police reserve, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.012(b). 

Sec. 58-19. - Police reserve unit established. 
    There is hereby created a police reserve unit, to consist of not more than ten duly qualified and appointed volunteers which shall augment the regular police department as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 158, § 1, 2-23-1982; Ord. No. 231, 11-17-1986; Ord. No. 244, 10-19-1987) 
Sec. 58-20. - Police reserve unit governed by General Order. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, the police reserve unit shall be governed by General Order 311.00.00, "Reserve Officer Program," which is attached hereto as Exhibit A of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and which is hereby adopted, approved and incorporated herein for all intents and purposes." 
(Ord. No. 158, § 2, 2-23-1982; Ord. No. 231, 11-17-1986; Ord. No. 244, 10-19-1987; Ord. No. 653, § 1, 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 58-21. - Appointment. 
    The chief of police is hereby authorized to appoint persons who successfully complete the application process and all other requirements of General Order 311.00.00 to be members of the police reserve force. Appointments to the reserve force must be approved by the town council. 
(Ord. No. 158, § 3, 2-23-1982; Ord. No. 231, 11-17-1986; Ord. No. 244, 10-19-1987; Ord. No. 653, § 2, 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 58-22. - Powers and duties. 
    Members of the police reserve force shall serve at the discretion of the chief of police and may be called into service at any time the chief of police considers it necessary to have additional officers to preserve the peace and enforce the law, and it is the intention of the town council that the reserve police officers shall act only in a supplementary capacity to the regular police force. 
(Ord. No. 158, § 5, 2-23-1982; Ord. No. 231, 11-17-1986; Ord. No. 244, 10-19-1987; Ord. No. 653, § 4, 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 58-23. - Integration of reservists with regular police officers. 
    Reserve police officers shall be directly responsible to the chief of police, and to such regular and reserve officers as the chief of police may designate. 
(Ord. No. 158, § 7, 2-23-1982; Ord. No. 231, 11-17-1986; Ord. No. 244, 10-19-1987) 
Sec. 58-24. - Powers of reservists. 
    When duly committed to active duty upon order of the chief of police, reservists shall exercise like powers, duties, and responsibilities as regular police officers, so far as same are consistent with their orders from the chief of police, and in obedience with the laws of the state, and ordinances of the town. 
(Ord. No. 158, § 8, 2-23-1982; Ord. No. 231, 11-17-1986; Ord. No. 244, 10-19-1987) 
Sec. 58-25. - Residency not required. 
    There shall be no requirement that a reserve police officer be a resident or maintain a residency in this town. 
(Ord. No. 158, § 10, 2-23-1982; Ord. No. 231, 11-17-1986; Ord. No. 244, 10-19-1987) 
Sec. 58-26. - Penalty clause. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent himself to be a police officer, regular or reserve. Any member of the reserve police unit shall be subject to dismissal for neglect of duty or misconduct in office, or for the violation of the lawful orders of the town council, mayor, chief of police. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, shall be fined not more than $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 158, § 12, 2-23-1982; Ord. No. 231, 11-17-1986; Ord. No. 244, 10-19-1987) 
Chapter 62 - LIBRARY 

Sec. 62-1. - Public library established. 
(a)  It is the desire of the town to have and maintain within the town limits a public library; that said library should be free to all citizens, with the privilege of taking materials from the library under the rules and regulations adopted by the library board and approved by the town manager and town council. 
(b)  The said library shall be called Little Elm Public Library. 
(c)  Said public library shall be maintained and promoted through appropriations of the revenues of the town as may be requested, such request being made in the form of an annual budget presented to the town manager and town council and approved by the town manager and town council. 
(Ord. No. 632, § I, 3-2-2004) 
Sec. 62-2. - Appointment and duties of library director. 
(a)  The library director shall be appointed by the town manager of the town and shall serve as administrative head of the public library and as such shall be in immediate charge of the care, maintenance and operation of the library facilities contained therein of the town. 
(b)  The duties of the library director shall be as follows: 
(1)  To recommend for employment required personnel according to standard procedures set forth by the town and, upon employment, shall supervise them in the performance of their various duties; 
(2)  To administer, operate and maintain existing library facilities and plan for the acquisition, development and operation of proposed facilities in accordance with the policies of the town council; 
(3)  To inform the general public of the services and facilities being provided by the library department; 
(4)  To solicit suggestions from the general public to improve or increase the effectiveness of the services; 
(5)  To cooperate with governmental and voluntary organizations and agencies in the furtherance of library facilities; 
(6)  To prepare manuals, bulletins and reviews on library problems; 
(7)  To counsel with officials of public and private organizations and other interested groups concerning community library activities and assist them in promotion of library services; 
(8)  To prepare an annual budget for submission to the town manager and town council; 
(9)  To attend meetings of the library board and advise with the library board pertaining to the planning, development and operations of the library facilities. 
(Ord. No. 632, § II, 3-2-2004) 
Chapter 70 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Federal law reference -Law Enforcement Officers Safety Act of 2004, 18 USC 926B. 
State Law reference- Municipality may not enact or enforce law making conduct covered under state Penal Code an offense subject to criminal penalty, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 1.08; municipal regulatory authority concerning firearms and explosives, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 229.001; right to keep and bear arms in lawful defense of self and state, Tex. Const. Art. 1, Sec. 23; leaving refrigerator or container accessible to children, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 756.012; types of containers, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 756.011. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 70-1. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
(a)  For purposes of this section: 
(1)  Vehicle means any automobile, truck, trailer, motor home, camper, semi-trailer, truck-tractor, boat or any other similar device in, upon or by which any person or property may be transported. 
(2)  Park means to stand an occupied or unoccupied vehicle, other than temporarily while loading or unloading merchandise or passengers. 
(3)  Stand means to halt an occupied or unoccupied vehicle, other than temporarily while receiving or discharging passengers. 
(4)  Town means the Town of Little Elm, Texas. 
(b)  No person shall park any vehicle on public or private property in the town for the purpose of displaying such vehicle for sale or lease unless: 
(1)  Such vehicle is owned or leased by the person who owns, leases, or otherwise controls the property upon which the vehicle is displayed, provided, however that the number of vehicles which may be displayed for sale or lease on any private property in any consecutive 12-month period shall not exceed three vehicles; or 
(2)  The property is the authorized location of a commercial auto sales, rental, or repair business which is in compliance with all state and local laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, no vehicle may be parked for the purpose of displaying such vehicle for sale or lease in or upon any (i) public street, or (ii) other public right-of-way or easement (unless such other public right-of-way or easement is on or crosses private property, parking in such public right-of-way or easement is authorized by law, and such private property is owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the person who owns or leases the vehicle). 
(Ord. No. 789, § 1, 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 70-2. - Residency requirements of sex offenders. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
(1)  Day care center means a facility providing care, training, education, custody, treatment, or supervision for 13 or more children for less than 24 hours a day. 
(2)  Minor means any person under 17 years of age. 
(3)  Permanent residence means a place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for 14 or more consecutive days. 
(4)  Premises include all improved and unimproved areas on the lot where the public park, public playground, private or public school, public swimming pool, semi-public swimming pool, or day care center is located. 
(5)  Temporary residence means a place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year, and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where a person routinely abides, lodges, or resides for a period of four or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent address. 
(b)  Offenses. 
(1)  It is unlawful for a person to establish a permanent or temporary residence within 1,000 feet of any premises where children commonly gather if the person is required to register on the Texas Department of Public Safety's Sex Offender Database (the "database") because of one or more conviction(s) involving a minor. 
(2)  For purposes of this section, premises where children commonly gather are deemed to be public parks, public playgrounds, private or public schools, libraries, public swimming pools, semi-public swimming pools, public or private youth center, day care centers or video arcade facilities. 
(c)  Evidentiary matters; measurements. 
(1)  It shall be prima facie evidence that this section applies to a person if that person's record appears on the database and the database indicates that the victim was less than 17 years of age. 
(2)  For the purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of the permanent or temporary residence to the nearest property line of the premises where children commonly gather, as described herein above, or, in the case of multiple residences on one property, measuring from the nearest property line of the premises to the nearest property line of the premises where children commonly gather, as described herein. 
(3)  A map depicting the prohibited areas shall be maintained by the Town of Little Elm. The town shall review the map at least annually for changes. Said map will be available to the public at the town secretary's office. 
(4)  Neither allegation nor evidence of a culpable mental state is required for the proof of an offense defined by this section. 
(5)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section that any of the following conditions apply: 
a.  The person required to register on the database established the permanent or temporary residence and has complied with all of the sex offender registration laws of the State of Texas, prior to the date of the adoption of this section, November 6, 2007. 
b.  The person required to register on the database was a minor when he or she committed the offense requiring such registration and was not convicted as an adult. 
c.  The person required to register on the database is a minor. 
d.  The premises where children commonly gather, as specified herein, within 1,000 feet of the permanent or temporary residence of the person required to register on the database was opened after the person established the permanent or temporary residence and complied with all sex offender registration laws of the State of Texas. 
e.  The information on the database is incorrect, and, if corrected, this section would not apply to the person who was erroneously listed on the database. 
f.  The person was at the time of the violation subject to community services supervision pursuant to Article 42.12 (Section 13B) of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended, and the court reduced or waived the 1,000 foot restriction for a child free zone under Article 42.12, Section 13B(a)(1)(B) of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as it applies to the person's residence. 
(d)  Penalty. A person who violates any of the provisions of section 70-2 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be fined a sum not to exceed $500.00 for each offense, and each and every violation or day such violation shall continue or exist, shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 861, § 2, 11-6-2007) 
Sec. 70-3. - Child safety zones. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, unless otherwise defined herein, the definitions set forth in section 70-2 of this article shall apply. 
(b)  Offenses. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for a person who is required to register on the Texas Department of Public Safety's Sex Offender Database (the "database") because of one or more conviction(s) involving a minor to go in, on, or within 1,000 feet of a premises where children commonly gather. 
(c)  Exemptions. 
(1)  Persons who are actively engaged in a legitimate business purpose may enter into the 1,000-foot zone surrounding premises where children commonly gather. A law enforcement officer of the town may require proof that such legitimate business purpose exists at the time when a person required to register on the database is within the 1,000-foot zone surrounding premises where children commonly gather. 
(2)  Persons who are temporarily visiting family members, within the first or second degrees of consanguinity or affinity, may enter into the 1,000-foot zone surrounding premises where children commonly gather. A law enforcement officer of the town may require proof that the person is visiting family as described above at the time when a person required to register on the database is within the 1,000-foot zone surrounding premises where children commonly gather. 
(3)  Persons who are temporarily visiting friends may enter into the 1,000-foot zone surrounding premises where children commonly gather. A law enforcement officer of the town may require proof that the person is actively visiting a friend located within the protected zone at the time when a person required to register on the database is within the 1,000-foot zone surrounding premises where children commonly gather. 
(4)  Persons who are actively attending an educational institution may enter into the 1,000-foot zone surrounding premises where children commonly gather. A law enforcement officer of the town may require proof that the person is actively enrolled and attending the educational institution at the time when a person required to register on the database is within the 1,000-foot zone surrounding premises where children commonly gather. 
(5)  Persons who are actively transporting their minor child or the minor child of their spouse, to or from an educational institution may enter into the 1,000-foot zone surrounding premises where children commonly gather. A law enforcement officer of the town may require proof that the minor is related to the person required to register on the database by blood or marriage and that the minor is actively enrolled and attending the educational institution at the time when a person required to register on the database is within the 1,000-foot zone surrounding premises where children commonly gather. 
(6)  For purposes of this section, premises where children commonly gather are deemed to be public parks, public playgrounds, private or public schools, libraries, public swimming pools, semi-public swimming pools, public or private youth center, day care centers or video arcade facilities. 
(d)  Evidentiary matters; measurements. 
(1)  It shall be prima facie evidence that this section applies to a person if that person's record appears on the database and the database indicates that the victim was less than 17 years of age. 
(2)  For the purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of the permanent or temporary residence to the nearest property line of the premises where children commonly gather, as described herein above, or, in the case of multiple residences on one property, measuring from the nearest property line of the premises to the nearest property line of the premises where children commonly gather, as described herein. 
(3)  A map depicting the child safety zones shall be maintained by the Town of Little Elm. The town shall review the map at least annually for changes. Said map will be available to the public at the town secretary's office. 
(4)  Neither allegation, nor evidence of a culpable mental state is required for the proof of an offense defined by this section. 
(5)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section that any of the following conditions apply: 
a.  The person required to register on the database established a permanent or temporary residence within the child safety zone and has complied with all of the sex offender registration laws of the State of Texas, prior to the date of the adoption of this section, November 6th, 2007. 
b.  The premises where children commonly gather, as specified herein, creating a child safety zone, after the adoption of this section, was opened after the person established a permanent or temporary residence and complied with all sex offender registration laws of the State of Texas. 
c.  The information on the database is incorrect, and, if corrected, this section would not apply to the person who was erroneously listed on the database. 
d.  The person was at the time of the violation subject to community services supervision pursuant to Article 42.12(Section 13B) of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended, and the court reduced or waived the 1,000-foot restriction for a child free zone under Article 42.12, Section 13B(a)(1)(B) of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(e)  Penalty. A person who violates any of the provisions of section 70-3 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be fined a sum not to exceed $500.00 for each offense, and each and every violation or day such violation shall continue or exist, shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 870, § 2, 11-6-2007) 
Sec. 70-4. - Public urination or defecation. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person urinates or defecates: 
(1)  On public property or in a public place; or 
(2)  In public view. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section if the person was in a restroom. 
(Ord. No. 1101, § 2, 5-1-2012) 
Secs. 70-5-70-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LITTER 

Sec. 70-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases used in this article shall have the meaning specified unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Garbage shall mean putrescible animal or vegetable waste, including, but not limited to, wastes that are generated from the handling, separation, cooking and consumption of food. 
    Litter shall mean garbage, refuse and rubbish as defined herein. 
    Public place shall mean any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways in any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds, parking lots, lakes, streams and buildings or property visible therefrom. 
    Refuse shall mean all solid waste including garbage and rubbish. 
    Rubbish shall mean all nonputrescible solid wastes, including, but not limited to, paper, metal, cardboard, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, yard clippings and similar materials. 
(Ord. No. 284, § 1, 5-4-1992) 
Sec. 70-22. - Throwing or depositing litter in public places prohibited. 
    A person commits an offense if he throws or deposits litter in or upon any public place within the town, except in public or private trash containers. 
(Ord. No. 284, § 2, 5-4-1992) 
Sec. 70-23. - Receptacles. 
    Persons placing litter in public or private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or blown out of such receptacle by the elements. 
(Ord. No. 284, § 3, 5-4-1992) 
Sec. 70-24. - Throwing or depositing litter from vehicles prohibited. 
(a)  A person in a motor vehicle or on a bicycle commits an offense if he throws or deposits litter from such vehicle or bicycle onto a public place or private property, except in public or private trash containers. 
(b)  A person operating a motor vehicle commits an offense if he allows litter, trash or debris from said motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 284, § 4, 5-4-1992) 
Sec. 70-25. - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of $500.00 for each offense, and each and every day such offense shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 284, § 5, 5-4-1992) 
Secs. 70-26-70-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Former §§ 70-54 and 70-55, have been deleted as having been superseded by Ord. No. 784, adopted July 18, 2006, which enacted similar provisions. Former §§ 70-54 and 70-55 derived from Ord. No. 67, adopted June, 3, 1976. Ord. No. 784 has been codified as new §§ 70-54-70-60 at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 70-54. - Definitions. 
    In this article: 
    Quiet zone means property on which a school, hospital, clinic, library or other noise disturbance sensitive facility is operated. 
    Town means the Town of Little Elm, Texas. 
    Town manager means the manager of the town or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 784, § 2, 7-18-2006; Ord. No. 1228, § 2, 9-2-2014) 
Sec. 70-55. - Loud or disturbing noises; specific instances. 
(a)  No person shall allow, make or cause to be made any unreasonably loud or disturbing noise which is offensive to the ordinary sensibilities of a neighboring person. 
(b)  Outdoor music is prohibited in parks, public places and nonresidential districts without a town-approved special event permit or facility rental agreement. 
(c)  Without limiting the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, the following can create unreasonably loud or disturbing noises in violation of this article: 
(1)  Animals. Owning, keeping, possessing or harboring any animal or fowl which by frequent or habitual noise-making, unreasonably disturbs or interferes with the peace, comfort or repose of a neighboring person or persons of ordinary sensibilities. The provisions of this subsection shall apply to all private and public facilities including any animal shelter or commercial kennel, which hold or treat animals. 
(2)  Radios, television sets, musical instruments, loud speaking amplifiers and similar devices. 
a.  The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any sound production or reproduction device, radio, receiving set, musical instrument, drums, phonograph, television set, loudspeakers and sound amplifiers or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound: 
1.  Within a residential district or quiet zone, or within 500 feet of any residence or quiet zone, in such a manner as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace, comfort or repose of a neighboring person or persons of ordinary sensibilities; or 
2.  After 11:00 p.m. on Friday or Saturday nights, or after 10:00 p.m. on work nights (Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday), or before 8:00 a.m. on a morning following any night. The town manager may authorize a variance for certain special events up to midnight. 
b.  The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any sound production or reproduction device, radio, receiving set, musical instrument, drums, phonograph, television set, loudspeaker and sound amplifiers or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound within a nonresidential area in such a manner as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace, comfort or repose of a neighboring person or persons of ordinary sensibilities. 
c.  The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any sound production or reproduction device, radio, receiving set, musical instrument, drums, phonograph, television set, loudspeakers and sound amplifiers or other machine or device that produces or reproduces sound for the purpose of attracting attention to any cause or demonstration, or to any performance, show, sale or display of merchandise so as to attract attention to such cause, demonstration or premises when such use is done in a manner which unreasonably disturbs or interferes with the peace, comfort or repose of a neighboring person or persons of ordinary sensibilities. 
d.  The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any sound production or reproduction device, radio, receiving set, musical instrument, drums, phonograph, television set, loudspeakers and sound amplifiers or other machine or device on trucks or other moving vehicles for the purpose of attracting attention to any cause or demonstration, or for advertising any show, sale or display of merchandise when such use is done in a manner which unreasonably disturbs or interferes with the peace, comfort or repose of a neighboring person or persons of ordinary sensibilities. 
(3)  Vehicular sound amplification systems. Operating or controlling a motor vehicle in either a public or private place within the town and operating any sound device which is part of, or connected to, any radio, stereo receiver, compact disc player, cassette tape player, or other similar device in or attached to the motor vehicle in such a manner that, when operated, it is audible at a distance of 50 feet, or when operated, causes a person to be aware of the vibration accompanying the sound at a distance of 25 feet from the source, when such operation is done in a manner which unreasonably disturbs or interferes with the peace, comfort or repose of a neighboring person or persons of ordinary sensibilities. 
(4)  Yelling, shouting. The yelling, shouting, crying, hooting, whistling or singing of peddlers, hawkers or any other person in such a manner to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace, comfort or repose of a neighboring person or persons of ordinary sensibilities. 
(5)  Loading operations. The loading or unloading of any vehicle in such a manner as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace, comfort or repose of a neighboring person or persons of ordinary sensibilities. 
(6)  Construction/maintenance work. 
a.  Operating or permitting to be operated between the hours of 8:00 p.m. on any day and 7:00 a.m. of the following day any equipment (but excluding any power equipment described in subsection (c)(7), below) used in construction, maintenance, repair, alteration or demolition work on buildings, structures, streets, alleys, lawns, golf courses or appurtenances thereto and/or the erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair, of any building within a residential district or quiet zone, or within 500 feet of any residence or quiet zone, in such a manner as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace, comfort or repose of a neighboring person or persons of ordinary sensibilities. 
b.  Operating or permitting to be operated between the hours of 8:00 p.m. on any day and 7:00 a.m. of the following day any gravel pit, rock crusher, or other machinery for the separation, gathering, grading, loading or unloading of sand, rock or gravel within a residential district or quiet zone, or within 500 feet any residence or quiet zone, in such a manner as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace, comfort or repose of a neighboring person or persons of ordinary sensibilities. 
c.  Operating or permitting to be operated any equipment used in construction, maintenance, repair, alteration or demolition work on buildings, structures, streets, alleys, lawns, golf course or appurtenances thereto within a nonresidential district in such a manner as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace, comfort or repose of a neighboring person or persons of ordinary sensibilities. 
d.  Operating or permitting to be operated any gravel pit, rock crusher or other machinery for the separation, gathering, grading, loading or unloading of sand, rock or gravel within a nonresidential area in such a manner as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace, comfort or repose of a neighboring person or persons of ordinary sensibilities. 
(7)  Power equipment. 
a.  Operating or permitting to be operated between the: (i) later of 8:00 p.m. or sundown on any day; and (ii) 8:00 a.m. of the following day, any power equipment (as defined herein and excluding construction equipment, which is specifically regulated above) within a residential district or quiet zone, or within 500 feet of any residence or quiet zone, in such a manner as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace, comfort or repose of a neighboring person or persons of ordinary sensibilities. Power equipment may begin at 7:00 a.m. during the five work days (Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday). 
b.  Operating or permitting to be operated any power equipment (as defined herein and excluding construction equipment, which is specifically regulated above) within a nonresidential district in such a manner as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace, comfort or repose of a neighboring person or persons of ordinary sensibilities. 
(8)  Motor vehicle-Repairs or testing. 
a.  Between the: (i) later of 8:00 p.m. or sundown on any day; and (ii) 7:00 a.m. of the following day, the repairing, rebuilding, modifying or testing of any motor vehicle (including off-road vehicles) or watercraft within a residential area or quiet zone, or within 500 feet of any residence or quiet zone, in such a manner as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace, comfort or repose of a neighboring person or persons of ordinary sensibilities. 
b.  The repairing, rebuilding, modifying or testing any motor vehicle (including off-road vehicles) or watercraft within a nonresidential district in such a manner as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace, comfort or repose of a neighboring person or persons of ordinary sensibilities. 
(9)  Motor vehicles-Running loud or out of repair. 
a.  The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle so out of repair, so modified, or so loaded, which emits or creates loud or unnecessary grading, grinding or rasping noise, the excessive spinning of the tires, or the racing of a motor vehicle engine unnecessarily within 500 feet of a residence or quiet zone, in such a manner as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace, comfort or repose of a neighboring person or persons of ordinary sensibilities. 
b.  The use of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so out of repair, so modified, or so loaded, which emits or creates loud or unnecessary grading, grinding or rasping noise, the excessive spinning of the tires, or the racing of a motor vehicle engine unnecessarily within a nonresidential district in such a manner as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace, comfort or repose of a neighboring person or persons of ordinary sensibilities. 
(10)  Motor vehicle-Exhaust. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any motor vehicle in such a manner as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace, comfort or repose of a neighboring person or persons of ordinary sensibilities, except as discharged through a muffler or other device which effectively and efficiently prevents loud and unusual noises and annoying smoke. 
(11)  Explosive devices. Sound sources including, but not limited to, the use of fireworks, explosives, the firing of guns or other explosive devices in such a manner as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace, comfort or repose of a neighboring person or persons of ordinary sensibilities. Provided however, no such noise disturbance shall be deemed to exist when the activity is conducted in strict accordance with applicable ordinances, laws, rules, or regulation of a governmental authority. 
(12)  Powered model mechanical devices. 
a.  Between the hours of 8:00 p.m. on any day and 7:00 a.m. of the following day, the flying of model aircraft powered by internal combustion engines, whether tethered or not, or the firing or operating of model rocket vehicles or other similar noise producing devices, within a residential area or quiet zone, or within 500 feet of any residence or quiet zone, in such a manner as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace, comfort or repose of a neighboring person or persons of ordinary sensibilities. 
b.  The flying of model aircraft powered by internal combustion engines, whether tethered or not, or the firing or operating of model rocket vehicles or other similar noise producing devices within a nonresidential district in such a manner as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace, comfort or repose of a neighboring person or persons of ordinary sensibilities. 
(13)  Refuse compacting vehicles. Operating or permitting to be operated between the hours of 8:00 p.m. on any day and 7:00 a.m. of the following day any waste compacting, processing or collection vehicles in any residential district or quiet zone, or within 500 feet of any residence or quiet zone in such a manner as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace, comfort or repose of a neighboring person or persons of ordinary sensibilities. No noise disturbance shall be deemed to occur when the noise is created in the regular course of the activity for which the equipment is designed and the noise occurs for no longer than reasonably necessary to conduct the activity and the hours of operation occur between 7:01 a.m. and 7:59 p.m. on any day. 
(14)  Quiet zone. Creating or causing a noise which unreasonably disturbs or interferes with the peace, comfort or repose of a neighboring person or persons of ordinary sensibilities on any street adjacent to any school, hospital, clinic, library or other noise sensitive facility. 
(15)  Stationary non-emergency signaling devices. Sounding or permitting the sounding of any electronically activated or amplified signal from any stationary bell, chime, siren, whistle, or similar device, intended primarily for non-emergency purposes, from any place for more than five minutes during any consecutive 60-minute period which unreasonably disturbs or interferes with the peace, comfort or repose of a neighboring person or persons of ordinary sensibilities. Such signaling device is allowed if used as a danger signal, residential alarm, and/or as required by law if vehicle is backing, starting or turning in such a way as to likely cause a collision. 
(Ord. No. 784, § 3, 7-18-2006; Ord. No. 1228, § 2, 9-2-2014; Ord. No. 1272, § 2, 3-3-2015) 
Sec. 70-56. - Exemptions. 
    The following sources of potential noise disturbance shall be exempt from the regulations of this article: 
(1)  Safety signals, storm warning sirens or horns and the testing of such equipment, emergency vehicle sirens or horns used when responding to an emergency and emergency pressure relief valves. 
(2)  Sound caused in the performance of emergency or public service work, including police, fire, public works and public utility operations, acting in the performance of lawful duties to protect the health, safety or welfare of the community. 
(3)  Sounds caused by natural phenomena. 
(4)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections 74-23(j)(2) and (j)(3) of this Code, activities conducted on public parks and playgrounds, which are sponsored by the town; provided, however, that the exemption for such activities shall expire at 12:00 a.m. midnight on the day following the day on which the activities are conducted, unless the town manager has approved an extension of time for such activities, in which event the exemption for such activities shall expire at the end of the period of extension. Activities conducted on public or private school grounds including, but not limited to, school athletic and school entertainment events which are approved, sponsored or sanctioned by the school. 
(Ord. No. 784, § 4, 7-18-2006; Ord. No. 798, § 2A, 10-3-2006; Ord. No. 1228, § 2, 9-2-2014) 
Sec. 70-57. - Permits for variance. 
(a)  The town manager, or the town manager's designated representative, is authorized to grant permits for relief of any provision in this article on the basis of undue hardship in cases where: 
(1)  The sound source will be of short duration and the activity cannot be conducted in a manner as to comply with this article; 
(2)  Additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify their activity or operation to comply with this article; and 
(3)  No reasonable alternative is available to the applicant. 
Any permit granted by the town manager hereunder shall contain all conditions upon which said permit has been granted and shall specify a time that the permit shall be effective. 
(b)  A special events noise variance permit allowing specific deviations from this article may be issued by the town manager, or his/her designated representative, without a demonstration of undue hardship, for events of limited duration (not to exceed seven days) which, in the opinion of the town manager, promote identifiable historical, cultural, artistic, economic development, or community goals (including, but not limited to, the promotion of community activity in the Lakefront district), including conditions for the variance specific to the use; provided that any noise disturbance created by such activity will be abated when such request is made by the town manager, or the town manager's designated representative. 
(c)  The town manager, or the town manager's designated representative, may grant, subject to his/her discretionary review and approval, after-hour or late-hour rights to concrete pours and/or other construction related work. Factors that may be considered in the review of such a request include, but are not limited to climatic conditions, traffic impacts, public safety, proximity to residential areas, the perception of the legitimacy of the contractor's need for the variance, and other items the town manager deems relevant. 
(d)  An automatic variance will be granted without the payment of permit fees for the purpose of conducting parades or other public events, provided that any noise disturbance in violation of this article created by such activity will be abated when such request is made by the town manager or the town manager's designated representative. 
(e)  The town manager, or the town manager's designated representative, may prescribe any reasonable conditions or requirements deemed necessary to minimize adverse effects and may suspend or revoke any permit issued for violating any provisions prescribed in the permit of variance. 
(Ord. No. 784, § 5, 7-18-2006; Ord. No. 1228, § 2, 9-2-2014) 
Sec. 70-58. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any applicant who has been denied a permit of variance, or any permit holder whose permit has been suspended or revoked by a designated representative of the town, shall have the right to appeal such denial, suspension or revocation before a person appointed by the town manager to consider such appeal. 
(b)  Request for a hearing shall be made in writing to the town manager within ten days following the date of the denial or the date of the notice of the suspension or revocation. The town manager may review or cause the review of the appeal at a staff level, and has the authority to reject the action of the town manager's designated representative and order that a permit be granted or to reinstate a suspended or revoked permit. However, should the person appointed by the town manager to consider an appeal uphold the denial or suspension of a permit, the town manager shall, schedule a hearing on the appeal within 30 days of receipt of the request, which appeal shall be considered and heard by the town manager. 
(c)  The town manager shall have the authority to review all pertinent files and information regarding the applicant/permit holder which, are in the custody of the person appointed by the town manager to consider the appeal. Additionally, the town manager shall have the authority to accept written and verbal testimony from any appropriate town staff member(s), applicant/permit holder, interested citizens, and such other persons as the town manager may deem appropriate. The town manager shall also have the authority to establish the conditions for the appeal, including placing time restrictions on the testimony to be given at the hearing. 
(d)  In connection with the consideration by the town manager of the appeal, the town manager shall affirm or reject the denial or suspension, and may in connection therewith provide any conditions deemed appropriate by the town manager. Rejection of the designated representative's decision shall automatically grant a permit or reinstate a suspended or revoked permit. 
(e)  No person, whose permit has been denied, suspended, or revoked shall create or allow the creation of a noise disturbance in dispute prior to a determination by the town manager. 
(Ord. No. 784, § 6, 7-18-2006; Ord. No. 1228, § 2, 9-2-2014) 
Sec. 70-59. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation or failure to comply occurs or continues to occur. 
(Ord. No. 784, § 7, 7-18-2006; Ord. No. 1228, § 2, 9-2-2014) 
Sec. 70-60. - Injunctive relief. 
    In addition to and accumulative of all other penalties, the town shall have the right to seek injunctive relief for any and all violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 784, § 8, 7-18-2006; Ord. No. 1228, § 2, 9-2-2014) 
Secs. 70-61-70-83. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUVENILE CURFEW[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 962, §§ 1-7, adopted July 7, 2009, repealed the former art. IV, §§ 70-84-70-90, and enacted a new art. IV, as set out herein. The former art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Ord. No. 783, adopted July 11, 2006; Ord. No. 323, adopted July 18, 1994; and Ord. No. 599, adopted July 1, 2003. 
State Law reference- Required review of municipality's curfew provisions every three years, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 370.002. 

Sec. 70-84. - Purpose. 
    It is the express purpose of this article to: (a) deter criminal conduct involving juveniles; (b) reduce the number of juvenile crime victims; (c) reduce injury from accidents involving juveniles; (d) reduce the additional time police officers are required to be in the field due to juvenile crime; (e) provide additional and more effective means and option for dealing with gang-related violence and crime; (f) reduce juvenile peer pressure to stay out late; (g) reduce juvenile peer pressure to participate in violent or criminal activities; and (h) assist parents in the control of their children. 
(Ord. No. 962, § 1, 7-7-2009; Ord. No. 1159, § 1, 8-6-2013) 
Sec. 70-85. - Definitions. 
    Curfew hours means: 
(1)  11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. of the following day; 
(2)  12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday; and 
(3)  9:00 a.m. until 2:30 p.m. on any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday; provided, however, the hours defined in this paragraph (3) shall not be considered as curfew hours for minors not subject to compulsory school attendance pursuant to the Texas Education Code, nor shall the hours defined in this paragraph (3) be considered as curfew hours on day or during period in which the school where the applicable minor is enrolled is closed or classes for which the applicable minor is enrolled have been canceled under the order and direction of officials authorized to issue such orders and directive. 
    Emergency means any unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. This term shall include, but not be limited to, a fire, natural disaster, automobile accidents or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
    Establishment means any privately owned place of business operated for profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
    Guardian means a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor or a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court. 
    Minor means any person under 17 years of age. 
    Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or other business entity operation, managing, or conducting any establishment. This term includes, but is not limited to, the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation. 
    Parent means a person, who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of a minor, or a responsible adult or a person at least 18 years of age who is authorized by the parent or guardian of a minor to have the care and custody of such minor. 
    Police department means the Little Elm Police Department. 
    Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and shall include, but not limited to streets, highways and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, restaurants, theaters, game rooms, shops, shopping centers or any other place that offers for sale services or merchandise. 
    Remain means to linger or stay, or to fail to leave premises when required to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises. 
    Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
(Ord. No. 962, § 2, 7-7-2009; Ord. No. 1159, § 2, 8-6-2013) 
Sec. 70-86. - Offenses. 
(a)  A minor commits an offense if the minor remains in or upon any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the town during curfew hours. 
(b)  A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if the parent or guardian knowingly permits, or by sufficient control allows the minor to remain in or upon any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the town during curfew hours. 
(c)  The owner, operator or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if the owner, operator, or employee knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. 
(Ord. No. 962, § 3, 7-7-2009; Ord. No. 1159, § 3, 8-6-2013) 
Sec. 70-87. - Defenses. 
(a)  It shall be a defense to prosecution under section 70-86 of this article that the minor was; 
(1)  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian; 
(2)  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian; without any detour or stop; 
(3)  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(4)  Engaged in lawful employment activity, or going directly to the employment activity or returning directly to the minor's residence from the employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
(5)  Involved in an emergency; 
(6)  On an errand made necessary by an illness, injury, or emergency; 
(7)  On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor of the minor's residence if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's presence thereon; 
(8)  Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the town, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, any official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the town, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
(9)  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; 
(10)  Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with V.T.C.A., Texas Family Code, ch. 31. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection 70-86(c) that the owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave. 
(c)  It is a defense to the prosecution of a minor under section 70-86 of this article that the minor has been directed by his or her parent or guardian to engage in a specific activity or to carry out expressed instructions during the time that the minor is actually engaged in fulfilling those directions or responsibilities. 
(Ord. No. 962, § 4, 7-7-2009; Ord. No. 1159, § 4, 8-6-2013) 
Sec. 70-88. - Enforcement. 
    Before taking any enforcement action under this article, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place or establishment. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this article unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in section 70-87 is present. 
(Ord. No. 962, § 5, 7-7-2009; Ord. No. 1159, § 5, 8-6-2013) 
Sec. 70-89. - Penalties. 
(a)  A person who violates any provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of day during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted and each offense, upon conviction, is punishable by fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(b)  When required by V.T.C.A., Texas Family Code § 51.08, as amended, the municipal court shall waive original jurisdiction over a minor who violates section 70-86(a) of this article and shall refer the minor to juvenile court. 
(Ord. No. 962, § 6, 7-7-2009; Ord. No. 1159, § 6, 8-6-2013) 
Sec. 70-90. - Expiration. 
    This article expires on August 6, 2016, unless sooner terminated or extended by town council ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 962, § 7, 7-7-2009; Ord. No. 1159, § 7, 8-6-2013) 
Secs. 70-91-70-101. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GRAFFITI 

Sec. 70-102. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to help prevent the spread of graffiti on town-owned property and nontown-owned property within the incorporated area of the town. 
    The town as a home rule city has the general police power to prohibit the placement of graffiti and other inscribed materials from private as well as public property. The town council finds and determines that graffiti is obnoxious and a public nuisance and unless the town causes it to be removed from town-owned and nontown-owned property within the incorporated area of the town, it tends to remain. Other properties then become the target of graffiti with the result that entire neighborhoods are affected and become less desirable places in which to be, all to the detriment of the town. 
    It is the purpose of the Town Council of the Town of Little Elm, through the adoption of this article, to provide additional enforcement tools to protect public and private property from acts of vandalism and defacement, including the application of graffiti on walls, natural objects and structures. Such acts are destructive of the rights and values of property owners as well as the entire community. 
(Ord. No. 802, § 1, 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 70-103. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended: 
    Aerosol paint container shall mean any aerosol container which is adapted or made for the purpose of applying spray painting, or other substance capable of defacing property. 
    Felt tip marker shall mean any indelible marker of similar paraphernalia with a tip which, at its broadest width, is greater than one-eighth of an inch, containing ink or other pigmented liquid which is not water soluble. 
    Graffiti shall mean any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting or other defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted or engraved on or otherwise affixed to or on any surface of town-owned property or non-town-owned property within the incorporated areas of the town by or with, but not limited to, any of the following: felt tip marker, paint stick or graffiti stick, or graffiti paraphernalia, to the extent that the same was not authorized in advance by the owner or occupant thereof. Nothing contained in this definition shall be construed to include the marking or painting of roadways, placement of government signs, street construction or underground placement markings for utilities or construction by the town or its licensees. 
    Graffiti paraphernalia shall mean an aerosol paint container, a felt tip marker, gummed label, paint stick or graffiti stick, etching tool, or any other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on glass, metal, concrete or wood or any other surface. 
    Minor shall mean any person under the age of 17 years of age. 
    Paint stick or graffiti stick shall mean any device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure, and upon application, of leaving a mark at least one-fourth of an inch in width. 
(Ord. No. 802, § 2, 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 70-104. - Unlawful to apply, prohibition of defacement. 
    It is unlawful for any person to apply graffiti to any trees or structures, including, but not limited to, buildings, walls, fences, poles and signs (hereinafter referred to collectively as "structures") on any town-owned property or without the permission of the owner or occupant, on any nontown-owned property within the incorporated city limits of Little Elm, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 802, § 3, 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 70-105. - Possession of graffiti paraphernalia on school property by minors prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any minor to have in his or her possession any graffiti paraphernalia while on any school property, grounds, facilities, buildings, or structures, or in areas immediately adjacent to these specific locations upon public property when such facilities are closed to the public or students. 
(b)  Upon private property without the prior consent of the owner of occupant of such private property. 
(c)  It shall be an affirmative defense to the provisions of this article that the possession of felt tip markers by minors attending, or traveling to or from school at which the minor is enrolled, if the minor participating in a class at said school which formally requires the possession of felt tip markers. (The burden of proof in any prosecution for violation of this article shall be upon the minor student to establish the need to possess a felt tip marker.) 
(Ord. No. 802, § 4, 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 70-106. - Possession of graffiti paraphernalia prohibited in designated places. 
    It is unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession any graffiti paraphernalia while in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, public facility, park, playground, swimming pool, recreational facility, or other public building owned or operated by the town or while in or within 100 feet of an underpass, bridge abutment, storm drain, or similar types of infrastructure unless otherwise authorized by the town. 
(Ord. No. 802, § 5, 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 70-107. - Limiting access to graffiti paraphernalia by minors. 
    It is unlawful for any person, other than a parent, legal guardian, or person acting in loco parentis to sell, exchange, give, loan or otherwise furnish or cause to permit to be exchanged, given, loaned, or otherwise furnished, any graffiti paraphernalia to any minor without the consent of the parent or other lawfully designated guardian, which consent shall be given in advance in writing. 
(Ord. No. 802, § 6, 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 70-108. - Graffiti declared public nuisance. 
(a)  The existence of graffiti on any town-owned property is expressly declared to be public nuisance. 
(1)  The town council hereby finds and declares graffiti to be a nuisance subject to abatement according to the provisions and procedures herein contained or otherwise permitted by state law. 
(2)  No person shall post, affix, or attach any handbill, poster, or placard on any town-owned property, or without the permission of the owner or occupant, on any nontown-owned property within the incorporated area of the town. The police department, department of public works, code enforcement, and any other town department head, as authorized by the town manager may remove graffiti from town-owned property. 
(Ord. No. 802, § 7, 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 70-109. - Penalties. 
    It is the town's intent that all acts of graffiti vandalism occurring within the town shall be prosecuted as a misdemeanor pursuant to this article and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00, and by the performance of community service in the form of graffiti clean-up. Each person, firm, corporation, or partnership shall be deemed guilty of a separated offense for each and every day or any portion thereof during which any violation of the provisions of this article is committed, or continued by such person, firm, corporation, or partnership, and shall be deemed punishable thereof as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 802, § 8, 11-7-2006) 
Secs. 70-110-70-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DISCHARGE OF WEAPONS 

Sec. 70-126. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ambient noise means noise from all sources other than the noise under specific consideration, including traffic operating on public streets, and is established by measuring the noise level over an eight-minute period of time. 
    Bounding property line means the far side of any street, alley, stream or permanently dedicated open space from the noise source when such open space exists between the property line of the noise source and the adjacent property. Otherwise, the bounding property line is the property line of the noise source. For noise complaints, the bounding property line shall be the closest property line of the complainant's property to the noise source. 
    Bow and arrow shall have the same meaning as intended, defined or construed under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 229, as amended. 
    Chief of police means either the chief of the town police department, or his designee. The chief of police may delegate such duties and responsibilities to any such person as the chief may, in his sole discretion, determine to be capable of exercising some or all of the authority, duties and obligations of the chief of police acting pursuant to this article. 
    Concealed handgun license means a person holding a license issued pursuant to V.T.C.A., Texas Government Code ch. 411, as amended, to carry a handgun, such that the presence of the handgun is not openly discernible to the ordinary observation of a reasonable person. 
    Enclosed means in a structure with four walls and a roof. 
    Firearm or gun or projectile weapon means a weapon capable of discharging a projectile by means of an explosive charge, including, without limitation, a handgun, rifle, pistol, shotgun or any other type of firearm; but not including an air gun, air pistol or air rifle incapable of discharging a projectile at a muzzle speed in excess of 300 feet per second. 
    Firing line means a designated area within a shooting facility designed and intended for use as the site from which persons may discharge firearms in the direction of a target. 
    Gross revenues means the total amount of fund collected by the shooting facility from range fees, equipment rentals and sales of goods. 
    Machine gun means any firearm that is capable of shooting more than two shots automatically, without manual reloading, by a single function of the trigger. 
    Permit holder means the owner or designated agent of a permitted shooting facility in the town. 
    Shooting facility means an enclosed area at which firearms are discharged at targets and which is designed so that projectiles fired from firearms at targets are prevented, by means of backstops, berms or other barriers, from going beyond the boundaries of the area. 
    Town building means any building or portion of a building owned, occupied, leased or controlled by the town, for town or public operations and activities; however, this term does not include any public or private driveway, street, sidewalk or walkway, parking lot, parking garage or other parking area. 
(Ord. No. 978, § 2, 9-15-2009) 
Sec. 70-127. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or operate, or to allow to be conducted or operated, on property under his ownership or control, a shooting facility unless such shooting facility is conducted and operated in accordance with a permit issued pursuant to this article. The fee for the permit shall be as determined from time to time by town council. Nothing in this article shall waive any of the requirements of chapter 106, "Zoning", and an applicant for a permit herein shall comply with all applicable zoning regulations. 
(Ord. No. 978, § 2, 9-15-2009) 
Sec. 70-128. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Any person desiring to operate or conduct a shooting facility shall file a written application for a permit to do so with the chief of police. In reviewing the permit, the chief of police is authorized to engage any experienced, qualified person to assist in the review of the shooting facility should any technical issues be outside his formal training or experience. Application forms provided by the chief of police shall include the following: 
(1)  The name, mailing address and telephone number of the applicant for the permit (including the names, addresses and telephone numbers of all partners if the applicant is organized as a partnership and the names, addresses and telephone numbers of all officers and directors of the corporation if the applicant is a corporation) and the business name, address and telephone number of the proposed or existing shooting facility; 
(2)  Plans drawn to scale and showing the location and dimensions of all improvements existing or to be constructed; 
(3)  Applications for all building permits required to construct any structures to be used in connection with the shooting facility; 
(4)  A complete and true copy of the proposed rules and regulations and operating procedures governing the use of such shooting facility; 
(5)  Evidence satisfactory to the chief of police of the applicant's ability to comply with the insurance requirement imposed by this article; 
(6)  Any other information reasonably required by the chief of police to determine the safety of the shooting facility. 
(b)  For all proposed facilities, the applicant shall post notice in a form and at locations deemed by the chief of police to be reasonably sufficient, in the sole discretion of the chief of police, to advise the public that an application has been filed pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 978, § 2, 9-15-2009) 
Sec. 70-129. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  If the chief of police determines from the information provided in the application that the shooting facility will satisfy the specific requirements of this article, the chief of police shall conditionally approve the permit for the shooting facility, subject to the completion of the improvements shown on the application in accordance with the approved plans and specifications. After inspecting the completed improvements and certifying that the criteria of this article have been satisfied, the chief of police shall issue the permit. Conditional approval of a permit under this section shall not be deemed or construed to constitute approval of any building permit or other permit required pursuant to other applicable provisions of this Code and any other ordinances of the town. 
(b)  The application for a permit for a shooting facility shall demonstrate compliance with the following specific criteria: 
(1)  Safety standards. 
a.  Any shooting facility shall be designed and operated in a manner to prevent any bullet or other projectile from traveling beyond the boundaries of such shooting facility. In reviewing the design of a shooting facility, the chief of police may consider range development guidelines promulgated by the National Rifle Association or other national governing body of the specific shooting sport as appropriate. 
b.  The possession or use of alcoholic beverages shall be prohibited at the shooting facility, and no person under the influence of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted to discharge any firearm. 
c.  The operating procedures for the shooting facility shall prohibit the use of any firing line at the facility except when the permit holder, or a bona fide employee, is present and directly supervising the range operation to ensure compliance with the approved rules and regulations. 
d.  The applicant for a permit issued pursuant to this article shall obtain and maintain in effect during the operation of the shooting facility insurance coverage in a minimum amount of $500,000.00 for bodily injuries or death and another policy in the amount of $500,000.00 for property damage resulting from firing any firearm while on the gun or shooting range. 
e.  The use of machine guns shall be prohibited. 
f.  The use of armor-piercing or steel-core ammunition shall be prohibited. 
g.  The use of .50 caliber or larger ammunition shall be prohibited. 
(2)  Noise standards. 
a.  If necessary, the applicant shall implement noise mitigation measures, which may include landscaping and insulation of the shooting facility and other measures as necessary to attain compliance with subsection (b)(2)d., of this section. 
b.  An "A" scale sound level meter that meets the standards of the American Standards Association must be used to determine whether the level of noise violates this section. A calibration check shall be performed prior to and following any noise investigation. Measurements shall be taken by a certified safety specialist, an industrial hygienist, or other person trained and qualified in the operation of sound-measuring devices. 
c.  For permitting compliance, noise shall be measured every 200 feet along the bounding property line, for eight-minute intervals at each location. For noise complaints, measurements shall be taken first at the identical 200-foot intervals along the bounding property line, or at the bounding property line of the complaining party. Weapons shall be discharged from each firing line at the shooting facility for both permitting and complaint testing. 
d.  A person may not conduct an activity that creates a noise level which exceeds the levels established in subsections (b)(2)d.1. through (b)(2)d.4. of this section or which exceeds the ambient noise level by five decibels, whichever is greater. References to districts are as defined in chapter 106, "Zoning". 
1.  In any residential district, the sound pressure level on the bounding property line shall not exceed 61 decibels during operating hours. 
2.  In an O-Office, NS-Neighborhood Services, R-Retail, LC-Light Commercial, or HC-Heavy Commercial District, the sound pressure level on the bounding property line shall not exceed 68 decibels during operating hours. 
3.  In an AG-Agricultural, 380-SH 380 Overlay, or TCI-Town Center-Interim District, the sound pressure level on the bounding property line shall not exceed 70 decibels during operating hours. 
4.  In a LI-1-Light Industrial 1, LI-2-Light Industrial 2, or HI-Heavy Industrial, the sound pressure level on the bounding property line shall not exceed 75 decibels during operating hours. 
e.  Weapons shall be discharged only from the designated firing line within a shooting facility. 
f.  The permit holder shall give the chief of police notice of shooting competitions no less than seven days before the event. 
(3)  Lighting. Lighting regulations shall be in compliance with this Code of Ordinances. 
(c)  General standards. Permits which are issued under this article shall recite that the issuance thereof does not constitute any assurance by the town, its employees, officers or agents that injury will not result from the operation or use of the approved shooting facility. Permits shall be valid for a one-year period and may also provide for: 
(1)  Maintenance of improvements and safety equipment; 
(2)  No more frequently than 12 times per year, and for not more than two consecutive days, waivers of hours of operation granted by the chief of police for specially designated events, such as competitions and governmental agency training; 
(3)  Juveniles (16 and under) must be under the supervision of a parent or adult legal guardian unless registered and participating in a gun safety class, in which case the minor must be under the supervision of the adult safety instructor; and 
(4)  Other reasonable terms and conditions relating to the use and operation of the shooting facility as the chief of police may deem reasonably necessary to ensure the safety and welfare of the public, neighboring property owners, and persons using the shooting facility. 
(Ord. No. 978, § 2, 9-15-2009) 
Sec. 70-130. - Discharging and carrying firearms and projectile weapons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a peace officer, to carry a firearm in any town building or other municipal property, unless the person is duly licensed by the state to carry a concealed handgun and pursuant to state law may carry a concealed handgun in a particular building or on said property. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry a firearm or prohibited weapon, as defined pursuant to V.T.C.A., Texas Penal Code § 46.05(a), as amended, on the premises of any municipal or governmental property where court or court administrative offices are located. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any gun, pistol, rifle, firearm, or bow and arrow of any kind within the town limits, except: 
(1)  Within a properly secured and permitted shooting facility constructed and maintained in accordance with applicable National Rifle Association specifications and standards and any standards prescribed by town ordinance; 
(2)  Upon a shooting range owned and operated by a governmental entity; or 
(3)  As otherwise provided in this article. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a BB gun, pellet gun or air gun (including air pistols, air rifles and all other firearms using air pressure to propel a projectile) where the projectile is composed of more than 50 percent metal. 
(d)  This section shall not be construed to prohibit any peace officer from discharging a firearm in the performance of his duty, nor to prohibit any citizen from discharging a firearm when lawfully defending person or property. 
(Ord. No. 978, § 2, 9-15-2009) 
Sec. 70-131. - Permits for government shooting facilities. 
    Notwithstanding anything in this article to the contrary, a permit to operate a shooting facility shall be issued to any federal, state or local governmental agency upon receipt of a certification from an authorized official of such agency that the shooting facility is under the control, ownership and management of the agency and is operated for the exclusive purpose of training and qualifying peace officers and persons in training to become peace officers, and shall include training on machine guns. 
(Ord. No. 978, § 2, 9-15-2009) 
Sec. 70-132. - Renewal or revocation of permit. 
(a)  A permit shall be renewed on an annual basis on the anniversary date of the permit issuance. The permit renewal fee shall be as determined from time to time by town council. During permit renewal, an applicant shall demonstrate continuing compliance with the noise, safety and lighting provisions of this article, and such continuing compliance shall result in the renewal of the permit. It is expected that such compliance shall be maintained between official review periods. Should such compliance not be demonstrated, the chief of police shall deny the renewal of the permit. 
(b)  As necessary, the chief of police shall review all written complaints filed with the town regarding the operation of the shooting facility and shall notify the permit holder of said complaints. Complainants shall comply with the citizen complaint procedures of the town municipal court. Any issued permit shall be revoked and no permit shall be renewed for any shooting facility for which the chief of police has certified six or more instances in the preceding 12-month period where the terms and conditions of the permit have been violated in a manner that constitutes an unreasonable danger or unreasonable nuisance to the public, neighboring property owners, or persons using the shooting facility. Any revocation may also subject the facility owner to the penalty provisions of section 70-135. 
(Ord. No. 978, § 2, 9-15-2009) 
Sec. 70-133. - Right of appeal. 
(a)  Any party aggrieved by a decision of the chief of police pursuant to this article may appeal that decision to the town council, specifically alleging the error of the chief of police. The filing of an appeal shall not stay the action or determination that is being appealed. The town council shall schedule a hearing on the appeal at the council's next regularly scheduled meeting following the date such appeal is filed, and may uphold, reverse or modify the decision of the chief of police at the conclusion of such public hearing. If the town council determines that such allegations are unfounded, it shall so state and shall take no action. 
(b)  A party may appeal the decision of the board of adjustment to the district court. In the alternative, a person seeking a permit may submit a new permit to the town council for expedited review. 
(Ord. No. 978, § 2, 9-15-2009) 
Sec. 70-134. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The provisions of this article do not apply in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the municipality or in an area annexed by the municipality after September 1, 1981, if the firearm or other weapon is: 
(1)  A shotgun, air rifle or pistol, BB gun, or bow and arrow discharged: 
a.  On a tract of land of ten acres or more and: 
1.  More than 1,000 feet from: 
i.  The property line of a public tract of land, generally accessible by the public, that is routinely used for organized sporting or recreational activities or that has permanent recreational facilities or equipment; and 
ii.  The property line of a school, hospital, or commercial day care facility. 
2.  More than 600 feet from: 
i.  The property line of a residential subdivision; and 
ii.  The property line of a multifamily residential complex. 
3.  More than 150 feet from a residence or occupied building located on another property. 
b.  In a manner not reasonably expected to cause a projectile to cross the boundary of the tract; or 
(2)  A center fire or rim fire rifle or pistol of any caliber discharged: 
a.  On a tract of land of 50 acres; and 
b.  In a manner not reasonably expected to cause a projectile to cross the boundary of the tract; or 
1.  More than 1,000 feet from: 
i.  The property line of a public tract of land, generally accessible by the public, that is routinely used for organized sporting or recreational activities or that has permanent recreational facilities or equipment; and 
ii.  The property line of a school, hospital or commercial day care facility. 
2.  More than 600 feet from: 
i.  The property line of a residential subdivision; and 
ii.  The property line of a multifamily residential complex. 
3.  More than 300 feet from a residence or occupied building located on another property. 
(3)  Discharged at a sport shooting range, as defined by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 250.001, in a manner not reasonably expected to cause a projectile to cross the boundary of a tract of land. 
(b)  A shooting facility within the town that is excepted from the permit requirements of this article, pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Safety standards. 
a.  Any shooting facility shall be designed and operated in a manner to prevent any bullet or other projectile from traveling beyond the boundaries of the tract of property where the facility is located. In reviewing the design of a shooting facility, the chief of police may consider range development guidelines promulgated by the National Rifle Association or other national governing body of the specific shooting sport as appropriate. 
b.  The use of machine guns shall be prohibited. 
(2)  Noise standards. 
a.  If necessary, the shooting facility shall implement noise mitigation measures, which may include landscaping and insulation of firing stations and other measures as necessary to attain compliance with subsection d. below. 
b.  An "A" scale sound level meter that meets the standards of the American Standards Association must be used to determine whether the level of noise violates this section. A calibration check shall be made performed prior to and following any noise investigation. Measurements shall be taken by a certified safety specialist, an industrial hygienist, or other person trained and qualified in the operation of sound measuring devices. 
c.  For permitting compliance, measurements shall be taken first at 200-foot intervals along the bounding property line, or at the bounding property line of the complaining party. Weapons shall be discharged from each firing line at the shooting facility for complaint testing. 
d.  A person may not conduct an activity that creates a noise level which exceeds the levels established in subsections (2)d.1. through (2)d.4. below, or which exceeds the ambient noise level by five decibels, whichever is greater. References to districts are as defined in chapter 106, "Zoning". 
1.  In any residential district, the sound pressure level on the bounding property line shall not exceed 61 decibels during operating hours. 
2.  In an O-Office, NS-Neighborhood Services, R-Retail, LC-Light Commercial, or HC-Heavy Commercial District, the sound pressure level on the bounding property line shall not exceed 68 decibels during operating hours. 
3.  In an AG-Agricultural, 380-SH 380 Overlay, or TCI-Town Center-Interim District, the sound pressure level on the bounding property line shall not exceed 70 decibels during operating hours. 
4.  In a LI-1-Light Industrial 1, LI-2-Light Industrial 2, or HI-Heavy Industrial, the sound pressure level on the bounding property line shall not exceed 75 decibels during operating hours. 
(3)  Lighting. Lighting regulations shall be in compliance with this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 978, § 2, 9-15-2009) 
Sec. 70-135. - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any section of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined any sum not in excess of $500.00 for each offense, and assessed court costs as provided by law, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 978, § 2, 9-15-2009) 
Secs. 70-136-70-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SUBSTANCES 

Sec. 70-150. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Restricted smoking material shall mean any substance, however marketed, which can reasonably be converted for smoking purposes whether it is presented as incense, tobacco, herbs, spices or any blend thereof if it includes any of the following chemicals or a comparable chemical: 
(1)  Salvia divinorum or Salvinorin A; all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as Salvia divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and every compound, manufacture, salts, derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or extracts; 
(2)  2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol (also known as CP47,497) and homologues; 
(3)  (6aS,10aS)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a,7,10,10a-tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-1-ol (also known as HU-211 or Dexanabinol); 
(4)  1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-018); 
(5)  1-butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-073); or 
(6)  1-pentyl-3-(4-methoxynaphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-081). 
    Products containing some or all of the above substances are currently being marketed under the following commercial names: 
"K-2", "K-2 SUMMIT", "K-2 SEX", "GENIE", "DASCENTS", "ZOHAI", "SAGE", "SPICE", "KO KNOCK-OUT 2", "SPICE GOLD", "SPICE DIAMOND", "YUCATAN FIRE", "SOLAR FLARE", "PEP SPICE", "FIRE N' ICE", AND "SALVIA DIVINORUM". 
    Any product containing any of the chemical compounds set forth above shall be subject to the provisions of this article, regardless of whether they are marketed under alternative names. 
    Restricted smoking material paraphernalia shall mean any paraphernalia, equipment or utensil that is used or intended to be used in ingesting or inhaling illegal smoking materials and may include: 
(1)  A metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipe with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head, or punctured metal bowl; 
(2)  A water pipe; 
(3)  A carburetion tube or device; 
(4)  A smoking or carburetion mask; 
(5)  A chamber pipe; 
(6)  A carburetor pipe; 
(7)  An electric pipe; 
(8)  An air-driven pipe; 
(9)  A chillum; 
(10)  A bong; or 
(11)  An ice pipe or chiller. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 2, 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 70-151. - Restricted smoking materials; purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to prohibit the sale or delivery of restricted smoking materials as defined within the town limits of the Town of Little Elm, Texas, and to prohibit the possession of restricted smoking materials within the town limits of the Town of Little Elm. Any form of delivery to include a simple gift constitutes a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 2, 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 70-152. - Sale, delivery, offer or gift. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell, deliver to or to give any restricted smoking material to any person. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 2, 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 70-153. - Use or possession of restricted smoking material. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have in their possession or to use restricted smoking materials within the corporate limits of the Town of Little Elm. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 2, 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 70-154. - Use or possession of restricted smoking paraphernalia. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have in their possession any restricted smoking paraphernalia with the intent to use it, to ingest, inhale or otherwise consume restricted smoking material. It is a violation of this section, if a person is found in possession of restricted smoking paraphernalia and appropriate forensic testing is done on the paraphernalia showing traces of restricted smoking material are present on the restricted smoking paraphernalia. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 2, 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 70-155. - Defenses to prosecution. 
(a)  It shall be a defense to prosecution for a violation of this article if the use of the restricted smoking material is at the direction or under a prescription issued by a licensed physician or dentist authorized to prescribe controlled substances within the State of Texas. 
(b)  It shall be a defense to prosecution under the terms of this article if an individual charged with a violation can provide proper and complete historic documentation that the use of such materials is a portion of a religious undertaking or activity of a religious denomination in which they have long standing historic membership supported by documentation from clergy or spiritual leader recognized by the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 2, 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 70-156. - Offenses and penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor infraction, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(b)  Every act in violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Unless otherwise specifically set forth herein allegation and evidence of culpable mental state are not required for the proof of an offense of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 2, 8-3-2010) 
Secs. 70-157-70-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OFFENSES RELATING TO LAW ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS 

Sec. 70-181. - Compliance with order of officer required; obstruction of duty prohibited. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person knowingly fails or refuses to comply with an order or direction of a peace officer that is given by a visible or audible signal. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person knowingly obstructs, prevents, or interferes with a peace officer engaged in the discharge of the officer's official duty. 
(c)  It is an affirmative defense to a prosecution for a violation of this section that the peace officer's order or direction, or duty being performed is unlawful. 
(d)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the interruption, disruption, impediment, or interference alleged consisted of speech only. 
(Ord. No. 1220, § 2, 6-17-2014) 
Secs. 70-182-70-205. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - SMOKING 

Sec. 70-206. - Definitions. 
    Cigar as used herein shall mean, unless otherwise amended by the V.T.C.A., Tax Code, ch. 155, a roll of fermented tobacco that is wrapped in tobacco and the main stream of smoke from which produces an alkaline reaction to litmus paper. 
    Cigarette as used herein shall mean, unless otherwise amended by the V.T.C.A., Tax Code, ch. 154, a roll for smoking: (A) that is made of tobacco or tobacco mixed with another ingredient and wrapped or covered with a material other than tobacco; and (B) that is not a cigar. 
    Electronic cigarette and/or e-cigarette as used herein shall mean any electronic device composed of a mouthpiece, heating element, battery and electronic circuits that provides, or is manufactured or intended to provide, a vapor of liquid nicotine and/or other substances mixed with propylene glycol and/or other substances delivered or deliverable to the user that he/she can inhale in simulation of smoking. This term shall include every version and type of such devices whether they are manufactured or marketed as electronic cigarettes, e-cigarettes, electronic cigars, e-cigars, electronic pipes, e-pipes, or under any other product name or description. 
    Employee means any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and any persons who volunteers his or her services for a nonprofit entity. 
    Employer means any person, partnership, entity, corporation, including a municipal corporation, or nonprofit entity, which employs the services of one or more individual persons or entities. 
    Liquid nicotine as used herein shall mean any liquid product composed either in whole or in part of pure nicotine and propylene glycol and/or any other substance and manufactured for use with electronic cigarettes or e- cigarettes. 
    Minor as used herein means a person younger than 18 years of age. 
    Open display unit as used herein shall mean, in the context of the retail sale of electronic cigarettes or e-cigarettes and/or liquid nicotine, any device, furniture or furnishing within or upon which electronic cigarettes or e-cigarettes and/or liquid nicotine are displayed to customers, and includes, but is not limited to, any case, rack, shelf, counter, table, desk, kiosk, booth, stand, vending machine and other surface. 
    Place of business as used herein shall mean: (A) a commercial business location where cigarettes, tobacco products, electronic cigarettes or e-cigarettes and/or liquid nicotine is/are sold; (B) a commercial business location where cigarettes, tobacco products, electronic cigarettes or e-cigarettes and/or liquid nicotine are kept for sale of consumption or otherwise stored; or (C) a vehicle from which cigarettes, tobacco products, electronic cigarettes or e-cigarettes and/or liquid nicotine is/are sold. 
    Place of employment means any enclosed area under the control of public or private employer which employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges and restrooms, conference and classrooms, employee cafeterias and hallways. A private residence is not a "place of employment" unless it is used as a licensed child care, adult day care or health care facility. 
    Possess(es), possessing, or possession as used herein shall mean actual care, custody, control or management. 
    Retail electronic cigarette store as used herein shall mean a retail store utilized solely for the sale and sampling of electronic cigarettes or e-cigarettes and/or liquid nicotine and related accessories. 
    Retailer as used herein shall mean a person, place of business or retail and service establishment, who/which engages in the practice of selling cigarettes, tobacco products, electronic cigarettes or e-cigarettes and/or liquid nicotine to consumers and includes, without limitation, the owner of an open display unit. 
    Self-service merchandising as used herein shall mean, in the context of the retail sale of electronic cigarettes or e-cigarettes and/or liquid nicotine, the open display, including, without limitation, the use of an open display unit of electronic cigarettes or e-cigarettes and/or liquid nicotine, whether packaged or otherwise, for direct retail customer access and handling prior to purchase without the intervention of assistance of the retailer or the retailer's owner, employee or agent. 
    Smoke(s) or smoking as used herein shall mean and includes the carrying, possessing or holding of a pipe, cigarette, tobacco product, electronic cigarette or e-cigarette or liquid nicotine of any kind which is burning or emitting a vapor. 
    Sports arena means sports stadiums, sports pavilions, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys, indoor amusements, and other similar places where members of the general public assemble either to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness sports events. 
    Tobacco product as used herein shall mean: (A) cigar; (B) smoking tobacco, including granulated, plug-cut, crimp-cut, ready-rubbed, and any form of tobacco suitable for smoking in a pipe or as a cigarette; (C) chewing tobacco, including cavendish, twist, plug scrap and any kind of tobacco suitable for chewing; (D) snuff or other preparations of pulverized tobacco; or (E) an article or product that is made of tobacco or a tobacco substitute and that is not a cigarette. 
(Ord. No. 1218, § 2, 6-17-2014) 
Sec. 70-207. - Smoking prohibited in certain public places. 
    A person commits an offense in violation of this article if he smokes, expectorates any smokeless tobacco product, or possesses a burning tobacco, weed, other plant product, electronic cigarette or e-cigarette or liquid nicotine in most public places and enclosed places of employment within the town, including, but not limited to, the following indoor and/or enclosed areas: 
(1)  Within any enclosed facility within all places of employment and/or within any enclosed area available to and customarily used by the general public in all businesses, including but not limited to, retail stores, offices, banks, restaurants, department stores, grocery stores, pharmacies, shopping malls, salons, bowling centers, bingo parlors, arcades, indoor amusements, laundry mats, warehouses, manufacturing facilities, leasing centers, food establishments, private clubs, and country clubs, including their respective service lines, except where specifically provided for in section 70-208, below; 
(2)  Hotels and motels; 
(3)  A public or private preschool, day care, primary or secondary school; 
(4)  Buses, bus terminals, taxicabs, airports and other facilities and means of public transit, as well as ticket, boarding, and waiting areas of public transit depots; 
(5)  Movie theaters, drama and recital theaters, lecture halls, galleries, libraries, museums, conference centers, meeting rooms, and outdoor amphitheaters not owned by the town; 
(6)  Service lines and waiting queues, whether indoor or outdoor, including all polling locations; 
(7)  In or within 25 feet of sports arenas or athletic stadiums, stadium seating, ticketing, queuing, and waiting areas, concession stands, and restrooms, whether public or private; 
(8)  Public parks in and around assembly amenities such as recreation fields, pools, playground areas, concession stands, pavilions, restrooms, and the swim beach, but excluding parking lots, open space, trails, and the amphitheater during live music events; 
(9)  Waiting rooms, hallways, wards, private and semi-private rooms of physical and mental health facilities, including, but not limited to, hospitals, clinics, physical therapy facilities, doctors' offices, and dentists' offices; 
(10)  Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in apartment buildings, condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes, and other multiple-unit residential facilities; 
(11)  Elevators, restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways and other common-use areas; 
(12)  Every room, chamber, place of meeting or public assembly, including school buildings under the control of any board, council, commission, committee, including joint committees, or agencies of the city or any political subdivision of the state during such time as a public meeting is in progress, to the extent such place is subject to the jurisdiction of the city; and 
(13)  Within 25 feet of any entrance (door, window, vent, or other opening) of any facility where smoking is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1218, § 2, 6-17-2014) 
Sec. 70-208. - Places where smoking is not prohibited. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, the following areas shall not be subject to the smoking restrictions of this article, unless within 25 feet of any door, operable window/vent, or other opening to an indoor enclosed area, or service lines and waiting queues: 
(1)  Private residences, including porch and yard areas, except when used as an in-home child care facility, adult day care, health care facility, group home, or home occupation; 
(2)  Personal automobiles; 
(3)  Outdoor places of employment, except where employees have to provide the public with service or are in close proximity to the general public; 
(4)  Public sidewalks; 
(5)  Parking lots; 
(6)  Retail tobacco stores or hookah lounges, where the sale of tobacco products and accessories is the primary retail use and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. Separate ventilation and HVAC systems that prevent the commingling of air with other businesses, common areas, hallways and other non-smoking areas shall be required; 
(7)  Designated exterior outdoor smoking areas; and 
(8)  Exterior outdoor patios of restaurants, which are exempt from the 25-foot standard. 
(Ord. No. 1218, § 2, 6-17-2014) 
Sec. 70-209. - Posting of signs. 
(a)  The owner, manager, or other person having control of such building or premises where smoking is prohibited by this article shall have a conspicuously posted sign clearly stating "No Smoking" at each entrance, whether for the public, employees, or deliveries, and at restroom entrances. E-cigarettes shall also be sufficiently included on the notification signage. 
(b)  Such "No Smoking" signs shall have bold lettering of not less than one inch in height. The international "No Smoking" symbol may also be used (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with red bar across it). 
(c)  Any owner, manager, or other person having control of any establishment regulated by this article shall be responsible for posting appropriate signage. 
(Ord. No. 1218, § 2, 6-17-2014) 
Sec. 70-210. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement of this article shall be implemented by the city manager or his/her designee by issuance of a citation. 
(b)  It is the duty of the owner, manager, operator, or person-in-charge of any establishment regulated by this article: 
(1)  To post signs in accordance with section 70-209 of this article; 
(2)  To not provide ashtrays, matches, lighters, or other smoking related paraphernalia in a regulated premises; 
(3)  To advise a person who violates this article that smoking is not allowed; and 
(4)  To request a person remove themselves from this location after that person has been advised that smoking is not allowed and that person willfully continues to smoke. 
(Ord. No. 1218, § 2, 6-17-2014) 
Sec. 70-211. - Offenses and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke, expectorate any smokeless tobacco product, or possess a burning tobacco, weed, other plant product, electronic cigarette or e-cigarette or liquid nicotine in any area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls the use of any premises subject to regulation under this article to fail to comply with the sections 70-209 or 70-210 of this article. 
(c)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor infraction, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(d)  Every act in violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(e)  Unless otherwise specifically set forth herein allegation and evidence of culpable mental state are not required for the proof of an offense of this artivcle. 
(f)  This article shall not be interpreted nor construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 1218, § 2, 6-17-2014) 
Secs. 70-212-70-240. - Reserved. 
Chapter 74 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of municipalities to operate and maintain parks, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 331.001; park to be open for public use under rules prescribed by local governing authority, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 331.007; home-rule municipality has exclusive control over public grounds, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 282.001; municipal authority concerning public waters within corporate limits, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code § 31.092. 

ARTICLE I. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1337, § 3, adopted July 5, 2016, repealed art. I, §§ 74-1, 74-2, which pertained to town parks and derived from Ord. No. 259, §§ 1-2, Aug. 20, 1990; and Ord. No. 659, § 1, adopted Aug. 3, 2004. 

Secs. 74-1-74-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TOWN OF LITTLE ELM PARKS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1337, § 4, adopted July 5, 2016, repealed the former art. II, §§ 74-21-74-24, and enacted a new art. II as set out herein. The former art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 245, adopted Mar. 21, 1988; Ord. No. 266, adopted Dec. 3, 1990; Ord. No. 272, adopted May 6, 1991; Ord. No. 659, §§ 1-4 adopted Aug. 3, 2004; Ord. No. 798, § 2B, adopted Oct. 3, 2006; Ord. No. 848, § 2, adopted Sept. 4, 2007; and Ord. No. 1265, § 2, adopted Feb. 3, 2015. 

Sec. 74-21. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
    Chief of police shall mean the Chief of Police of the Town of Little Elm, Texas, or his designee. 
    District commander shall mean the District Commander of the United States Army Corps of Engineers, or his designee. 
    Lake Lewisville area shall mean Lake Lewisville and the area surrounding Lake Lewisville which is owned by the United States of America and which is within the corporate limits of the town or the town's extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
    Parks and recreation director shall mean the Parks and Recreation Director for the Town of Little Elm, or the parks and recreation director's designated representative. 
    Project waters or lands shall mean Lewisville Lake and the area surrounding Lewisville Lake which is owned by the federal government and which lies within the corporate town limits or the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Town of Little Elm. 
    Posted rules and restrictions shall mean any and all restrictions, rules and regulations promulgated by the Town of Little Elm and/or the United States Army Corps of Engineers which govern the use of Lake Lewisville or the project lands. 
    Town shall mean the Town of Little Elm, Texas. 
    Town park shall mean a park, reservation, playground, recreation center or any area in the town owned, leased, or used by the town, and devoted to active or passive recreation, including all planted medians, parkways, triangles and circles maintained by the town. 
(Ord. No. 1337, § 4, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 74-22. - Adoption of rules, regulations and standards. 
(a)  Texas Water Safety Act. The town hereby adopts and incorporates by reference, the rules, regulations and standards of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code, ch. 31, and the Texas Water Safety Act, as amended. 
(b)  Public use of Lake Lewisville area. The town hereby adopts and incorporates by reference the "Rules and Regulations Governing Public Use of Corps of Engineers Water Resources Development Projects," as set forth in 36 CFR 327, as amended. 
(c)  Park patrons must adhere to all posted restrictions/rules. 
(Ord. No. 1337, § 4, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 74-23. - Authorization. 
(a)  The mayor of the town shall have the authorization to sign a contract with the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers for the town to have care and control of Little Elm Park. 
(b)  The Little Elm Park contract will be for a 25-year period, and may be renewed by action of the town council. 
(c)  The mayor of the town shall have the authorization to sign a contract with the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers for the town to have care and control of Cottonwood Park. 
(d)  The Cottonwood Park contract will be for a 25-year period, and may be renewed by action of the town council. 
(Ord. No. 1337, § 4, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 74-24. - Vehicles. 
(a)  This section pertains to all vehicles, including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, mini-bikes, snowmobiles, dune buggies, all-terrain vehicles, and trailers, campers, bicycles, or any other such equipment. 
(b)  Vehicles shall not be parked in violation of posted restrictions and regulations, or in such a manner as to obstruct or impede normal or emergency traffic movement, or the parking of other vehicles, create a safety hazard, or endanger any person, property or environmental feature. Vehicles so parked are subject to removal and impoundment at the owner's expense. 
(c)  The operation and/or parking of a vehicle off authorized roadways is prohibited except at locations and times designated by the district commander or Town of Little Elm Parks and Recreation Director. Taking any vehicle through, around or beyond a restrictive sign, recognizable barricade, fence, curb or traffic control barrier is prohibited. 
(d)  Vehicles shall be operated in accordance with posted restrictions and regulations. 
(e)  No person shall operate any vehicle in a careless, negligent or reckless manner so as to endanger any person, property or environmental feature. 
(f)  At designated recreation areas, vehicles shall be used only to enter or leave the area or individual sites or facilities unless otherwise posted. 
(g)  Except as authorized by the district commander, no person shall operate any motorized vehicle without a proper and effective exhaust muffler as defined by state and local laws, or with an exhaust muffler cutout open, or in any other manner which renders the exhaust muffler ineffective in muffling the sound of engine exhaust. 
(Ord. No. 1337, § 4, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 74-25. - Use and possession of alcohol. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or willfully sell, possess or consume any alcoholic beverage during any of the following: 
(1)  Registered youth sports organization field activities, including but not limited to practice, games and tournaments. 
(2)  On any playing area of any athletic field while field is being used for athletics. 
(3)  Any outdoor area adjacent to the areas listed in [the above] subsections as designated by signs located within the park. 
(b)  The possession and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages on any portion of the project land or waters, or the entire project, may be prohibited when designated and posted by the district commander, Town of Little Elm Parks and Recreation Director, or chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 1337, § 4, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 74-26. - Glass containers prohibited in certain areas. 
    The possession of glass containers is prohibited in all town parks, on any beach, playground, volleyball court, athletic or sports fields, spectator areas, amphitheaters or any other areas as prohibited and where posted unless approved by the Town of Little Elm Parks and Recreation Director. 
(Ord. No. 1337, § 4, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 74-27. - Registration required for use of facilities. 
(a)  Groups, leagues or other organizations must be registered and permitted with the Town of Little Elm Parks and Recreation Department before using any playing field or other area of any athletic field or facility within any town park or park within town jurisdiction. 
(b)  Vending or soliciting of any kind is prohibited unless approved and permitted through the Town of Little Elm Parks and Recreation Department. 
(Ord. No. 1337, § 4, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 74-28. - Special events. 
(a)  Special events including, but not limited to, boat regattas, fishing tournaments, music festivals, dramatic presentations, parades, races or other special recreation events are prohibited unless a permit is obtained and approved by the parks and recreation director, or proper permitting has been obtained. All areas permitted shall be restored to the pre-event condition. 
(b)  The chief of police and/or the Town of Little Elm Parks and Recreation Director shall have the authority to revoke the permit and require the removal of any equipment upon failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 1337, § 4, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 74-29. - Vessels. 
(a)  This section pertains to all vessels or watercraft, including, but not limited to, powerboats, cruisers, houseboats, sailboats, rowboats, canoes, kayaks, personal watercraft, and any other such equipment capable of navigation on water or ice, whether in motion or at rest. 
(b)  The placement and/or operation of any vessel or watercraft for a fee or profit upon project waters or lands is prohibited except as authorized by permit, lease, license, or concession contract with the Department of the Army. The permit shall be kept on the vessel or watercraft at all times while in operation on or at project waters or lands. 
(c)  Vessels or other watercraft may be operated on the project waters, except in prohibited or restricted areas, in accordance with posted regulations and restrictions, including buoys. All vessels or watercraft so required by applicable federal, state and local laws shall display an appropriate registration on board whenever the vessel is on project waters. 
(d)  No person shall operate any vessel or other watercraft in a careless, negligent, or reckless manner so as to endanger any person, property, or environmental feature. 
(e)  All vessels, when on project waters, shall have safety equipment, including personal flotation devices, on board in compliance with U.S. Coast Guard boating safety requirements and in compliance with boating safety laws issued and enforced by the State of Texas. Owners or operators of vessels not in compliance with this section may be requested to remove the vessel immediately from project waters until such time as items of non-compliance are corrected. 
(f)  Unless otherwise permitted by federal, state or local law, vessels or other watercraft, while moored in commercial facilities, community or corporate docks, or at any fixed or permanent mooring point, may only be used for overnight occupancy when such use is incidental to recreational boating. Vessels or other watercraft are not to be used as a place of habitation or residence. 
(g)  Water skis, parasails, ski-kites and similar devices are permitted in non-restricted areas except that they may not be used in a careless, negligent, or reckless manner so as to endanger any person, property or environmental feature. 
(h)  Vessels shall not be attached or anchored to structures such as locks, dams, buoys or other structures unless authorized by the district commander. All vessels when not in actual use shall be removed from project lands and waters unless securely moored or stored at designated areas approved by the district commander. The placing of floating or stationary mooring facilities on, adjacent to, or interfering with a buoy, channel marker or other navigational aid is prohibited. 
(i)  The use at a project of any vessel not constructed or maintained in compliance with the standards and requirements established by the Federal Safe Boating Act of 1971 (Pub. L. 92-75, 85 Stat. 213), or promulgated pursuant to such Act, is prohibited. 
(j)  Except as authorized by the district commander, no person shall operate any vessel or watercraft without a proper and effective exhaust muffler as defined by state and local laws, or with an exhaust muffler cutout open, or in any other manner which renders the exhaust muffler ineffective in muffling the sound of engine exhaust. 
(Ord. No. 1337, § 4, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 74-30. - Use of boat ramp and trailer parking areas. 
(a)  Use of the Town of Little Elm boat ramp and vehicle/trailer parking lots and areas designated for such parking is prohibited unless users have purchased a parking/launch pass in accordance with the Town of Little Elm boat ramp user fee schedule. 
(b)  Vehicles without trailers are prohibited from utilizing and parking in double spaces that are intended solely for use by vehicles towing a trailer. 
(c)  All vehicles launching or loading any type of watercraft must pay launch fees in accordance with the Town of Little Elm boat ramp user fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 1337, § 4, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 74-31. - Swimming. 
(a)  Swimming, wading, snorkeling or scuba diving at one's own risk is permitted, except at launching sites, designated mooring points and public docks, or other areas so designated by the district commander or by the Town of Little Elm Parks and Recreation Director. 
(b)  An international diver down, or inland diving flag, must be displayed during underwater activities. 
(c)  Diving, jumping or swinging from trees, bridges or other structures which cross or are adjacent to project waters is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1337, § 4, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 74-32. - Camping. 
(a)  Camping is permitted only at sites and/or areas designated by the district commander or Town of Little Elm Parks and Recreation Director. A permit is required, per tent, for all camping in designated campsite areas in the town. Permits fees are located in the parks and recreation fee schedule. A permit can be denied or revoked at any time by the Town of Little Elm Parks and Recreation Director. 
(b)  Camping at one or more campsites at any one water resource project within the town for a period longer than four days during any 30-consecutive-day period is prohibited without the written permission of Town of Little Elm Parks and Recreation Director. Motorized vehicles are not permitted in the designated campsite areas unless approved by the Town of Little Elm Parks and Recreation Director. 
(c)  The unauthorized placement of camping equipment or other items on a campsite and/or personal appearance at a campsite without daily occupancy for the purpose of reserving that campsite for future occupancy is prohibited. 
(d)  The digging or leveling of any ground or the construction of any structure without written permission of the district commander is prohibited. 
(e)  Occupying or placement of any camping equipment at a campsite which is posted or otherwise marked or indicated as "reserved" without an authorized reservation for that site is prohibited. 
(f)  Campers shall keep their campsites free of trash and litter during the period of occupancy and shall clean their campsites and remove all personal equipment upon departure. 
(Ord. No. 1337, § 4, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 74-33. - Hunting, fishing, and trapping. 
(a)  Hunting is permitted except in areas and during periods where prohibited by the district commander. 
(b)  Trapping is permitted except in areas and during periods where prohibited by the district commander. 
(c)  Fishing is permitted except in swimming areas, on boat ramps, courtesy docks or other areas designated by the district commander or Town of Little Elm Parks and Recreation Director. 
(d)  Additional restrictions pertaining to these activities may be established and posted by the district commander or Town of Little Elm Parks and Recreation Director. 
(e)  All applicable federal, state and local laws regulating these activities apply on project lands and waters, and shall be regulated by authorized enforcement officials. 
(Ord. No. 1337, § 4, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 74-34. - Sanitation. 
(a)  Garbage, trash, rubbish, litter, gray water, or any other waste material or waste liquid generated on the project and incidental to authorized recreational activities shall be either removed from the project or deposited in receptacles provided for that purpose. The improper disposal of such wastes, human and animal waste included, on the project is prohibited. 
(b)  It is a violation to bring onto a project any household or commercial garbage, trash, rubbish, debris, dead animals or litter of any kind for disposal or dumping without the written permission of the district commander. For the purposes of this section, the owner of any garbage, trash, rubbish, debris, dead animals or litter of any kind shall be presumed to be responsible for proper disposal. Such presumption will be sufficient to issue a citation for violation. 
(c)  The spilling, pumping, discharge or disposal of contaminants, pollutants or other wastes, including, but not limited to, human or animal waste, petroleum, industrial and commercial products and by-products, on project lands or into project waters is prohibited. 
(d)  Campers, picnickers, and all other persons using a water resources development project shall keep their sites free of trash and litter during the period of occupancy and shall remove all personal equipment and clean their sites upon departure. 
(e)  The discharge or placing of sewage, galley waste, garbage, refuse, or pollutants into the project waters from any vessel or watercraft is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1337, § 4, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 74-35. - Fires. 
(a)  Gasoline and other fuels, except that which is contained in storage tanks of vehicles, vessels, camping equipment, or hand portable containers designed for such purpose, shall not be carried onto or stored on the project without written permission of the district commander or Town of Little Elm Parks and Recreation Director. 
(b)  Fires shall be confined to those areas designated by the district commander or Town of Little Elm Parks and Recreation Director, and shall be contained in fireplaces, grills, or other facilities designated for this purpose. Fires are not permitted on the ground or in hand-made fire rings. Fires shall not be left unattended and must be completely extinguished prior to departure. The burning of materials that produce toxic fumes, including, but not limited to, tires, plastic and other floatation materials or treated wood products is prohibited. The district commander may prohibit open burning of any type for environmental considerations. 
(c)  The gathering of wood is prohibited without written permission of the Town of Little Elm Parks and Recreation Director. The cutting of standing wood, dead or alive is prohibited. 
(d)  Improper disposal of lighted smoking materials, matches or other burning material is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1337, § 4, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 74-36. - Control of animals. 
(a)  No person shall bring or allow dogs, cats, or other pets into developed recreation areas or adjacent waters unless penned, caged, on a leash, or otherwise physically restrained. No person shall allow animals to impede or restrict otherwise full and free use of project lands and waters by the public. No person shall allow animals to bark or emit other noise which unreasonably disturbs other people. Animals and pets, except properly trained animals assisting those with disabilities (such as seeing-eye dogs), are prohibited in sanitary facilities, playgrounds, swimming beaches and any other areas so designated by the district commander. Abandonment of any animal on project lands or waters is prohibited. Unclaimed or unattended animals are subject to immediate impoundment and removal in accordance with state and local laws. 
(b)  No person shall bring any animal or pet in or on any designated playground, swimming beach or volleyball court areas. 
(c)  Persons bringing or allowing pets in designated public use areas shall be responsible for proper removal and disposal of any waste produced by these animals. 
(d)  No person shall bring or allow horses, cattle, or other livestock in camping, picnicking, swimming or other recreation areas or on trails except in areas designated by the district commander or the Town of Little Elm Parks and Recreation Director. 
(e)  Ranging, grazing, watering or allowing livestock on project lands and waters is prohibited except when authorized by lease, license or other written agreement with the district commander. 
(f)  Unauthorized livestock are subject to impoundment and removal in accordance with federal, state and local laws. 
(g)  Any animal impounded under the provisions of this section may be confined at a location designated by the district commander or the Town of Little Elm Animal Services Department, who may assess a reasonable impoundment fee. This fee shall be paid before the impounded animal is returned to its owner(s). 
(h)  Wild or exotic pets and animals (including but not limited to cougars, lions, bears, bobcats, wolves, and snakes), or any pets or animals displaying vicious or aggressive behavior or otherwise posing a threat to public safety or deemed a public nuisance, are prohibited from project lands and waters unless authorized by the district commander, and are subject to removal in accordance with federal, state and local laws. 
(Ord. No. 1337, § 4, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 74-37. - Restrictions. 
(a)  The district commander or Town of Little Elm Parks and Recreation Director may establish and post a schedule of visiting hours and/or restrictions on the public use of a project or portion of a project. The district commander or Town of Little Elm Parks and Recreation Director may close or restrict the use of a project or portion of a project when necessitated by reason of public health, public safety, maintenance, resource protection or other reasons in the public interest. Entering or using a project in a manner which is contrary to the schedule of visiting hours, closures or restrictions is prohibited. 
(b)  Quiet shall be maintained in all public use areas in accordance with the Town of Little Elm Noise Ordinance (article III, section 70-55) or those hours designated by the district commander, Town of Little Elm Parks and Recreation Director, or police chief. Excessive noise during such times which unreasonably disturbs persons is prohibited. 
(c)  Any act or conduct by any person which interferes with, impedes or disrupts the use of the project or impairs the safety of any person is prohibited. Individuals who are boisterous, rowdy, disorderly, or otherwise disturb the peace on project lands or waters may be requested to leave the project. 
(d)  The operation or use of any sound-producing or motorized equipment, including but not limited to, generators, vessels or vehicles, in such a manner as to unreasonably annoy or endanger persons at any time or exceed state or local laws governing noise levels from motorized equipment is prohibited unless authorized by the Town of Little Elm Parks and Recreation Director. 
(e)  Unless authorized by the district commander, smoking is prohibited in visitor centers, enclosed park buildings and in areas posted to restrict smoking. 
(Ord. No. 1337, § 4, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 74-38. - Explosives, firearms, other weapons and fireworks. 
    The possession of loaded firearms, ammunition, loaded projectile firing devices, bows and arrows, crossbows, or other weapons is prohibited unless: 
(1)  In the possession of a federal, state or local law enforcement officer; 
(2)  Being used for hunting or fishing as permitted under 327.8, with devices being unloaded when transported to, from or between hunting and fishing sites; 
(3)  Being used at authorized shooting ranges; 
(4)  Permission has been received from the district commander, Town of Little Elm Parks and Recreation Director, or chief of police; or 
(5)  Possession of explosives or explosive devices of any kind, including fireworks or other pyrotechnics, is prohibited unless written permission has been received from the district commander, Town of Little Elm Parks and Recreation Director or chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 1337, § 4, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 74-39. - Public property. 
(a)  Destruction, injury, defacement, removal or any alteration of public property including, but not limited to, developed facilities, natural formations, mineral deposits, historical and archaeological features, paleontological resources, boundary monumentation or markers and vegetative growth, is prohibited except when in accordance with written permission of the district commander. 
(b)  Cutting or gathering of trees or parts of trees and/or the removal of wood from project lands is prohibited without written permission of the district commander. 
(c)  Gathering of dead wood on the ground for use in designated recreation areas as firewood is permitted, unless prohibited and posted by the district commander. 
(Ord. No. 1337, § 4, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 74-40. - Abandonment and impoundment of personal property. 
(a)  Personal property of any kind shall not be abandoned, stored or left unattended upon project lands or waters. After a period of 48 hours, or at any time after a posted closure hour in a public use area or for the purpose of providing public safety or resource protection, unattended personal property shall be presumed to be abandoned and may be impounded and stored at a storage point designated by the chief of police, who may assess a reasonable impoundment fee. Such fee shall be paid before the impounded property is returned to its owner. 
(b)  Personal property placed on federal lands or waters adjacent to a private residence, facility and/or developments of any private nature for more than 48 hours without permission of the district commander shall be presumed to have been abandoned and, unless proven otherwise, such presumption will be sufficient to impound the property and/or issue a citation. 
(Ord. No. 1337, § 4, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 74-41. - Advertisement. 
(a)  Advertising and the distribution of printed matter is allowed within project land and waters provided that a permit to do so has been issued by the district commander or the Town of Little Elm Parks and Recreation Director and provided that this activity is not solely commercial advertising. 
(b)  An application for such a permit shall set forth the name of the applicant, the name of the organization (if any), the date, time, duration, and location of the proposed advertising or the distribution of printed matter, the number of participants, and any other information required by the permit application form. Permit conditions and procedures are available from the district commander or the Town of Little Elm Parks and Recreation Director. 
(c)  Vessels and vehicles with semi-permanent or permanent painted or installed signs are exempt as long as they are used for authorized recreational activities and comply with all other rules and regulations pertaining to vessels and vehicles. 
(d)  A copy of any permit obtained shall be provided to the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 1337, § 4, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 74-42. - Unauthorized structures. 
(a)  The construction, placement, or existence of any structure (including, but not limited to, roads, trails, signs, non-portable hunting stands or blinds, buoys, docks, or landscape features) of any kind under, upon, in or over the project lands, or waters is prohibited unless a permit, lease, license or other appropriate written authorization has been issued by the district commander, Town of Little Elm Parks and Recreation Director or chief of police. The design, construction, placement, existence or use of structures in violation of the terms of the permit, lease, license, or other written authorization is prohibited. The government shall not be liable for the loss of or damage to, any private structures, whether authorized or not, placed on project lands or waters. Unauthorized structures are subject to summary removal or impoundment by the chief of police. Portable hunting stands, climbing devices, steps, or blinds that are not nailed or screwed into trees and are removed at the end of a day's hunt may be used. 
(b)  The set-up and/or use of tents or similar items are prohibited in and around the swimming beach, volleyball courts and any other areas where prohibited or posted unless authorized by the Town of Little Elm Parks and Recreation Director. 
(Ord. No. 1337, § 4, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 74-43. - Written permission. 
(a)  A copy of any permit, lease, license or other appropriate written authorization by the district commander when required by the provisions of this article, upon issuance shall be provided to the chief of police. 
(b)  At all times while on project waters or lands, a copy of any permit, lease, license or other appropriate written authorization by the district commander shall be carried by and in the possession of the person to whom it was issued and shall be made available for inspection by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 1337, § 4, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 74-44. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  The chief of police and/or parks and recreation director is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of this article. 
(b)  Jurisdiction for any violation of the provisions of this article shall be in the Little Elm Municipal Court unless otherwise provided by state law. 
(Ord. No. 1337, § 4, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 74-45. - Penalty and enforcement. 
(a)  Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision or requirement of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $2,000.00 for each offense relating to fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, including dumping refuse, nor to exceed $500.00 for each offense for all other violations, unless otherwise provided by state law. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation or failure to comply occurs or continues to occur. 
(b)  Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state is not required for the proof of an offense or conviction of an offense defined by this article. 
(c)  The chief of police and/or the parks and recreation director shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this article and to eject from any park any person in violation of this article. The chief of police shall have the authority to issue citations in accordance. 
(Ord. No. 1337, § 4, 7-5-2016) 
Secs. 74-46-74-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ATHLETIC ACTIVITES 

Sec. 74-52. - Purpose. 
    This article is hereby adopted to serve as a guide for the comprehensive and effective usage of the athletic/recreational facilities owned, leased, scheduled or otherwise controlled by the town. 
Sec. 74-53. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of this article to provide a basis for establishing the following objectives: 
(1)  A method of communicating the available inventory of allocable athletic/recreational facilities to qualified requesters for usage of those facilities; 
(2)  The implementation of a system of facilities allocation producing results most beneficial to the total town; and 
(3)  A program for continuously improving the utilization of existing facilities to the betterment of the total town. 
Sec. 74-54. - Responsibility of CDC board exercising parks and recreation functions. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the CDC board to: 
(1)  Periodically audit and review the effectiveness of this policy; 
(2)  Evaluate problems encountered by users and/or requesters of facilities; and 
(3)  Recommend changes to this policy to the town council at those times as it or the council deems necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1265, § 2, 2-3-2015) 
Sec. 74-55. - Athletic/recreational facilities allocations; fees. 
(a)  Allocations. 
(1)  Organizations or associations conducting organized leagues requiring facilities for practice and/or league games will submit in writing their registration figures when requested by the parks and recreation department upon which all athletic/recreational facilities allocations will be based. Each organization must submit final registration two calendar weeks prior to the designated start of the specific sport season. If actual registration numbers are less than the estimated registration numbers, the parks and recreation department may reduce the organization's facility allocations in order to ensure an equitable allocation of facilities to all organizations. Final league schedule must be submitted one week prior to start of season. 
(2)  The parks and recreation department shall consider all requests for facilities and allocate available facilities in the best interest of the total town. Factors and steps to be considered shall include but not be limited to the following: 
a.  Fire consideration will be given to programs based on the primary season. Efforts will be made to accommodate new programs according the facility availability. The town will only recognize one association per sport. 
b.  First priority will be given to those individuals, teams and groups whose members and/or participants live, work and participate in a bona fide church league within the town corporate limits. 
(3)  All request will be reviewed and facilities allocated in the most equitable manner possible. 
(4)  Any organization, prior to organizing a new sports program or association, must meet with the parks and recreation department at least 90 days prior to the proposed season starting date to discuss the availability of facilities. New athletic programs must be approved by the CDC board. Failure to comply with this provision will result in refusal of usage. 
(b)  Fees. 
(1)  The town council has determined that it is necessary and proper to establish and levy fees to be charged sports leagues for the allocation of the town's sports athletic/recreational facilities. 
(2)  Every adult league or organization requesting athletic or recreational facilities allocation under subsection (a) of this section shall pay a team fee. 
(3)  It shall be the responsibility of each sponsoring organization to collect all sport facility maintenance fees and to submit these fees and individual/team rosters to the parks and recreation department no later than two weeks after the start of each season. 
(Ord. No. 1265, § 3, 2-3-2015) 
Sec. 74-56. - Insurance requirement. 
    Organizations or associations conducting organized leagues and seeking the use of and allocation of town athletic/recreational facilities must provide to the town (and keep in force for the duration of the playing season) general liability insurance written by an insurance company acceptable to the town's risk manager. This insurance must have insurance limits of not less than $500,000.00 CSL (combined single limit). The insurance certificate must list the town as an additional insured with a notice of cancellation clause of not less than 30 days. The town will prohibit games being played until an approved certificate of insurance has been received by the town. 
Sec. 74-57. - Audits. 
    At the completion of league play, each association, upon the request of any participant, must submit a financial statement for review. 
Sec. 74-58. - Violation of provisions; refusal of scheduled usage of facilities. 
    Any person or group violating any provision of this article or the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this article may be refused the scheduled usage of athletic/recreational facilities. 
Sec. 74-59. - Enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Officials. The director of parks and recreation, park attendants designated by the director and the police department, shall, in connection with their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Ejectment. The director, park attendants designated by the director and any member of the police department shall have the authority to eject from the park any person acting in violation of this chapter. 
(c)  Seizure of property. The director, park attendants designated by the director or any member of the police department shall have the authority to seize and confiscate any property, thing or device in the park or used in violation of this chapter. 
Sec. 74-60. - Penalty. 
    Any person or group violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-10. 
ARTICLE IV. - SENIOR CENTER AND COMMUNITY RECREATION CENTER[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1114, § 2, adopted Sept. 18, 2012, amended art. IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. IV, §§ 74-61-74-63, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Ord. No. 1099, § 2, adopted Apr. 3, 2012. 

Sec. 74-61. - Purpose. 
    This article is hereby adopted to serve as a guide for the comprehensive and effective usage of the senior center and community recreation center. 
(Ord. No. 1114, § 2, 9-18-2012) 
Sec. 74-62. - Community recreation center fees. 
(a)  Hours of operation. 
Monday-Thursday 6:00 a.m.-10:00 p.m. Friday 6:00 a.m.-9:00 p.m. Saturday 9:00 a.m.-6:00 p.m. Sunday Noon-6:00 p.m.  
(b)  Memberships. 
(1)  Residency for membership at the Little Elm Recreation Center is determined by Little Elm city limits. Those individuals living outside Little Elm city limits, but whose children attend Little Elm schools, are considered nonresidents. 
Proof of residency for all members must be shown at the time of registration and before receiving a photo ID. A current driver's license, utility bill or an insurance card may all be used to show proof of residency. 
Little Elm Independent School District (LEISD) employees will be charged a membership fee at the adult resident rate. Proof of employment must be shown at the time of registration and before receiving a photo ID. A current LEISD employee photo or current pay stub with a current driver's license may be used to show proof of employment. 
Town of Little Elm staff will be charged a membership fee at the adult resident rate. Proof of employment must be shown at the time of registration and before receiving a photo ID. A current employee photo or current pay stub with a current driver's license may be used to show proof of employment. 
(2)  Membership types. 
Youth - A youth is defined as an individual two-17 years of age. A child under the age of two does not require a membership or usage fee. 
Adult - An adult is defined as an individual 18 years or age and older. 
Senior - A senior adult is defined as 50 years of age or older. 
Family - A family is considered all those members living at the same address. Individuals must be able to show proof of permanent residency at that address. 
Daily/guest - A daily pass gives an individual access to all self-directed aspects of the facility and all group exercise classes for the day available within their age limits. 
Student membership - This pass is for college students to attend the recreation center during the summer months. A valid college ID is required to purchase this pass. This pass is valid May 15-August 15 only. This pass is nontransferable to other pass types or people. 
(c)  Recreation center membership rates. 
RESIDENT MONTHLY RATE ANNUAL RATE Youth (2-17 years) $15.00 $135.00 Adult (18-49 years) $20.00 $170.00 Senior (50+ years) $15.00 $135.00 Family (up to 6 members living at same residence) $45.00 $420.00 NONRESIDENT MONTHLY RATE ANNUAL RATE Youth (2-17 years) $25.00 $230.00 Adult (18-49 years) $30.00 $255.00 Senior (50+ years) $25.00 $230.00 Family (up to 6 members living at same residence) $70.00 $650.00 DAILY GUESTS RESIDENT RATE NONRESIDENT RATE Youth (2-17 years) $3.00 $5.00 Adult (18-49 years) $5.00 $7.00 Senior (50+ years) $3.00 $5.00 STUDENT MEMBERSHIP AGES RESIDENT RATE Student - valid 5/15 to 8/15 18 and up $45.00  
(d)  Boat ramp user fees-Little Elm Park. 
  RESIDENT FEE NONRESIDENT FEE Season Pass (January - December) $25.00 $75.00 Daily Rate $10.00 $10.00  
(e)  Tent camping fees-Little Elm Park. 
Daily Rate $5.00 per day Four consecutive days (maximum) $15.00 Camping-Nonprofit No fee - based on one event per year  
(Ord. No. 1114, § 2, 9-18-2012; Ord. No. 1209, § 3(Exh. A), 3-4-2014; Ord. No. 1274, § 2, 3-3-2015) 
Sec. 74-63. - Facility and community room reservation rates. 
(a)  Community center, amphitheater, pavilion. 
FACILITY RESIDENT FEE NONRESIDENT FEE NONPROFIT FEE DEPOSIT Community Center $25.00 per hour ($100.00 minimum/$200.00 maximum) $50.00 per hour ($200.00 minimum/$400.00 maximum) $25.00 per day 
(2 times per month maximum) $100.00 Community Center - Community or Civic Group No fee - based on 1 monthly rental for meetings, M-Th only, unless approved by Parks Director. If party - then $25.00 per day fee will be charged. N/A $100.00 per party $0.00 for meetings Little Elm Park Amphitheater $50.00 per hour ($200.00 minimum/$400.00 maximum) $75.00 per hour ($300.00 minimum/$600.00 maximum) N/A $200.00 Little Elm Park Pavilions $20.00 per hour (2-hour minimum) $150.00 per day (8:00 a.m. - 12:00 a.m.) $30.00 per hour (2-hour minimum) $200.00 per day (8:00 a.m. - 12:00 a.m.) N/A $100.00 Little Elm Park Pavilions - Community or Civic Group $10.00 per hour (2-hour minimum) $75.00 per day (8:00 a.m. - 12:00 a.m.) $20.00 per hour (2-hour minimum) $100.00 per day (8:00 a.m. -12:00 a.m.) N/A $100.00  
(b)  Little Elm Recreation Center. 
AREA MEMBER FEE NON-MEMBER FEE NONPROFIT FEE DEPOSIT Craft Room $20.00 per hour $40.00 per hour N/A $50.00 Classroom $20.00 per hour $40.00 per hour N/A $50.00 Multi-Purpose Room with Kitchen $40.00 per hour $60.00 per hour N/A $100.00 Gymnasium 
Half-Court $50.00 per hour $70.00 per hour N/A $100.00 Gymnasium 
Full-Court $100.00 per hour $125.00 per hour N/A $100.00  
(c)  Athletic fields. 
FACILITY RESIDENT FEE NONRESIDENT FEE TOURNAMENT FEE* LIGHTS Little Elm Park Softball Fields $30.00 per hour $35.00 per hour $400.00 per day/resident 
$450.00 per day/nonresident $20.00 per hour FACILITY RESIDENT FEE NONRESIDENT FEE TOURNAMENT FEE* LIGHTS Little Elm Park Soccer Fields $30.00 per hour $35.00 per hour N/A $20.00 per hour Cottonwood Park Baseball/Softball Fields $30.00 per hour $35.00 per hour $800.00 per day/resident 
$900.00 per day/nonresident $20.00 per hour Little Elm Park Sand Volleyball Courts $15.00 per hour $25.00 per hour $1,000.00 per day N/A  
Field preparation available for an additional charge. 
* Proof of liability insurance required. Gate fees negotiated with parks director. 
(Ord. No. 1114, § 2, 9-18-2012; Ord. No. 1209, § 3(Exh. A), 3-4-2014) 
Secs. 74-64-74-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - UTILIZATION OF PARKS AND ATHLETIC FACILITIES AND REGULATIONS REGARDING ATHLETIC ORGANIZATIONS 

Sec. 74-70. - Youth sports. 
(a)  The town shall officially select and recognize the organization or organizations coordinating the youth athletic community within the town. Currently, the Little Elm Area Youth Sports Association ("LEAYSA") is the organization coordinating the youth athletic community. The town may, at any time and for any reason, choose to designate another organization to coordinating some or all of the youth athletic community within the town. The organization or organizations coordinating the youth athletic community within the town shall hereinafter be referred to as a "sports organization" or "sports organizations." 
(b)  A sports organization's governing board or governing body shall operate according to the terms of this chapter 74. 
(c)  A sports organization's by-laws shall include, among other items, provisions for regular meetings as may be deemed necessary by the town, a requirement that records of its proceedings be open to the public, and a requirement that reports be provided to the town at regular intervals. 
(d)  The sports organization shall receive and retain it's 501(c)3 status. 
(e)  A sports organization shall provide that the town's recreation manager, or the recreation manager's designee, shall be an ex-officio member of the sports organization, who shall be authorized to attend regular meetings of the sports organization in order to represent the interest of the town in all aspects as they may relate to the town's parks and recreation facilities. 
(f)  Athletic organization meetings may be held biannually by the town to discuss issues relating to sports in the town. The designated contact person for each sports organization shall be required to attend such meetings. 
(g)  Each sports organization shall inform the parks and recreation department of all requests made to the Little Elm School District for use of a sports facility. 
(h)  The sports organization shall provide the parks and recreation department a complete listing of all individuals serving as head and assistant coaches, as well as background check verification for all coaches by the timeline specified on the document checklist provided by the town. 
(Ord. No. 1317, § 2, 3-1-2016) 
Sec. 74-71. - Premises. 
(a)  The town will provide facilities and game fields for sports associations associated with the town, with priority given to the sports organizations. A sports organization shall coordinate with the town to identify field requests for each season of play as soon as practical and not less than 30 days prior to the beginning of practice for the respective season. 
(b)  A sports organization's teams can begin utilizing town facilities and fields no more than 30 days prior to the sport's primary season. 
(c)  Use of athletic facilities and fields may be adjusted from time to time by the town, generally based on the regular seasons of a sports organization. After consultation with the sports organization, the town shall determine the most appropriate premises and field allocations. The town shall have the sole discretion to allocate premises and field usage in the manner in which it deems to be in the best interest of the town. 
(Ord. No. 1317, § 2, 3-1-2016) 
Sec. 74-72. - Seasons and hours. 
(a)  Usage of lights and fields may be modified with prior notification and approval from the director of the parks and recreation department or his/her designee. 
(b)  The town shall make a good faith effort to coordinate with the sports organizations in determining the appropriate premises and field use dates. Such dates are subject to the approval of and modification by the town. 
(Ord. No. 1317, § 2, 3-1-2016) 
Sec. 74-73. - Fees and assignments. 
(a)  Sports organizations shall not charge any fees for admission of spectators without prior written approval of the parks and recreation director or his/her designee. By way of example only, the parks and recreation department may approve the charging of and admission at a sports organization's tournament. No sports organizations shall assign or rent out, or allow any other individual or group to use, any property of the town including, without limitation, town premises, without prior written consent of the town. 
(b)  Sports organizations shall charge reasonable fees for programs offered at town facilities. 
(c)  Sports groups which are current members of a sports organization will not be required to pay any fee with regard to scheduling. 
(d)  If requested by the town, a sports organization must submit to the town a copy of its federal tax return and annual financial statements, which shall include the number of participants within the sports organization. Such information shall be submitted by the timeline specified by the town. If a review of documents is requested and/ or needed during the operation of the league, the party/parties requesting the audit must pay for the audit. 
(Ord. No. 1317, § 2, 3-1-2016) 
Sec. 74-74. - Unlawful activities. 
    Sports organizations shall not engage in any activities on town parks and recreation property which are in violation of any existing state, federal and/or local law, and/or use any town premises in such a manner as to unreasonably interfere with the use of the premises by others engaged in lawful activities. 
(Ord. No. 1317, § 2, 3-1-2016) 
Sec. 74-75. - Permission for installation or construction. 
(a)  Each sports organization, in accordance with the town's donation policies, shall submit to the town, for written approval, any proposal to install and/or construct temporary and/or permanent structures, signs, equipment, fences and/or other items on town premises. 
(b)  Permanent structures installed or constructed by a sports organization on town premises shall become the property of the town. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent a sports organization and the town from entering into a written agreement regarding endorsements, or other activities not specifically regulated under this chapter. 
(c)  Modifications to the structure of park facilities including, but not limited to, concession stands, storage facilities and playing surfaces are strictly prohibited without the express written consent of the director of the parks and recreation department or his/her designee. This includes, but is not limited to, screws, bolts or anchors in walls; additional fixtures; counter top changes; and the mounting of items from the ceilings in concession stands or storage facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1317, § 2, 3-1-2016) 
Sec. 74-76. - Concessions. 
(a)  The town may allocate specific vending facilities for use by a sports organization. Such allocation of facilities is at the sole discretion of the town. 
(b)  A sports organization may utilize the beverage or food vendor of their choice until such time as the town enters into an agreement for the provision of a specific concessionaire, vendor or vended item(s) for a park facility utilized by the sports organization. The town shall provide 30 days' notice to a sports organization regarding the effective date of such an agreement and the sports organization agrees that it will cease using any other vendor and will cease selling any vended item(s) which would be incompatible with the town's concessionaire(s) and/or vendor(s) agreement. 
(c)  Sports organizations shall operate allocated concession stands, and all revenues generated from such use shall be for the sole and exclusive use of the sports organization, unless there is an outside tournament or event. Fees for an outside tournament or event shall be negotiated on a per event basis with the town. The sports organization shall be responsible for any items stolen or damaged during the course of the year, and shall promptly replace or pay for the same. During use of a concession stand, the sports organization shall have signage identifying that the operation of the concession stand is by the sports organization. 
(d)  A sports organization may assist in repairing and replacing minor items inside a concession stand such as light bulbs, etc. A sports organization using a concession stand, however, shall be responsible to maintain, repair and replace concession stand equipment. 
(e)  A sports organization shall be responsible to ensure that any concession stand used by the sports organization passes all inspections required by the town's health official. All health permits shall be posted in the concession stand. Sports organizations shall abide by and comply with any and all local and state health code requirements for food services and any and all other standards of the town related to food. 
(f)  Sports organizations shall clear the area near a concession stand of all trash, garbage, paper, containers, litter, etc., generated by use of the concession stand. A dumpster and trash receptacles will be provided by the town for use by the sports organization. 
(g)  Sports organizations shall be responsible for keeping only essential concession stand appliances (specifically, refrigerators, freezers and ice machines) operational during non-operating hours. Air conditioners and lights shall be turned off when a concessions stand is not in use. Sports organizations shall be responsible for the upkeep and maintenance of all sports organization-owned equipment used at or in conjunction with the use of a concession stand. 
(h)  Sports organizations are prohibited from storing toxic or hazardous materials in any part of the storage area of a concession stand. 
(i)  Sports organizations shall be responsible for securing insurance for any equipment, inventory and/or any other item(s) owned by the sports organization and used at or in conjunction with the use of a concession stand. 
(j)  The town reserves the right to utilize any concession stand when not in use by a sports organization. The town agrees to provide 24 hours' notice to the sports organization prior to such use. 
(k)  Sports organizations may be required to remove all food, drinks and related condiments from all concession stands within one week after the conclusion of the season(s) and shall perform a thorough cleaning of the entirety of the concession stands. 
(l)  Sports organizations shall have the first right of refusal on operating a concession stand. If a sports organization determines not to operate a concession stand, the town will select private concessionaires and/or vendors to operate the concession stand in any manner authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 1317, § 2, 3-1-2016) 
Sec. 74-77. - Documents and officers. 
(a)  Sports organizations shall submit the following to the parks and recreation department prior to the use of any town athletic field: 
(1)  A current copy of the sports organization's by-laws, rules and regulations, and charter and/or constitution (with any amendments thereto) that have been approved by the general membership of sports organization; 
(2)  A current copy of the sports organization's annual budget (and any amendments thereto) that has been approved by the general membership of the sports organization; 
(3)  A current copy of the sports organization's annual financial statements as prepared by accountant; 
(4)  A current certificate of liability insurance with the town shown as an additional insured, as well as any other organization as required for facility usage; 
(5)  A current listing of telephone, email, and any other contact information for all members of the sports organization, designating which members are on the board of directors and/or officers for the sports organization. 
(b)  The parks and recreation department shall submit to each sports organization the names, addresses and phone numbers of all appropriate contacts of the parks and recreation department. 
(Ord. No. 1317, § 2, 3-1-2016) 
Sec. 74-78. - Rosters and schedules. 
(a)  All sports organizations shall submit to the parks and recreation department rosters of all of its participant's names, mailing addresses, and a listing of the full schedule for each season for each sport. The rosters shall be submitted after completion of sports registration, and the full sports schedule shall be submitted to the parks and recreation department at least seven business days prior to the first regular season game or practice season, whichever comes first. All sports organization shall provide to town the beginning and ending dates for that particular sports' season. 
(b)  Youth sports teams that utilize a selection process, other than an open draft, to form teams and/or participate in competitive, and/or select, and/or club associations must reserve facilities through the parks and recreation department. 
(c)  Parks and recreation department maintenance crews will require a minimum of 24 hours prior notice of rescheduled tournament games by any sports organization. If the required 24-hour notice is not received, the town may decline to prepare fields for such use. 
(d)  Changes to any game, practice or tournament schedule must be submitted by the sports organization to the parks and recreation department before the changes are to be implemented. 
(e)  In the event that a game is canceled due to rain or other inclement weather event, no sports organization may move the game to another field without the prior approval of the parks and recreation director or his/her designee. 
(f)  The town reserves the right to utilize town premises for any purpose when a sports organization approved activity is not scheduled. 
(g)  If a sports organization fails to use town premises for its designated and scheduled activities, the sports organization may forfeit future scheduled time or be charged for the town's time spent in preparing the premises for use. 
(h)  Youth sports organizations which are current members of a sports organization shall be given priority over non-members in scheduling the use of town premises. 
(Ord. No. 1317, § 2, 3-1-2016) 
Sec. 74-79. - Field manager. 
    Sports organizations shall designate at least one field manager for each specific sport. Sports organizations shall furnish the parks and recreation department the name(s) and telephone number(s) of each person(s) designated as field manager(s). It shall be the responsibility of the field manager to meet with and discuss field conditions with a parks and recreation department representative. It shall also be the responsibility of the field manager to submit a work order form to the parks and recreation department to request any maintenance, repairs or supplies. The parks and recreation department shall, in its sole discretion, determine whether the town will complete the work requested in the submitted work order form. before the beginning of each sports season, the sports organization field manager shall meet with the parks and recreation director, or his/her designee, to be briefed on maintenance procedures and techniques. 
(Ord. No. 1317, § 2, 3-1-2016) 
Sec. 74-80. - Insurance. 
(a)  Every sports organization, at its own cost and expense, shall obtain and keep in force public liability insurance for the purpose of protecting the sports organization (and its officials, players, members, officers, spectators, participants, invitees, representatives, volunteers, agents, and/or servants) and the town (and all town agents, officials, servants, representatives and employees and/or volunteers) from any and all claims for damages to property and/or injury to person (including death) which may arise from and/or out of the sports organization's use and/or occupation of town premises, and any incidents(s) related thereto. All insurance shall be issued by a company duly authorized to conduct business in the State of Texas, which is A-rated or better, and is determined to be acceptable by the town's finance department. 
(b)  Every sports organization must procure and maintain insurance limits as listed in the town's standard insurance requirements. At a minimum, the requirements shall include workers compensation, general liability and automotive. Policy limits and requirements are detailed in the town's standard insurance requirements. 
(c)  All insurance policies shall be subject to the examination and approval of the town's finance director or his/her designee for their adequacy as to content, protection and the named insurance company. Every sports organization shall furnish to town copies of such certificates of insurance prior to the commencement of any activities by the sports organization at town premises. 
(Ord. No. 1317, § 2, 3-1-2016) 
Sec. 74-81. - Public address system. 
    Sports organizations shall comply with the town's noise ordinances and noise requirements at all times. 
(Ord. No. 1317, § 2, 3-1-2016) 
Sec. 74-82. - Commissioner. 
    Each sports organization shall provide and require that a representative be on-site at each sports organization's league or tournament game held and/or conducted on town premises. 
(Ord. No. 1317, § 2, 3-1-2016) 
Sec. 74-83. - On-site signage and advertising. 
(a)  Each sports organization shall be responsible for contacting and receiving approval from the parks and recreation director, or his/her designee, for all signage requests prior to placing any sponsor and/or advertising signage on town premises. The town shall have the final authority to determine where signage can or cannot appear on town premises. 
(b)  Signs may be installed not earlier than one week prior to the competition season. All signs are to be removed not later than one week after the completion of the season. 
(c)  Signs shall be in good taste and not promote alcohol, tobacco or nudity. The town shall be the sole and exclusive arbiter of whether a sign is in good taste and whether the sign promotes alcohol, tobacco or nudity. 
(d)  Each sports organization shall be responsible to properly install, remove and maintain their signage. Signs must remain in good quality condition and must not pose a hazard to participants or spectators. 
(Ord. No. 1317, § 2, 3-1-2016) 
Sec. 74-84. - Maintenance for public fields. 
(a)  The town shall maintain the athletic fields and all turf areas of the playing fields, and shall be responsible for mowing, weed control, fertilizing and herbicide spraying. 
(b)  The town shall mark all game fields from the grass area to the foul pole. The town shall also mark all soccer game fields. 
(c)  The town shall chalk athletic fields once a day for field rentals (games only) prior to first games. 
(d)  The sports organization is responsible for chalking/marking baseball and softball fields with a parks and recreation approved product. The sports organization must provide its own town-approved marking product. The town will provide equipment for chalking/marking the fields. 
(e)  The town shall maintain all bleachers. 
(f)  The town shall provide and maintain all area and ball field lighting systems. 
(g)  The town shall be responsible for the maintenance of any irrigation system and watering systems, and for the watering of the outfield areas. 
(h)  The town shall maintain the restrooms in a sanitary condition. The town will stock restrooms. The sports organization is responsible for helping keep restrooms clean and restocking the restrooms on game day as necessary. The town will provide all supplies for cleaning and restocking. 
(i)  The town shall be responsible for all public scoreboards. The sports organization shall maintain and provide any repairs to the scoreboard control boxes and pay for replacement of the scoreboard control boxes if misplaced or lost by the sports organization. 
(j)  The sports organization shall be responsible for daily game day collection of all litter on the fields including, but not be limited to, playing areas, fences, bleachers, concession stands and adjacent grounds. The sports organization shall be responsible to provide that all litter is placed in the dumpsters provided by the town. The town shall provide trash pick-up service for these dumpsters. The sports organization shall be responsible to provide that no trash is left outside of the concession stands and that all trash is placed with a dumpster. 
(k)  The sports organization is prohibited from performing any maintenance to any turf without written permission from the town. 
(l)  The sports organization shall ensure that all secured areas remain locked at the completion of each activity. 
(m)  The sports organization shall provide for any special needs or services such as port-a-cans, security, traffic control devices, or police officers needed as a result of the sports organization's use of town facilities. 
(n)  The sports organization shall recognize the town's inclement weather policy, which provides, among other reasons, the following bases for athletic field closure and postponement: (1) raining at or before game time creating an unplayable facility; and (2) athletic fields for which it is determined need to be closed in the interest of participant safety and/or preservation of good playing surfaces. 
(o)  The parks and recreation director, or his/her designee, will take responsibility for making a decision on athletic field closure and postponement based upon field conditions, weather and/or any other reason deemed appropriate by the parks and recreation director, or his/her designee. 
(p)  After games have begun and inclement weather becomes a factor, the sports organization shall follow the same guidelines set forth herein in deciding whether to cancel and/or postpone any game. 
(q)  In the event of lightning and/or thunder, all participants and spectators must vacate playing fields, bleachers, and other unsafe areas. These areas are to remain vacated for a minimum of 30 minutes after the last observed lightning event and/or hearing of thunder. 
(Ord. No. 1317, § 2, 3-1-2016) 
Sec. 74-85. - Equipment list and requirements. 
(a)  Keys and/or lock codes will be distributed to sports organizations at the beginning of the season, or the implementation of a rental agreement, to the main gates, fields, lights, and buildings to be used by the sports organization. These keys must be returned to the parks and recreation department within one week of the conclusion of the regular season or rental, unless approved by parks and recreation director. 
(b)  The sports organization is responsible for the care of all keys distributed to it. If a key is misplaced or lost, the sports organization will be solely responsible for any costs involved with changing the locks and/or replacing keys. 
(c)  The town shall not be responsible for any loss of and/or damage to any and all equipment and/or any other item(s) stored in the storage areas by the sports organization. 
(Ord. No. 1317, § 2, 3-1-2016) 
Sec. 74-86. - Athletic facility use. 
(a)  There shall be a two-week period between the conclusion of one league and the beginning of another league, providing the leagues are playing on multi-use facilities. Leagues must honor days and time allotted for facilities, and must relinquish all facilities for other scheduled activities. 
(b)  All associations and coaches shall undertake good faith efforts to ensure that all participants and spectators park in designated parking areas. 
(c)  Individual teams and associations must find their own workout areas. The town shall only furnish facilities for approved sports organizations. 
(d)  Any sports organization that is affiliated with a national and/or state association shall submit its rules and guidelines to the parks and recreation department. 
(e)  No sports organization shall sublease fields to any association or group not recognized by the town. 
(f)  A sports organization shall be allowed to interlock with like organizations upon approval from the parks and recreation director, or his/her designee. 
(g)  Failure to comply with the rules and guidelines established by this chapter by a sports organization may result in the loss of use of sports facilities and related privileges by the sports organization. The parks and recreation department director may restrict the use of assigned facilities by the sports organization until the sports organization is determined to be in compliance with the rules and guidelines established by this chapter. 
(h)  Games and practices are not allowed on fields when "Fields Closed" signs are displayed or when gates are locked. 
(i)  Games and practices shall not be played on muddy fields. 
(j)  No game fields shall be used for practices, tryouts, scrimmages, etc., without the permission of the parks and recreation department. 
(k)  Teams must honor the time allotted for fields and relinquish fields for other scheduled activities. 
(l)  All organized practice utilizing town parks and athletic facilities must be approved through the parks and recreation department. Reservation permits shall be issued to teams renting town athletic facilities. All organized activities must have a reservation permit. At the discretion of the parks and recreation department, organized activities utilizing town athletic facilities without a reservation permit will be asked to vacate the premises, and may be subject to fine up to $500.00 for violation of this provision. 
(m)  The parks and recreation department will maintain all fields to town specifications. Youth sports, personal rentals, and organizations renting athletic fields may request that field lines be marked for an additional fee. 
(n)  All fields will be maintained on a daily basis after an approved schedule of games is provided to the town. All fields will be marked on Friday afternoons for weekend games. 
(o)  All athletic field users must comply with all applicable ordinances, laws, rules, codes, standards and regulations of the town and of any other governmental entity or agency with jurisdiction over town facilities. 
(p)  All athletic fields (i.e., softball, baseball, soccer) are closed the second week in June through the second week in July for annual maintenance. Parks maintenance reserves the right, however, to adjust this schedule as deemed appropriate by parks maintenance. 
(q)  The parks and recreation department director, staff designated by the director, authorized sports organization representatives, and the police department, have the authority to eject anyone causing disruptive or abusive behavior in a town park. 
(r)  The sports organization or other renting party is responsible for picking up trash associated with the event, game or tournament. A fee can be imposed on the sports organization if parks maintenance is required to pick up trash following the event due to the failure of the sports organization to fully clean up the site. Trash receptacles are located within each town park for the sports organization's trash. 
(Ord. No. 1317, § 2, 3-1-2016) 
Sec. 74-87. - Facilities allocation procedures. 
(a)  All athletic facility request forms should be submitted to the parks and recreation department. Final allocation of facilities shall be by the authority and discretion of the parks and recreation department. 
(b)  If conflicts arise, or if an allocation decision is needed, the parks and recreation department will make final allocation decisions. 
(c)  All sports organizations must establish a specific sports season and request approval from the parks and recreation department to expand the season. 
(d)  Town-recognized youth sports association primary seasons shall have priority over practice or tournaments unless the parks and recreation department gives approval through the allocation process. 
(e)  The primary season for use of parks and recreation department facilities shall be as follows: Baseball - Spring/Fall; Basketball - Winter; Softball - Spring/Fall; Soccer - Spring/Fall; Football - Spring/Fall; and Volleyball - Spring/Fall, Cheer - Spring/Fall. 
(f)  All allocation applications must be turned in at least one week prior to regular scheduled meetings. 
(g)  Sports organizations shall select their primary season if they conduct two or more seasons per calendar year. 
(h)  All allocations of facilities shall be determined in the best interests of the town. 
(i)  Teams participating in all-star tournaments or playoffs in their respective leagues must be granted approval by the town prior to the start of practices. 
(Ord. No. 1317, § 2, 3-1-2016) 
Sec. 74-88. - Tournaments. 
(a)  Only two free tournaments per season per sport for youth league play shall be allowed without approval by the parks and recreation department. 
(b)  The town reserves the right to host any regional, state or national tournament, which would take precedence over any other tournament. 
(c)  A sports organization hosting league play-offs must submit in writing the dates they desire to conduct play-off games. 
(d)  Tournament requests must be made in writing by a sports organization, or other nonprofit organization, to the parks and recreation department. Facility request forms may be picked up at the parks and recreation department, which is located in the Recreation Center (303 Main Street, Little Elm, Texas 75068). Tournament approval must be granted by the parks and recreation department before invitations for the tournament are sent out. Approval for association-sponsored tournaments will be contingent upon the sanctioning of town-sponsored tournaments. 
(e)  The proceeds from any tournament must benefit either the sports organization or the town. 
(f)  Residents, nonresidents or companies may request, in writing, to reserve game fields for special occasions or for a nonprofit tournament. Rental fees associated with athletic fields shall be provided on the athletics field rental agreement. 
(Ord. No. 1317, § 2, 3-1-2016) 
Sec. 74-89. - Clinics or camps. 
(a)  All clinics or camps must be approved by the parks and recreation department. 
(b)  Registration procedures must be approved by the parks and recreation department. An agreed upon percentage of gross revenue generated from the camp or clinic will be paid to the town as a user fee. No clinic and camps shall be permitted without the payment of an agreed upon user fee. 
(c)  A request to host a clinic by non-athletic committee members must be submitted to the parks and recreation department 90 days prior to the clinic or camp. 
(d)  Camps/clinics through a sports organization must be scheduled within the sport's primary season. 
(Ord. No. 1317, § 2, 3-1-2016) 
Sec. 74-90. - Special events. 
    The parks and recreation department reserves the right to host any special event, which special event would take precedence over local league play, tournaments, etc. 
(Ord. No. 1317, § 2, 3-1-2016) 
Secs. 74-91-74-115. - Reserved. 
Chapter 82 - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to regulate sexually oriented businesses, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 243.001 et seq. 

Sec. 82-1. - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the purpose of this section to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the town, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the continued concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the town. The provisions of this section have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this section to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 1, 3-16-2004) 
Sec. 82-2. - Definitions. 
    Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purposes of this article, have the meanings indicated in this section. 
    Adult arcade shall mean any commercial establishment to which the public is permitted or invited where, by deposit of money, coin, tokens, or credit an electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machine, projector or other image-producing device shows images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult bookstore or adult video store shall mean a commercial establishment to which the public is permitted or invited which, as its principal business purpose, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or video reproductions, slides or other visual representations which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities (but not including items used for birth control or for the prevention of sexually transmitted diseases). 
    Adult cabaret shall mean a nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial establishment that regularly has: 
(1)  Persons who appear in a state of nudity; 
(2)  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or 
(3)  Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions, closed-circuit television transmissions, cable television transmissions, satellite television transmissions, subscriber programming, any disk, diskette, or other physical medium that allows an image to be displayed on a computer or other video screen and any image transmitted to a computer or other video screen by telephone line, cable satellite transmission or other method, which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult motel shall mean a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that: 
(1)  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides customers with closed circuit television transmissions, cable television transmissions, satellite television transmissions, subscriber programming, any disk, diskette, or other physical medium that allows an image to be displayed on a computer or other video screen and any image transmitted to a computer or other video screen by telephone line, cable, satellite transmission or other method, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from a public right-of-way that advertises the availability of this type of material; 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or 
(4)  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the business is an adult motel. 
    Adult motion picture theater shall mean a commercial establishment to which the public is permitted or invited where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions, any disk, diskette, or other physical medium that allows an image to be displayed on a computer or other video screened and any image transmitted to a computer or other video screen by telephone line, cable, satellite transmission or other method, are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult theater shall mean a theatre, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment to which the public is permitted or invited that regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities. 
    Applicant shall mean a person listed as such on an application for a permit as a sexually oriented business. 
    Building official shall mean the building official and such employees of the building inspection department as the building official may designate to perform the duties of the building official under this section. 
    Conduct any business in a sexually oriented business shall mean any person who does any one or more of the following shall be deemed to be conducting business in a sexually oriented business: 
(1)  Operates a cash register, cash drawer or other depository on the premises of the sexually oriented business where cash funds or records of credit card or other credit transactions generated in any manner by the operation of the sexually oriented business or the activities of the premises of the sexually oriented business; 
(2)  Displays or takes orders from any customer for any merchandise, goods, entertainment or other services offered on the premises of the sexually oriented business; 
(3)  Delivers or provides to any customer any merchandise, goods, entertainment or other services offered on the premises of the sexually oriented businesses; 
(4)  Acts as a door attendant to regulate entry of customers or other persons into the premises of the sexually oriented business; or 
(5)  Supervises or manages other persons in the performance of any of the foregoing activities on the premises of the sexually oriented business. 
    Conviction or convicted shall mean a finding of guilty by a court of record, regardless of whether an appeal is pending. 
    Customer shall mean any person who: 
(1)  Is allowed to enter a sexually oriented business or any portion of a sexually oriented business in return for the payment of an admission fee, membership fee or any other form of consideration or gratuity; 
(2)  Enters a sexually oriented business or any portion of a sexually oriented business and purchases, rents, or otherwise uses or partakes of any merchandise, goods, entertainment or other services offered therein; or 
(3)  Is a member of and on the premises of a sexually oriented business operating as a private or membership club or a sexually oriented business that reserves any portion of the premises of the sexually oriented business as a private or membership club. 
    Employee shall mean any person who renders any service whatsoever to the customers of a sexually oriented business; works in or about a sexually oriented business or who conducts any business in a sexually oriented business and who receives or has the expectation or receiving any compensation from the operator, or customers of the sexually oriented business. By way of example, rather than limitation, the term includes the operator and other management personnel, clerks, dancers, models and other entertainers, food and beverage preparation and service personnel, door person, bouncers and cashiers. It is expressly intended that this definition cover not only conventional employer-employee relationships but also independent contractor relationships, agency relationships, and other scheme or system whereby the "employee" has an expectation of receiving compensation, tips, or other benefits from the sexually oriented business or its customers in exchange for services performed. 
    Entertainer shall mean any employee of a sexually oriented business who performs or engages in entertainment. 
    Entertainment shall mean any act or performance, such as a play, skit, reading, revue, fashion show, modeling performance, pantomime, role playing, encounter session, scene, song, dance, musical rendition or striptease that involves the display or exposure of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. The term "entertainment" shall include any employee or entertainer exposing any specified anatomical areas or engaging in any specified sexual activities whatever in the presence of customers. 
    Escort shall mean a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
    Escort agency shall mean a person or business association who or which furnishes, offers to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as its principal business purpose, for a fee, tip, or other consideration. 
    Licensed day care center shall mean a facility licensed by the state, whether situated within the town or not, that provides care, training, education, custody treatment or supervision for more than six children under 14 years of age, where such children are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility, for less than 24 hours a day, regardless of whether or not the facility is operated for a profit or charges for the services it offers. 
    Manager shall mean any person who supervises, directs or manages any employee of a sexually oriented business or any other person who conducts any business in a sexually oriented business with respect to any activity conducted on the premises of the sexually oriented business, including any on site manager. 
    Nude model business shall mean any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided or allowed to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by another person who pay money or any form of consideration. Nude model business shall not include those activities excepted from the definition of sexually oriented business. 
    Nudity or a state of nudity shall mean: 
(1)  The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or female breast; or 
(2)  A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or female breast from below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
    On-site manager shall mean a person charged by an owner or operator of a sexually oriented business with the responsibility for direct supervision of the operation of the sexually oriented business and with monitoring and observing all areas of the sexually oriented business to which customers are admitted at all times during which the sexually oriented business is open for business or customers are on the premises of the sexually oriented business. 
    Operator or causes to be operated shall mean to cause to function or to put in keep in operation. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner, permittee or manager of the establishment. 
    Owner shall mean the proprietor if a sole proprietorship, all general partners if a partnership, or the corporation if a corporation. 
    Permit shall mean a current, valid permit issued by the building official pursuant to the terms of this section. 
    Place of worship shall mean a building, whether situated within the town or not, in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which building is intended primarily for purposes connected with worship or for propagating a particular form of religious belief. 
    Premises shall mean the grounds and all building, vehicles, and appurtenances pertaining to the grounds, including any adjacent premises if they are directly or indirectly under the control of the same person. 
    Regularly shall mean featuring, promoting, permitting to occur or advertising a happening or occurrence on a recurring basics. 
    Residential district shall mean a residentially zoned district as defined in the zoning ordinance. 
    Residential use shall mean a single-family, townhouse, duplex, mobile home or multiple family use as defined in the zoning ordinance. 
    School shall mean a building, whether situated within the town or not, where persons regularly assemble for the purpose of instruction or education together with the playgrounds, stadium and other structures or grounds used in conjunction therewith. The term is limited to: 
(1)  Public and private schools used for primary or secondary education, in which any regular kindergarten or grades one through 12 classes are taught; and 
(2)  Charter schools and special educational facilities in which students receive specialized education in lieu of attending regular classes in kindergarten or any of grades one through 12. 
    Separate area shall mean any portion of the interior of a sexually oriented business separated from any other portion of a sexually oriented business by a wall, partition or other divider. 
    Sexual encounter center shall mean a commercial establishment to which the public is permitted or invited, which as its principal business purpose, offers for any form of consideration: 
(1)  Physical contact in the form of specified sexual activities between persons of the same or opposite sex; or 
(2)  Activities between male and female persons or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity. 
    Sexually oriented business shall mean: 
(1)  An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult theater, adult motion picture theater, escort agency, nude model business or sexual encounter center; or 
(2)  Any establishment the principal business of which is the offering of a service or the selling, renting or exhibiting of devices or any other items intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to its customers, and which is distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or whose employees or customers appear in a state of nudity. 
(3)  The term "sexually oriented business" shall not be construed to include: 
a.  Any business operated by or employing a licensed psychologist, licensed physical therapist, licensed masseuse, licensed vocational nurse, registered nurse, licensed athletic trainer, licensed cosmetologist, or licensed barber engaged in performing functions authorized under the license held; 
b.  Any business operated by or employing a licensed physician or licensed chiropractor engaged in practicing the healing arts; 
c.  Any retail establishment whose principal business is the offering of wearing apparel for sale to customers and does not exhibit merchandise on live models; or 
d.  An activity conducted or sponsored: 
1.  By a proprietary school licensed by the state or a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
2.  By a private college or university that maintains or operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation. 
e.  And in a structure: 
1.  Which has no sign or other advertising visible from the exterior of the structure indicating a nude person is available for viewing; 
2.  Where in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
3.  Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
    Sign shall mean any display, design, pictorial or other representation, which shall be so constructed, placed, attached, painted, erected, fastened or manufactured in any manner whatsoever so that the same is visible from the outside of a sexually oriented business and that is used to seek the attraction of the public to any goods, services or merchandise available at the sexually oriented business. The term "sign" shall also include representations painted on or other affixed to any exterior portion of a sexually oriented business as well as representations painted on or otherwise affixed to any part of the premises upon which the sexually oriented business is situated. 
    Specified anatomical areas shall mean: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
a.  Human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair; 
b.  Buttock; 
c.  Female breast or any portion thereof that is situated below a point immediately above the top of the areola; 
d.  Any combination of the foregoing; or 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernible state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities shall mean: 
(1)  Human genitals in a discernible state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(2)  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair, buttock or female breast; or 
(4)  Any combination of the foregoing. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 2, 3-16-2004) 
Sec. 82-3. - Location. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person establishes, operates or causes to be operated or expanded a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of: 
(1)  A place of worship; 
(2)  A school; 
(3)  A boundary of a residential district; 
(4)  A licensed day care center; 
(5)  A public park; or 
(6)  The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use as defined in this article. 
However, if there is a controlled access highway between the district boundary/property line and the sexually oriented business, the sexually oriented business must be at lest 500 feet from such district boundary/property line. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person establishes, operates or causes to be operated or expanded a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of any other sexually oriented business. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if the person establishes, operates or causes to be operated or expanded a sexually oriented business in any building, structure or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business. 
(d)  For the purposes of subsection (b) of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as tenant space occupied by a sexually oriented business to the nearest property line of the premises of a place of worship, school, licensed day care center, or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park, residential district or residential lot. 
(e)  For the purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the distance between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. If the establishment is located within a structure with multiple spaces available for occupancy, the measurement will be from the wall of the tenant space occupied by the sexually oriented business. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 3, 3-16-2004) 
Sec. 82-4. - Permits; application and issuances; term and renewal, denial, suspension, and revocation. 
(a)  Permits. 
(1)  A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid permit issued by the town under this article for the particular type of business. 
(2)  A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business unless the permit is posted at or near the principal public entrance to the sexually oriented business in such a manner that it will be conspicuous to customers who enter the premises. 
(3)  In a prosecution under subsection (a)(1) of this section, it shall be presumed that there was no permit at the time of the alleged offense, unless a permit was then posted as provided in subsection (a)(2) of this section. 
(b)  Applications. 
(1)  Applications for a permit, whether original or renewal, must be made to the building official by the intended operator of the sexually oriented business. Applications must be submitted by hand delivery by the intended operator to the office of the building inspection department during regular working hours (8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, town holidays excepted). Application forms shall be provided by the building official. The application shall require, and the applicant shall provide, the following information: 
a.  The full name of the intended operator, the operator's residence street address and mailing address (if different), and operator's driver's license or Texas Department of Public Safety personal identification number. 
b.  The name under which the sexually oriented business is to be operated and a general description of the services to be provided. 
c.  The telephone number of the sexually oriented business. 
d.  The address, and legal description of the tract of land on which the sexually oriented business is to be located. 
e.  If the sexually oriented business is in operation, the date on which the owner acquired the sexually oriented business for which the permit is sought, and the date on which the sexually oriented business began operations as a sexually oriented business at the location for which the permit is sought. 
f.  If the sexually oriented business is not in operation, the expected startup date (which shall be expressed in number of days from the date of issuance of the permit). If the expected startup date is to be more than ten days following the date of issuance of the permit, then a detailed explanation of the construction, repair or remodeling work or other cause of the expected delay and a statement of the owner's time schedule and plan for accomplishing the same. 
g.  The names, residence street addresses, and mailing addresses (if different) of the owners of the sexually oriented business and the type of business entity (proprietorship, partnership or corporation). 
h.  The name, mailing address and telephone number of a person who will act as the applicant's liaison with the building official for purposes of the permit inspection required under this article. Such person must be available to come to the sexually oriented business upon one hour's notice given between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., on Monday through Friday (holidays excepted), upon request by the building official to the telephone number designated during the time that the permit application is pending hereunder and must be authorized to act for the applicant in matters relating to the inspection of the premises during the time that the permit application is pending hereunder. 
(2)  The application shall be accompanied by the following: 
a.  Payment in full of a fee of: 
1.  Five hundred dollars for an original application; or 
2.  Two hundred fifty dollars for a renewal application, as applicable, by certified check, cashier's check or money order, which fee shall not be refundable under any circumstances; 
b.  A certified copy of the assumed name certificate filed in compliance with the Assumed Business or Professional Name Act (V.T.C.A., Business and Commerce Code ch. 36) if the sexually oriented business is to be operated under an assumed name; 
c.  If the sexually oriented business is a state corporation, a certified copy of the articles of incorporation, together with all amendments thereto; 
d.  If the sexually oriented business is a foreign corporation, a certified copy of the certificate of authority to transact business in this state, together with all amendments thereto; 
e.  If the sexually oriented business is a limited partnership formed under the laws of the state, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership, together with all amendments thereto, filed in the office of the Secretary of State under the Texas Business Organizations Code; 
f.  If the sexually oriented business is a foreign limited partnership, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership and the qualification documents, together with all amendments thereto, filed in the office of the Secretary of State under the Texas Business Organizations Code; 
g.  Proof of the current fee ownership of the tract of land on which the sexually oriented business is to be situated in the form of a copy of the recorded deed; 
h.  If the persons identified as the fee owner of the tract of land in subsection g. of this section are not also the owners of the sexually oriented business, then the lease, purchase contract, purchase option contract, lease option contract or other documents evidencing the legally enforceable right of the owners or proposed owners of the sexually oriented business to have or obtain the use and possession of the tract or portion thereof that is to be used for the sexually oriented business for the purpose of the operation of the sexually oriented business; 
i.  If the application is for a sexually oriented business that will display or offer to display sexually explicit films or videos regulated by section 82-6, the application shall be accompanied by the plans required by section 82-6; 
j.  Any of subsections b. through h. of this section shall not be required for a renewal application if the applicant states that the documents previously furnished the director with the original application or previous renewals thereof remain correct and current. 
(3)  The application shall contain a statement under oath that: 
a.  The applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application and that the information contained therein and furnished therewith is true and correct; and, 
b.  On behalf of the owner, the applicant has read, and the owner has actual notice of, the provisions of this article. 
(4)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant as witnessed by a duly authorized notary public. 
(5)  A separate application and permit shall be required for each sexually oriented business. 
(6)  Each applicant shall, following the filing of the application and payment of the filing fee, place signs (at least 24 inches by 36 inches in size) that provide notification and information specifically stating "SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS PERMIT APPLICATION PENDING" and the date on which the application was filed along with the notation: "For further information, contact the building official of the Town of Little Elm, Texas." All lettering on the signs must be at least 11/2 inches by two inches in size for each letter on the sign. It shall be the duty of each applicant as to each particular application to erect at least one such sign along each of the property's public street frontages so as to be clearly visible from the public streets. If a property does not have a public street frontage, then signs shall be placed upon the property at a point visible from the nearest public right-of-way. The signs shall be placed not less than three days after the filing of the application for the sexually oriented business permit and shall be checked daily by the applicant and reposted as required to ensure that they remain posted until the application has been approved or denied. 
(7)  Every applicant shall give notice of the application by publication at the applicant's own expense in two consecutive issues of a newspaper published in Denton County, Texas with a daily circulation of not less that 100,000 copies. The notice shall be printed in 10-point boldface type and shall include: (1) the fact that a sexually oriented business permit has been applied for; (2) the street address, including suite or unit number, if any, of the place of business for which the permit is sought; (3) the names of the business and, if the business is operated under an assumed name, the trade name, and (4) if the applicant is a corporation, the names and titles of all officers. The notices shall be published within seven days after the application is filed with the building official. 
(c)  Each permit shall be valid for a period of one year and shall expire on the anniversary of its date of issuance, unless sooner revoked, or surrendered. Each permit shall be subject to renewal as of its expiration date by the filing of a renewal application with the building official. Renewal applications must be filed at least 20 days prior to the expiration date of the permit that is to be renewed. 
(d)  Issuance or denial: 
(1)  Within 30 days of receipt of any application, either original or renewal, the building official shall grant or deny the requested permit and give written notice to the applicant as to the decision, unless such time period is extended at the request of the applicant as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(2)  The building official shall issue a permit to the applicant unless one or more of the following conditions exist: 
a.  The applicant's sexually oriented business is located within 1,000 feet of any place of worship, school, boundary of a residential district, licensed day care center, public park or the property line of a lot devoted to a residential use, as measured in accordance with section 82-3(e); 
b.  The applicant's sexually oriented business is located within 1,000 feet of any other sexually oriented business for which there is a permit issued under this article, as measured in accordance with section 82-3(e); 
c.  The applicant failed to supply all of the information requested on the application; 
d.  The applicant gave materially false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application; 
e.  The applicant's sexually oriented business is not in compliance with section 82-7 or section 82-8. The building official may allow any noncompliance with section 82-7 or section 82-8 to be cured during the building official's review period established in subsection (d)(5) of this section, provided that noncompliance must be cured before the notice of decision on the permit is issued; 
f.  The application or the sexually oriented business does not meet any other requirement of this article or would violate the zoning ordinance; 
g.  The applicant, an owner of the sexually oriented business, or the proposed operator has had a permit denied or revoked for the same sexually oriented business within the 180-day period next preceding the later of the date that the application was filed or a final decision on the denial or revocation was rendered; 
h.  The applicant has not demonstrated that the owner of the sexually oriented business owns or holds a lease for the property or the applicable portion thereof upon which the sexually oriented business will be situated or has a legally enforceable right to acquire the same; 
i.  An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted or placed on deferred adjudication, probation, or community supervision for: 
1.  Any offense under the laws of the United States of America, another state or the Uniform Code of Military Justice for an offense described in this subsection; 
2.  Any of the following offenses of the state or criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit same; 
3.  Any of the following offenses as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 43: 
(i)  Prostitution; 
(ii)  Promotion of prostitution; 
(iii)  Aggravated promotion of prostitution; 
(iv)  Compelling prostitution; 
(v)  Obscenity; 
(vi)  Sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; 
(vii)  Sexual performance by a child; 
(viii)  Possession of child pornography; 
4.  Any of the following offenses as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 21: 
(i)  Public lewdness; 
(ii)  Indecent exposure; 
(iii)  Indecency with a child; 
(iv)  Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 22; or 
(v)  Incest, solicitation of a child or harboring a runaway child as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 25; 
5.  For which: 
(i)  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction, or the date of release from the terms of community supervision, probation, parole or deferred adjudication or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
(ii)  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction, or the date of release from the terms of community supervision, probation, parole or deferred adjudication or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
(iii)  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24 month period; 
j.  The applicant or the applicant's spouse is required to register as a sex offender under the provisions of Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. ch. 62; 
k.  An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in payment to the town of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant or the applicant's spouse in relation to a sexually oriented business; or 
l.  An applicant is under 18 years of age. 
(3)  Property uses and distances for original applications shall be determined as of the time that the application is filed. If a renewal application is timely filed as provided in subsection (c) of this section, the property uses and measurements for the renewal application shall be determined as of the time that the original application for the sexually oriented business was filed. If not timely filed, renewal applications shall be subject to the same fees and shall be treated in the same manner in all respects as original applications. 
(4)  An applicant, or applicant's spouse, who has been convicted of or placed on deferred adjudication, probation or community supervision for an offense listed in subsection (d)(2)i. of this section may qualify for permit only when the time period required by subsection (d)(2)i.5. of this section has elapsed. 
(5)  In the event that the building official determines that an applicant is not eligible for a permit, the applicant shall be given notice in writing of the reasons for the denial within 30 days of the receipt of its application by the building official, provided that the applicant may request, in writing, that such period be extended for an additional period of not more than ten days at any time before the notice is issued in order to make modifications necessary to comply with section 82-7 or section 82-8. An applicant may appeal the decision of the building official regarding such denial by filing a written request for a hearing with the building official within 30 days after the applicant is given notice of such denial. The building official's decision on the application shall be final unless an appeal is timely filed. An appeal shall not stay the building official's decision on the issuance of a permit. The applicant's written request for a hearing shall set out the grounds on which the denial is challenged. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures contained in subsection (f)(4) of this section. 
(6)  Failure of the building official to give timely notice of his action on an application, or failure of the hearing official to timely conduct or give notice of his decision on an appeal from the building official's decision shall entitle the applicant to the issuance of a temporary permit upon written demand therefore filed by the applicant with the building official unless the delay resulted from a written request for a delay or deferral by the applicant. A temporary permit shall only be valid until the third day after the building official gives notice of his decision on the appeal, as applicable. 
(7)  In any instance in which the applicant's sexually oriented business is to be situated within 1,000 feet, as measured hereunder, from another proposed sexually oriented business for which a previously filed permit application has been denied, and the previously filed application is still subject to appeals, the building official may grant the permit on a conditional basis, subject to the outcome of the appeals on the previous application. A permit so issued may be withdrawn and denied effective upon the third day after notice thereof is given to the operator following the resolution of the appeals on the prior permit. In case of denial the applicant shall have the same rights of appeal hereunder as if the permit had been denied in the first instance. 
(8)  The provisions of subsection (d)(2)b. of this section shall not be construed to prohibit a sexually oriented business for which there is a permit from relocating to another location situated within 1,000 feet of its existing location, provided that the proposed location complies with all applicable requirements of this article other than its proximity to its own existing sexually oriented business location. An original permit application shall be required to be filed for the proposed relocation, and the building official shall conditionally grant the application, if granted, on the stipulation that the permit will not actually be issued until the applicant discontinues operation at its existing location and surrenders the permit for its existing location. Any such relocation must be completed within 180 days from the date that the permit is conditionally granted or the conditional grant of the application will become void. Pending the removal of the sexually oriented business to its new location, both the old and new locations shall be deemed to be operating under a permit for purpose of measurements to locations of other proposed sexually oriented businesses for which applications may be filed. 
(e)  Permit transfers. 
(1)  A permit is personal to the owner and the operator designated in the application holds the permit on the owner' behalf as the owner agent, provided it may be transferred pursuant to this section. A transfer application must be filed by the tenth day next following any change of the owner or operator designated on the application. In the event that a transfer application is not timely filed, then the permit shall be invalid for any purpose relating to the operation of the sexually oriented business, and any transfer shall require the filing of an original permit application and shall be subject to the regulations applicable thereto. For purposes of measurements between sexually oriented businesses under section 82-3(c), an establishment for which the permit has become invalid by operation of this section shall be treated as though it had a permit until the permit is revoked. 
(2)  The building official shall prescribe a form on which permit transfer applications shall be made. The form shall include a statement under oath that the original application remains correct as previously submitted in all respects except those that are amended hereby. The transfer application shall contain a statement under oath that the individual signing the transfer application has personal knowledge of the information is true and correct and shall not be complete unless accompanied by a nonrefundable transfer fee of $100.00. Transfer applications shall be filed in the same place, time, and manner as original applications and the fee shall be payable in the same manner as for original applications. 
(3)  Transfers shall be reviewed, issued, and subject to appeal in the same manner as original applications, and they shall be issued for the remaining term of the permit to be transferred. 
(4)  No change in ownership of a sexually oriented business or transfer of a permit for a sexually oriented business shall be allowed during the pendency of any administrative proceeding under subsection (f) of this section, from the time that any request for revocation or suspension has been filed with the hearing official until the hearing official's order is final. Any such transfer or attempted transfer shall confer no rights whatever in the permit for the sexually oriented business to the putative transferee. 
(f)  Suspension or revocation of permits. 
(1)  The town attorney shall have the authority to request the revocation of a permit for any one or more of the following reasons: 
a.  The owner or operator of the permitted sexually oriented business knowingly allowed a person under 18 years of age to enter a sexually oriented business; 
b.  The permitted sexually oriented business does not conform to the provisions of section 82-7 and section 82-8; 
c.  Three or more cumulative violations of any of the offenses contained in V.T.C.A., Penal Code chs. 21, 43, § 22.011 or 22.021 or of the offenses contained in this article have occurred on the premises of the permitted sexually oriented business. These violations must have occurred in a consecutive period of 12 months, and the owner, operator or any manager: (i) knowingly allowed such violations to occur; (ii) did not make a reasonable effort to prevent the occurrence of such violations; or (iii) should have known that such violations were occurring or did occur; 
d.  An owner, operator or manager has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
e.  An owner, operator or manager has on three or more occasions knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or sexual contact (as that term is defined in V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 21.01) to occur in or on the premises, other than within a private sleeping room on the premises of an adult motel; 
f.  The owner or operator is delinquent in payment to the town or hotel occupancy taxes, ad valorem taxes or sales taxes related to the sexually oriented business; 
g.  The owner or operator is required to register as a sex offender under the provisions of Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. ch. 62; 
h.  The operator of the permitted sexually oriented business gave materially false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the original, renewal or transfer application form; 
i.  The sexually oriented business has not been open for business for a period of 30 consecutive days, unless due to circumstances beyond the control of the owner, and the owner is proceeding with due diligence, given all attendant circumstances to open or reopen the establishment; 
j.  That there was a change of owner or operator for which a transfer application was not timely filed pursuant to subsection (f) of this section; or 
k.  That the permit was erroneously issued in contravention of the criteria of this article. 
(2)  The town attorney shall have sole authority to initiate any action for revocation of a permit; provided, that the building official may request that the town attorney give priority to any such action based upon the number or nature of violations involving a particular sexually oriented business or sexually oriented businesses. 
(3)  Prior to revocation of a permit, the town attorney, with the assistance of the building official, shall investigate the grounds alleged to determine whether probable cause for revocation may exist and, if so, shall notify the owner and operator in writing of reasons for the proposed revocation and grant such owner and operator the opportunity to appear before a hearing official to be designated by the mayor and confirmed by the town council, at a time and place specified within such notice. The hearing official designated shall not have participated in any investigation of the alleged grounds for the revocation. The hearing shall be held not less than 20 days after the notice is given. Hearings shall be conducted under rules issued by the building official. Such rules shall be consistent with the nature of the proceedings and shall ensure that each party may present evidence, cross-examine witnesses and be represented by legal counsel. If, after the hearing, the hearing official finds that the permit should be revoked, he shall issue a written order revoking such permit. If the hearing official determines, based upon the nature of the violation, that the ends of justice would be served by a suspension in lieu of a revocation, he may suspend the operation of the permit for a period of time to be stated in the order of suspension, not to exceed two months. 
(4)  Upon receipt of written notice of the denial, suspension or revocation, the applicant whose application for a permit has been denied or whose permit has been suspended or revoked shall have the right to appeal by filing suit in the appropriate court within 30 days after the receipt of notice of the decision of the hearing official. 
(5)  A sexually oriented business shall be treated as having a permit for purposes of measurements under subsection (d) of this section pending the final disposition of any court action involving judicial review of a permit revocation or suspension. 
(6)  Each day in which a violation is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate violation for purposes of suspension. 
(g)  Other permit provisions. 
(1)  A permit is valid only at the location for which it is issued. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to counterfeit, forge, change, deface, or alter a permit. 
(3)  A permit may be canceled upon written request of the owner or operator and surrender of the permit itself to the building official. The surrender of a permit shall be effective immediately upon its filing in the office of building official. 
(4)  Applications and other notices required or permitted to be given to the building official under this article must be submitted by hand delivery by the intended operator to the office of the building official during regular working hours 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday (town holidays excepted). 
(5)  The fees prescribed in this article shall only be payable by certified check, cashier's check or money order. If payment thereon is not honored, the building official may suspend the permit, if issued, until payment is made by written notice to the operator. 
(6)  Possession by the owner or operator of other state or town permits does not exempt that person from the requirement of obtaining a permit for a sexually oriented business. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 4, 3-16-2004) 
Sec. 82-5. - Operational regulation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful: 
(1)  For any entertainer to touch customer or the clothing of a customer while engaging in entertainment or while exposing any specified anatomical areas or engaging in any specified sexual activities; 
(2)  For any entertainer to approach closer than three feet to any customer while engaging in entertainment or while exposing any specified anatomical areas or engaging in any specified sexual activities; 
(3)  For any employee to engage in entertainment or to expose any specified anatomical areas or engage in any specified sexual activities in the presence of a customer in any separate area within a sexually oriented business to which entry or access is blocked or obscured by a door, curtain or other barrier separating entry to such area from any other area of the sexually oriented business; or 
(4)  For an owner, operator or manager to knowingly allow an employee to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a sexually oriented business premises that can be viewed from a public street. 
(b)  Age restrictions. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to allow a person who is younger than 18 years of age to enter or be on the premises of a sexually oriented business at any time that the sexually oriented business is open for business. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of the operator of each sexually oriented business to ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public entrance to the sexually oriented business at all times during such sexually oriented business's regular business hours. It shall be the duty of the attendant to not allow any person under the age of 18 years to enter the sexually oriented business. It shall be presumed that an attendant knew a person was under the age of 18 unless such attendant asked for and was furnished: 
a.  A valid operator's, commercial operator's, or chauffeur's driver's license; or 
b.  A valid personal identification certificate issued by the Texas Department of Public Safety reflecting that such person is 18 years of age or older. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful to: 
a.  Employ at an escort agency any person under the age of 18 years; or 
b.  Act as an escort or agree to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years. 
(4)  The owner or operator of an adult bookstore or adult video store shall place any item of merchandise purchased or rented by a customer into an opaque bag or bag or other opaque covering before the customer removes the merchandise from the premises. 
(5)  Records relating to managers and other employees. 
a.  The operator of a sexually oriented business shall maintain on the premises a current registration card or file that clearly identifies all employees of the sexually oriented business. 
b.  The registration card or file must contain the following information for each employee required to be registered under subsection (1) of this section: 
1.  All aliases or stage names; 
2.  Date of birth; 
3.  Race and gender; 
4.  Hair color, eye color, height, and weight; 
5.  Current residence address and telephone number; 
6.  Driver's license number or other personal identification number; and 
7.  Color photograph with a full-face view. 
c.  All records maintained on an employee in compliance with this subsection must be retained at the sexually oriented business for at least 90 days following the date of any voluntary or involuntary termination of the employee's employment or contract with the sexually oriented business. 
d.  The operator or manager of a sexually oriented business shall allow immediate access to these records by representatives of the police department. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 5, 3-16-2004) 
Sec. 82-6. - Regulations pertaining to the exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business (including, without limitation, an adult arcade and an adult motion picture theatre, but excluding an adult motel) which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room a film, videocassette or other video reproduction that depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the additional requirements of this section. 
(b)  Upon application for a sexually oriented business permit, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof that specifies the location of one or more manager's stations, the locations of all overhead lighting fixtures, and that designates any portion of the premises in which customers will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however each diagram should be oriented to the north, or to some designated street or object, and shall be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The building official may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(c)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any customer is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction or transmission equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any customer is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of human sight from the manager's station. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the owner and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any manager and employees present in a sexually oriented business regulated by this section, to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (c) of this section remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any customer is present on the premises and to ensure that no customer is permitted access to any area of the premises that has been designated as an area in which customers will not be permitted in the plan filed pursuant to subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(e)  Each manager's station shall be attended by an employee at any time a customer is present on the premises. 
(f)  No viewing area or both of less that 155 square feet of floor space shall be occupied by more than one person at any time. 
(g)  An owner or operator commits an offense if the owner or operator permits access to a customer of any area of the premises that is not visible from the manager's station for any purpose excluding restrooms. 
(h)  A sexually oriented business regulated by this section shall be equipped with lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which customers are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle as measured at four feet above the floor level. It shall be the duty of the owner and operator and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises to ensure that the illumination required by this subsection is maintained at all times that any customer is present on the premises. 
(i)  No sexually oriented business regulated by this section shall be configured in such a manner as to have any opening in any partition, screen wall, or other barrier that separates a viewing area from other viewing areas. This provision shall not apply to conduits for plumbing, heating, air conditioning, ventilation or electrical service, provided that such conduits shall be so screened or otherwise configured as to prevent their use as openings that would permit any portion of a human body to penetrate the wall or barrier separating viewing areas. It shall be the duty of the owner and operator and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises of a sexually oriented business regulated by this section to assure that no openings are allowed to exist in violation of this subsection and to ensure that no patron is allowed access to any portion of the premises where any opening exists in violation of this subsection until the opening has been repaired. 
(j)  It shall be unlawful to the owner or operator and it shall also be unlawful for any agent or employee present in a sexually oriented business regulated by this section to knowingly allow or permit any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, indecent exposure, lewd conduct or masturbation to occur on the premises or to knowingly allow or permit the premises to be used as a place in which solicitation for sexual intercourse, sodomy or oral copulation occur. 
(k)  A permit issued under this article for a sexually oriented business regulated by this section shall only extend to the premises in the configuration described in the application and the plans submitted with or adopted therein. If the premises remains open during alterations or expansions, then it shall be the duty of the operator to ensure that no customer is permitted to use a viewing area within any portion of the premises that has been altered or added by an alteration or expansion until a new permit has been obtained on the basis of the premises as reconfigured by the work. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 6, 3-16-2004) 
Sec. 82-7. - Exterior portions of sexually oriented businesses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow the merchandise or activities of the sexually oriented business to be visible from any point outside such sexually oriented business. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow the exterior portions of the sexually oriented business to have flashing lights, or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial representations of any manner except to the extent permitted by the provisions of this article. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow exterior portions of the sexually oriented business to be painted any color other than a single achromatic color. As used in this section, "achromatic" means colorless, lacking in saturation or hue. Without limitation, grays, tans and light earth tones shall be included, but white and black and any bold coloration that attracts attention shall be excluded from the definition of achromatic. 
(1)  This provision shall not apply to a sexually oriented business if the following conditions are met: 
a.  The sexually oriented business is a part of a commercial multi-unit center; and 
b.  The exterior portions of each individual unit in the commercial multi-unit center, including the exterior portions of the sexually oriented business, are painted the same color as one another or are painted in such a way so as to be a component of the overall architectural style or pattern of the commercial multi-unit center. 
(2)  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to require the painting of an otherwise unpainted exterior portion of a sexually oriented business. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 7, 3-16-2004) 
Sec. 82-8. - Signage. 
(a)  Notwithstanding chapter 58 of this Code or any other town ordinance, code, or regulation to the contrary, it shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any sexually oriented business or any other person to erect, construct, or maintain any sign for the sexually oriented business other than one primary sign and one secondary sign, as provided herein. 
(b)  Primary signs shall have no more than two display surfaces. Each such display surface shall: 
(1)  Not contain any flashing lights; 
(2)  Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape; 
(3)  Not exceed 75 square feet in area; and 
(4)  Not exceed ten feet in height or ten feet in length. 
(c)  Primary signs shall contain no photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations of any manner, and may contain only: 
(1)  The name of the sexually oriented business; and 
(2)  One or more of the following phrases: 
a.  "Adult bookstore." 
b.  "Adult movie theatre." 
c.  "Adult encounter parlor." 
d.  "Adult encounter parlor." 
e.  "Adult lounge." 
f.  "Adult novelties." 
g.  "Adult entertainment." 
h.  "Adult modeling studio." 
(3)  Primary signs for adult movie theatres may contain the additional phrase, "Movie Titles Posted on Premises." 
(d)  Each letter forming a word on a primary sign shall be of a solid color, and each such letter shall be the same print-type, size and color. The background behind such lettering on the display surface of a primary sign shall be of a uniform and solid color. 
(e)  Secondary signs shall have only one display surface. Such display surface shall: 
(1)  Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape; 
(2)  Not exceed 20 square feet in area; 
(3)  Not exceed five feet in height and four feet in width; 
(4)  Be affixed or attached to any wall or door of the sexually oriented business. 
(f)  The provisions of subsection (b)(1) of this section and subsections (c) and (d) of this section shall also apply to secondary signs. 
(g)  Any sign located on the premises of a commercial multi-unit center containing a sexually oriented business that displays the name, or any portion of the name of the sexually oriented business, any name under which any sexually oriented business was formerly operated on the premises, or that contains any of the terms set forth in subsection (c)(2) of this section or any other terminology that is commonly used to identify, or is associated with the presence of a sexually oriented business, shall comply with all restrictions of this section. The intent of this subsection is to prevent the use of signage identifying the commercial multi-tenant center itself from being used as a subterfuge to evade the restrictions on sexually oriented business signs set forth in this section. 
(h)  Except as expressly provided herein, nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to grant or allow for any sign, additional sign, (whether attached or freestanding), or additional sign area not otherwise allowed in general in any applicable town ordinance, code, or regulation relating to signs. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 8, 3-16-2004) 
Sec. 82-9. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Whenever a person does an act that is forbidden, fails to perform an act that is required, or commits an act that is made unlawful by any provision of this article, the violation is punishable as provided by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 243.010(b), as amended. A person violating a provision of this article is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted. 
(b)  Except as otherwise specified, a culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under this article. 
(c)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business in violation of this article is subject to a suit for injunction and civil penalties as provided by law, in addition to prosecution for criminal violations. The town attorney is hereby authorized to file suit for such purposes. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 9, 3-16-2004) 
Chapter 86 - SIGNS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1282, § 2(Att.), adopted July 7, 2015, repealed the former Ch. 86, §§ 86-1-86-20, and enacted a new Ch. 86 as set out herein. The former chapter pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 972, 9-1-2009; Ord. No. 995, 5-18-2010; Ord. No. 1010, 5-18-2010; Ord. No. 1147, 5-7-2013. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
State Law reference- Regulation of signs by home-rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 216.901; regulation of political signs by municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 216.903. 

Sec. 86-1. - Title. 
    This chapter, 86, of the Town of Little Elm Code of Ordinances shall be known as "Signs." 
(Ord. No. 1282, § 2(Att.), 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 86-2. - First Amendment rights. 
    This Code shall not be construed, applied, interpreted nor enforced in a manner to violate the First Amendment rights of any person, and the director shall seek the advice and recommendation of the town manager and town attorney prior to taking any action to enforce any provision of this Code with respect to any non-commercial sign on private property. 
(Ord. No. 1282, § 2(Att.), 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 86-3. - Authority. 
    The provisions of this Code are adopted pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 216 and the Town Charter, and the town's authority as a home rule city. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, no sign legally erected shall be required to be relocated, reconstructed or removed except in compliance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 216. 
(Ord. No. 1282, § 2(Att.), 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 86-4. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Code is to promote the health, safety and welfare of the public. It is the town's intent to achieve this goal by enacting a comprehensive system of reasonable, effective, consistent, content-neutral, and nondiscriminatory standards and requirements for signs within the town and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. It is further determined that the provisions of this Code cannot achieve the end result desired unless the community voluntarily cooperates in upholding these provisions. 
    With these concepts in mind, this Code is adopted for the following purposes: to preserve and protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Town of Little Elm; to balance public and private objectives by allowing adequate signage for business identification, to maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the town's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth; to improve pedestrian and traffic safety; to protect property values, the local economy, and the quality of life by preserving and enhancing the appearance of the streetscape which affects the image of the Town of Little Elm; and to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1282, § 2(Att.), 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 86-5. - Applicability-Effect. 
(a)  A sign may not be erected, constructed, placed, painted, created, enlarged, moved, or converted within the Town of Little Elm or its extraterritorial jurisdiction except in compliance with the standards, procedures, exemptions, and other requirements of this Code. 
(b)  The intent of this Code as more specifically set forth herein, is to: 
(1)  Provide functional flexibility, encourage variety, and create an incentive to relate signing to basic principles of good design; 
(2)  Provide an improved visual environment for the citizens of, and visitors to, the Town of Little Elm; 
(3)  Establish a permit system to allow a variety of types of signs in commercial and industrial zones, and a limited variety of signs in other zones, subject to the standards and the permit procedures of this Code; 
(4)  Allow certain signs that are small, unobtrusive, and incidental to the principal use of the respective lots on which they are located, subject to the substantive requirements of this Code, but without requirements for permits; and 
(5)  Provide cost recovery measures supporting the administration and enforcement of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1282, § 2(Att.), 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 86-6. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated below unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. All other words and phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning, unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    "A" frame sign means a sandwich board sign constructed in such a manner as to form an "A" or tent-like shape that is hinged or not hinged at the top with each angular face held at an opposite distance by a supporting member. 
    Announcement sign means a residential sign that publicly displays a notice, usually located on a fence or a window of the structure that makes an announcement, such as, "no trespassing", "beware of dog", or "children/animals inside" for police or fire. 
    Architectural element means an uninhabitable structure or building intended solely as an artistic or architectural embellishment of a landscaped area. 
    Awning means a shelter constructed of materials on a supporting framework that projects from and is supported by the exterior wall of a building. 
    Balloon means any object filled with lighter-than-air gasses, which are designed to float or fly over any given location. 
    Bandit signs means temporary signs, usually of cardboard or foam board and mounted on angle iron or a wooden stake. 
    Banner means a sign having characters, letters, or illustrations applied to plastic, fabric, canvas or any non-rigid material, where the only purpose for such non-rigid material is for background. 
    Billboard means a sign advertising products not made, sold, used or served on the premises upon which the sign is located. 
    Building directory sign means a small wall-mounted display featuring, for restaurants and cafes, the actual menu as used at the dining table; or for businesses, official directory information and/or legal notices regarding the premises. 
    Building official means the building official of the Town of Little Elm and includes the building official's designee, or other official administering the chapter. 
    Canopy means a freestanding structure with a roof but no walls. 
    Civic sign means a temporary stake sign that publicizes times or locations of meetings or special events of property owners associations or religious organizations. This definition excludes directional signs for regularly scheduled religious events. A civic sign may also publicize times or locations of special events for schools and athletic team registrations. 
    Clearance (of a sign) means the smallest vertical distance between the grade of the adjacent street curb, sidewalk and/or other paved surface and the lowest point of any sign, including framework and embellishments, but excluding sign supports. 
    Development information sign means any onsite temporary residential subdivision development sign that identifies the developer or any related party for such building or land. 
    Directional sign means any sign relating solely to internal pedestrian and vehicular traffic circulation, warning of obstacles or overhead clearance, or designating permissible parking within a complex or project without any form of advertising. 
    Director means the director of development services of the Town of Little Elm and includes his or her designee. 
    Earth tone is a color scheme that draws from a color palette of browns, tans, greys, greens, oranges, whites, blues, and some reds. The colors in an earth tone scheme are muted and flat in an emulation of the natural colors found in dirt, moss, trees, and rocks. 
    Electronic message (L.E.D.) sign means an on-site, non-temporary sign that uses light bulbs or light emitting diodes to display messages of advertisement as announcements, to include all digital signs. 
    Facade means all building wall elevations, including any vertical extension of the building wall (parapet), but not including any part of the building roof. 
    Face change means the replacing or revision of the logos, wording, etc., included on the front of the sign by means of replacing the physical material or by repainting or similar process. A "face change" includes the change of a sign face when a new business or tenant/owner wishes to locate a sign on the premises; however, it does not include reader boards or changeable copy signs. 
    Fine art means sculpture, fountain, mural, or similar object, containing no reference to or image of a business or its logo and is not used for advertising. Fine art is not considered as a sign. 
    Flag means fabric containing distinctive colors and patterns that represent an official symbol of a nation, state, school, religious group, or other type of public institution. Corporate and builder flags are prohibited. 
    Flashing means to light suddenly or intermittently, including rotating, pulsating or a light source that changes or alternates the color of the light in sequence. "Flashing" does not include an electronic message (L.E.D.) sign as defined herein when operated in compliance with this Code. 
    Freestanding sign means a sign that is not attached to a building but is placed on or anchored in the ground and intended to be permanent. 
    Frontage means a boundary line separating public right-of-way from the lot or tract. 
    Future development sign (commercial or development sign) means a temporary freestanding sign advertising the construction, remodeling, development, sale, or lease of a commercial building or the land on which the sign is located that indicates the developer or any related party having a role or interest with respect to the structure or project. 
    Garage sale sign means a sign, issued by the town, usually a stake sign, used for a "garage", "yard", "estate" or other types of residential sale of used tangible personal property such as clothing, household effects, tools, garden implements, toys, recreation equipment or other used or second hand items customarily found in and about the home and advertised in a manner to provide notice such that the public at large is, or can be, aware of such sale. 
    Government sign means: 
(1)  A sign installed, maintained, or used by the town, county, State of Texas or the federal government that is required or specifically authorized for the public purpose pursuant to regulations promulgated by the state or federal government; 
(2)  A traffic-related sign installed by any government agency within public right-of-way; or 
(3)  A sign installed to convey information to the public regarding town, state, or federal government activities and events. 
    HAGL means height above ground level and is commonly used to describe the distance between the ground and the bottom of a sign of non-monument style signs on posts. 
    Home improvement sign means a temporary stake sign that displays the name of a roofing, fence, pool, paint, landscape, or other home improvement contractor. 
    Human sign means a sign held or attached to a human for the purposes of advertising or otherwise drawing attention to an individual, business, commodity, service, activity, or product. A person dressed in costume for the purpose of advertising or otherwise drawing attention to an individual, business, commodity, service, activity, or product shall also be construed as a human sign. 
    Illuminated sign means any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs, or outlines illuminated directly or indirectly by electric lights, luminous tubes, or other means. 
    Incidental sign means a small sign, emblem, or decal informing the public of goods, facilities, or services available on the premises (e.g., a credit card sign or a sign indicating hours of business), or identifying emergency telephone numbers, hours, and security information, generally located on a window or door. Incidental signs shall count toward allowed window signage. 
    Inflatable sign is any hollow sign expanded or enlarged by the use of gas or air. 
    Information signs means and includes bulletin boards, changeable copy directories, signs relating solely to publicly owned institutions (town, county, state, school district), or non-profit organizations (churches, homeowners associations) intended for use by the institution or organization that owns or is located on the property on which the sign is located to provide information to the public of a general nature or of general interest. 
    Logo means any registered trademark or insignia of a company or product that is commonly used in advertising to identify that company or product. 
    Mansard roof means the style of roof where there are two slopes to the roof structure. 
    Memorial signs or tablets means and includes freestanding historical markers in accordance with state historical standards, and/or cornerstones with names and dates of construction of a building when cut into a building surface or inlaid upon it to become part of the building. 
    Menu board means a freestanding or wall sign used for the purpose of informing patrons of food which may be purchased on the premises. 
    Model home sign is a temporary real estate sign placed in front of a group of model homes that is removed from the premises upon sale of the last model. 
    Monument sign means a sign that is supported from the grade to the bottom of the sign and is surrounded and supported on all sides with a masonry framework. 
    Multi-tenant sign means a monument sign for a building complex or center that contains multiple businesses that share the same site and have common building architecture, color, and materials, landscaping, and parking. 
    Municipal board on sign control means the board of adjustment, appointed by the mayor pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 216.004 to consider certain matters related to the relocation, reconstruction or removal of a sign legally erected within the town's corporate limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
    Nameplate is a non-electrical, on-premises sign which communicates only the name of the residential occupant, name of a model home, or the address of the premises. 
    Nonconforming sign face means an illuminated sign face that does not conform to the regulations that impact the face of the sign prescribed in this Code, including but not limited to color of background and/or letters, and that existed lawfully on the date of adoption of this Code or applicable amendment hereto. 
    Nonconforming sign structure means a sign that does not conform to the regulations that impact the structure of the sign prescribed in this Code, including but not limited to sign type, height, size, or location, and that existed lawfully on the date of adoption of this Code or applicable amendment hereto. 
    Off-premises sign means a sign displaying advertising copy that pertains to a business, person, organization, activity, event, place, service or product not principally located or primarily manufactured or sold on the premises on which the sign is located. 
    Opaque means a material that does not transmit light from the internal illumination source. 
    Parapet means the extension of a false front or wall above a roof line. 
    Pole or pylon signs means freestanding signs that are supported by a structure extending from and permanently attached to the ground by a foundation or footing, with a clearance between the ground and the sign face. 
    Political sign means a sign relating to the election of a person to a public office, relating to a political party, relating to a matter to be voted upon at an election called by a public body, or contains primarily a political message. 
    Portable signs means signs not permanently affixed to a building, structure, or the ground; designed or installed in a manner allowing the sign to be moved or relocated without any structural or support changes. This definition includes, but is not limited to, "A" and "T" frame signs. 
    Projecting sign means a sign attached to and projecting out from a building face or wall more than 12 inches, generally at a right angle, including graphic or icon signs mounted perpendicularly to the wall. 
    Reader board or manual changeable copy sign means a sign or part of a sign where the copy is replaceable and can be changed manually at will. 
    Real estate signs, residential or commercial, means temporary signs placed upon property indicating that particular property [is] for sale, rent, or lease. 
    Roof sign means any sign installed over or on the roof of a building. 
    Scoreboards means signs erected at an athletic field or stadium and which are generally used to maintain the score or time expired in an event at the field or stadium. This definition shall also include signs mounted or applied to the outfield wall within a baseball field. 
    Searchlight means a searchlight used to direct beams of light upward for advertising purposes. 
    Sight triangle means the area within a right triangle formed by extending the curb lines of intersecting streets from the point of intersection for a distance of 45 feet to the hypotenuse, or for streets intersecting a driveway or alley for a distance of 20 feet to the hypotenuse. 
    Sign means any device, including its structure and component parts, which conveys messages for visual communication, notice or advertising that is used for the purpose of attracting attention of the public but not including any lawful display of merchandise. The term "sign" shall also mean and include any display of one or more of the following: 
(1)  Any letter, numeral, figure, emblem, picture, outline, character, lights, announcement, trademark, or logo. 
(2)  Multicolored bands, stripes, patterns, fabrics, pennants, ribbons, outlines, or delineations displayed for the purpose of commercial identification or attracting attention. 
(3)  Anything specified above in part or in combination by any means whereby the same are made visible from beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel of property on which the same are displayed for the purpose of attracting attention outdoors to make anything known, to include paint/color schemes or any illuminating device on buildings or other site features. 
    Sign area means the actual area of the face of the sign determined from the outside edge of the frame itself including the area of the base and any surrounding masonry border, unless the shape of the sign is irregular (square, rectangle, triangle, or circle). 
(1)  In the case of an irregular-shaped sign, the sign area shall be calculated by enclosing the extreme limits of the sign and forming a rectangle, which shall be measured by the overall height and width of the rectangle. 
(2)  In the event two or more signs share a single structure, each sign or panel may be considered separately for square footage purposes, except that the combined footage of such signs cannot exceed the total square footage allowed for the sign. In the case of a monument sign, square footage shall be measured by the overall height and width of the sign, including the base/structure. 
(3)  Double-faced signs shall be calculated as the area of one side only and three-dimensional or multi-faced signs shall be calculated as the sum of all visible sides. 
    Special events sign is a sign of a temporary nature other than those established by a business; for the purpose of advertising a special event pertaining to drives or events of a civic, philanthropic, cultural, educational, sporting events, concerts or religious organization, excluding events that occur more frequently than once a month. 
    Stake sign means a temporary sign that utilizes the support structure to anchor the sign to the ground by inserting the support structure into the ground, or any temporary sign attached to utility poles, street signs, or other objects. Also commonly called "bandit" signs. 
    Subdivision means, for purposes of this Code, the subdivision in its entirety, not a phase, section, village, unit, or product line. 
    Subdivision entrance sign means a sign authorized for each major project entry into a legally recorded, multi-lot, multi-sectioned, master-planned residential subdivision, and contains only the name of the subdivision with no other information. There are three types of subdivision development entrance signs: (1) primary, (2) secondary, and (3) tertiary used to define various entries of a subdivision. 
    "T" frame sign means a temporary sign that is constructed in such a manner as to form an inverted "T." 
    Town means the Town of Little Elm, Texas. 
    Vehicle sign means a sign that is attached to or placed in or on a truck, bus, car, trailer, boat, recreations vehicle, or any other vehicle used for routine business. Vehicle signs shall exclude bumper stickers, license plates, and state required registration/inspection stickers. 
    Vending machine sign means a sign that is attached to a vending machine or gasoline pump and which generally advertises the products dispensed from the vending machine or gasoline pump or associated convenience store. 
    Wall sign means a sign attached to the facade of a building or a canopy. Wall signs include signs on or affixed to walls, awnings, or other parts of the exterior of a building or canopy including walls. 
    Wind-driven sign means any sign consisting of one or a series of two or more banners, flags, feather flags, pennants, ribbons, spinners, captive balloons, or other objects or material fastened in such a manner as to move upon being subjected to pressure by wind or breeze. 
    Window or door surface signs means signs visible from the public street or sidewalk and are installed or applied on or in a window or door, an incidental sign, or a sign that is located within three feet of a window on a building's interior. 
    Yard sign means a temporary stake sign that publicizes the arrival of a newborn or the participation of a family member in a school activity or sport. Yard signs shall also include signs that advertise the presence of a home security system. 
(Ord. No. 1282, § 2(Att.), 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 86-7. - Land use categories. 
    For purposes of this Code, all territory within the town's jurisdiction is classified into a land use (L.U.) category. Those properties within the town limits are classified based upon their zoning district classification. Those properties located within the extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) shall be classified by the director based upon the future land use map (FLUP) of the comprehensive plan. Identification by a L.U. category is for the purposes of determining allowable signage only and in no manner shall be interpreted as the town zoning property within the extraterritorial jurisdiction or establishing vested rights regarding applicable zoning should the property be annexed into the town limits of Little Elm. 
(1)  Low-density residential L.U. category includes any residential site in an AG, SF-RE, A1, A2, SF1, SF2, SF3, SF4, MH1, TH, or D zoning district or equivalent use in the town's extraterritorial jurisdiction ("ETJ"). Nonresidential uses permitted in this low-density residential L.U. category shall be included in the commercial L.U. category below. 
(2)  Multi-family residential L.U. category includes any site in an MF or MH2 zoning district or equivalent use in the ETJ. Nonresidential uses permitted in this multi-family residential L.U. category shall be included in the commercial L.U. category below. 
(3)  Commercial L.U. category includes any site that is located within the boundaries of an O, NS, LC, HC, TC, LI, or HI zoning district or equivalent use in the ETJ. 
(Ord. No. 1282, § 2(Att.), 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 86-8. - Permit required. 
(a)  Permit required. No sign, other than those exceptions listed in section 86-12 and indicated on Table 86.1, shall be erected, constructed, placed, painted, replaced, repaired, attached, enlarged, moved, converted, altered (including face changes), or secured to the ground, any building, or any structure, until a permit for such sign has been issued by the development services department. The director shall approve or deny an application for a sign permit within 30 days of the town's receipt of a complete application. A permit will be issued if a proposed sign conforms to all town ordinances and the associated fee has been paid. The town will not issue a new sign permit for property where illegal signs or sign violations exist. Each individual sign on a site must receive a permit to be installed, unless otherwise exempted in this Code or on Table 86.1. 
(b)  To whom issued. No permit for the erection of any sign shall be issued to any person other than the property owner or the property owner's designated and authorized representative. In the case of a special event or permitted vendor, the permit shall be issued to the individual authorized by the town for said activity. 
(c)  Fees. The fee for sign permits shall be as established in the town's current fee schedule. The fee for a permit for a sign that was constructed without a permit shall be double the applicable permit fee to cover additional administrative costs in connection therewith. Non-profit/charitable organizations are exempt from paying permit fees for temporary signs requiring a permit. 
(d)  Interpretation and administration. The director shall be responsible for interpreting and administering this Code. 
(e)  Violation. A person is responsible for a violation, as specified within, if the person is the permit holder, owner, agent, or person having the beneficial use of the sign and a citation may be issued. 
(f)  Promotional events. With a town approved promotional event, special, temporary sign privileges may be granted upon discretionary approval by the director at time of application, generally for a weekend or three days. Longer periods of time may be considered by the director. 
(Ord. No. 1282, § 2(Att.), 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 86-9. - Applications. 
(a)  An application for a sign permit must be accompanied by the permit fee and shall include such information as is necessary to assure compliance with all appropriate laws and regulations of the Town of Little Elm, including: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner of the sign(s). 
(2)  The name and address of the owner or the person in possession of the premises where the sign(s) is located or to be located. 
(3)  Clear and legible drawings with description definitively showing the location of the sign(s) which is the subject of the permit and all proposed signs whose construction or placement requires permits, when such signs are on the same premises. Any existing sign on the premises must also be depicted on the drawings. 
(4)  Drawings showing the dimensions, elevations, construction supports, sizes, foundation, electrical wiring, and components, materials of the sign and method of attachment and character of structure members to which attachment is to be made. The design, quality, materials and loading shall conform to the requirements of the building code. If required by the director, engineering data certified by a licensed structural engineer shall be supplied on submitted plans. 
(5)  Approval of property owner is required for all tenant spaces. 
(b)  Expiration of sign permits. A sign permit shall expire and become void unless a request for final inspection of the sign is made no later than 60 days after the date the permit is issued. 
(c)  Subordinate. A sign permit shall be considered a subordinate project for all new construction and tenant finish-outs. Proposed signage must pass a final sign inspection prior to the associated business or building receiving a certificate of occupancy. 
(d)  Revocation. All rights and privileges acquired under the provisions of this chapter or any amendment hereto are mere licenses, revocable at any time by the director, even if reviewed and approved, if it is determined that the sign is in violation of this chapter, the application was incomplete, or the application contained misleading or false information. After receiving notice, the owner may re-apply for a new permit or voluntarily comply by bringing the sign into conformance, or the enforcement process ensues. 
(Ord. No. 1282, § 2(Att.), 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 86-10. - General provisions. 
(a)  Sign measurement criteria. 
(1)  Sign area measurement. Sign area for all sign types is measured as follows: 
a.  Sign copy mounted, affixed, or painted on a background panel or area distinctively painted, textured, or constructed as a background for the sign copy, is measured as that area contained within the sum of the smallest rectangle(s) that will enclose the sign copy, the background, the structure, masonry border and base. 
b.  Sign copy mounted as individual letters or graphics against a wall, fascia, mansard, or parapet of a building or surface of another structure, that has not been painted, textured, or otherwise altered to provide a distinctive background for the sign copy, is measured as a sum of the smallest rectangle(s) that will enclose each word and each graphic in the total sign. 
c.  Sign copy mounted, affixed, or painted on an illuminated surface or illuminated element of a building or structure, is measured as the entire illuminated surface or illuminated element which contains sign copy. Such elements may include, but are not limited to lit canopy fascia signs; cabinet signs; and/or interior lit awnings. 
d.  Temporary signs mounted on posts or other objects are measured by the area of space the sign occupies, not the entire structure the temporary sign is affixed to. 
e.  Multi-face signs are measured as follows: 
1.  Two-face signs: The sum of all visible sides on three-dimensional signs. 
2.  Three- or four-face signs: The sign area is 50 percent of the sum of the areas of all sign faces. 
f.  Spherical, free-form, sculptural, or other non-planar sign area is 50 percent of the sum of the areas using only the four vertical sides of the smallest four-sided polyhedron that will encompass the sign structure. 
(2)  Sign height measurement. Sign height is measured as follows: 
a.  Freestanding signs: The height of a freestanding sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign at finished grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign. The height of any monument sign base or other structure erected to support or adorn the sign is measured as part of the sign height. If a sign is located on a mound, berm, or other raised area for the sole purpose of increasing the height of the sign, the height of the mound, berm, or other raised area shall be included in the height of the sign. 
b.  Building mounted signs: The height of wall, fascia, mansard, parapet or other building mounted signs is the vertical distance measured from the base of the wall on which the sign is located to the top of the sign or sign structure. 
(b)  Sign illumination. All permanent signs may be non-illuminated, illuminated by internal, internal indirect (halo), or lit by external indirect illumination, unless otherwise specified. Signs shall have no: 
Flashing copy or lights; 
Revolving beacon lights; 
Chasing, blinking, or stroboscopic lights; 
Fluttering, undulating, swinging, or otherwise moving parts. 
    For purposes of this Code an electronically controlled changeable-copy sign is not considered a flashing sign unless it directly falls under the definition of "flashing" as defined in this Code. 
(1)  Internal illumination. Outdoor, internally illuminated advertising signs including but not limited to awning/canopy signs, cabinet signs (whether freestanding or building mounted, electronic message panels, reader boards, or service island signs) shall either be constructed with: 
a.  An opaque background and translucent letters and symbols (color of opaque backgrounds or translucent letters and symbols are not restricted); or 
b.  A translucent background with either translucent or opaque letters and symbols that are lighter than the background. 
c.  Where a translucent background lighter than the letters is required for a registered logo, the logo will be allowed as long as it does not represent more than 50 percent of the total sign area. 
(2)  External indirect illumination. Externally lit signs are permitted to be illuminated only with steady, stationary, down directed and shielded light sources directed solely onto the sign. Monument signs may have ground mounted lighting when said lighting is in compliance with this section. Light bulbs or light tubes, excluding neon, used for illuminating a sign shall not be visible from adjacent public rights-of-way or residential properties. 
(3)  No traffic interference. An illuminated sign must not interfere with traffic or traffic devices. A sign lighted by incandescent light shall be installed to protect the driver of a vehicle from dangerous glare and to maintain visual clearance of all official traffic signs, signals, and devices. 
(4)  Neon. Exposed neon tube illumination, to include string lights, pod lights, strand tube, and any other similar luminous device, utilized as a sign copy projection, border, frame, or other embellishment of sign copy, or on other site/building features or a window consistent with the definition of "sign" in this Code is prohibited. 
(5)  Electronic message (L.E.D.) signs: 
a.  May be incorporated into a permitted monument sign on each tract or parcel of land, as provided herein. Digital signs oriented to motorists or the public right-of-way are not allowed on building walls or windows. 
b.  Shall not exceed 50 percent of the area of the sign within the one-foot masonry border on monument signs. Multi-tenant monument signs are limited to one panel/blade or 20 square feet in area. 
c.  Any change of pictures or information on said sign shall not produce the illusion of moving objects, expanding or contracting shapes, rotation or any similar effect of animation. 
d.  Any change of pictures or information on the sign shall not change more often than once each three seconds for all displays on the sign. 
(6)  Reader board or manual changeable copy signs. 
a.  Shall be incorporated into a permitted monument sign on each tract or parcel of land, as provided herein. The director may allow incorporation into a wall sign or multi-tenant sign per his/her discretionary review and approval. 
b.  Shall not exceed 50 percent of the area of the sign. 
c.  Reader boards are not required to comply with the same internal lighting restrictions as indicated in section 86-10(b)(1). 
(7)  Residentially-zoned areas. An illuminated sign is not allowed to face a residentially zoned area if it is within 150 feet of the residential property line and is not separated by a public street. 
(c)  Location. 
(1)  Private property. All signs shall be located on private property and outside of public right-of-way with no setback unless otherwise specified. 
(2)  Sight triangle. All signs shall be located outside of the sight triangle as defined within this Code. 
(3)  Developed property. All signs shall be located on developed property or property to which a building permit has been issued for construction of the use or building to which the sign is for, unless otherwise specified herein. 
(d)  Construction and maintenance. All signs shall be constructed and maintained in accordance to the following standards: 
(1)  Construction. 
a.  All signs shall comply with the applicable provisions of the town adopted versions of the International Building Code, International Electrical Code, and International Property Maintenance Code. 
b.  Any sign as defined in this Code, shall be designed and constructed to withstand wind pressures and receive dead loads as required in the building code adopted by the Town of Little Elm. Any sign, other than a wall sign, shall be designed, installed, and maintained so that is will withstand a horizontal pressure of 30 pounds per square foot of exposed surface. 
(2)  Maintenance. 
a.  All signs shall be maintained in proper working order and good structural condition, in compliance with all building, electrical, and property maintenance codes, and in conformance with this Code, at all times. 
b.  The director shall have the authority to order the painting, repair, or replacement of a sign and accompanying landscaping. 
(e)  Removal. 
(1)  Illegal sign. Any sign erected or constructed after the effective date of this Code in violation of this Code must be removed or brought into compliance with the provisions of this Code. 
a.  Upon a determination that any sign has been constructed or placed or is maintained in violation of the provisions of this Code, the town code enforcement officer ("code enforcement officer") shall give written notice of the violation to the owner or person entitled to possession of the sign and the owner(s) of the property where the sign is located by certified and regular mail, or by personal delivery. The notice must identify (legal description not required) the property where the sign is located, identify the provisions of the Code violated, and state that the sign must be removed or brought into compliance with the Code within 30 days of the date of the notice. If the illegal sign is a hazardous sign, as identified in section 86-16 of this Code, the notice must state that the sign must be removed within 72 hours of the date of receipt of the notice. If the town is unable to contact the owner(s) or person entitled to possession of the sign by mail or personal delivery, the requirements of written notice shall be fulfilled by publishing notice in the newspaper. 
b.  If the person or owner fails to remove the sign or bring it into compliance with this Code within 30 days after notice has been given, the code enforcement officer may, in accordance with the provisions contained herein, cause the sign to be removed at the expense of the owner or person entitled to possession of the property or sign, and shall, upon the determination of the expenses, certify them to the town. The decision of the code enforcement officer to cause a sign to be removed may be appealed in accordance with subsection 86-10(e)(1)c. below. 
c.  If appealed, this decision shall be subject to review by the board of adjustment, acting as the sign control board, in accordance with the provisions contained herein. Except as may be otherwise provided herein, appeal must be made in writing and submitted to the director's office no later than ten days after the date of the notice issued by the code enforcement officer under subsection (e)(1)a. of this section. Notification of the date, time and location scheduled for the review of the board of adjustment shall be by certified mail. The board of adjustment may: (1) reverse the code enforcement officer's decision if it finds that the sign is in compliance with this Code; (2) uphold the decision of the code enforcement officer; or (3) issue its own removal or maintenance orders with respect to the sign. If removal or maintenance orders upheld or issued by the board of adjustment are not complied with within 15 days after the board's decision, or within 30 days after the decision of the date of the notice issued by the code enforcement officer, as set forth in subsection (e)(1)a. of this section, if no appeal is taken, the code enforcement officer may order the sign removed at the owner's expense under the provisions of this Code. 
d.  If the code enforcement officer orders the removal of an illegal sign and the sign is removed at the expense of the town, the code enforcement officer shall notify the property owner, the person entitled to possession of the sign or property, and each mortgagee and lienholder identified through a diligent effort, of the total costs incurred by the town for the removal of the sign within ten days after removal is accomplished. If the persons notified fail within 30 days after the date of notification to pay the entire costs and expenses of the removal, such costs and expenses shall be assessed on and the town shall have a lien against the property on which the sign was located. The lien is extinguished if the person entitled to the sign or property, the property owner or another person having an interest in the title to the property reimburses the town for the costs and expenses. The lien arises and attaches to the property at the time the notice of the lien is recorded and indexed in the office of the county clerk in the county in which the property is located. The notice must contain the name and address of the owner if that information can be determined with a reasonable effort, a legal description of the real property on which the sign was located, the amount of expenses incurred by the town, and the balance due. 
e.  The town satisfies the requirements of this section to make a diligent effort or a reasonable effort to determine the identity and address of an owner, a lienholder, or a mortgagee if the town searches the following records: 
1.  County real property records of the county in which the property is located; 
2.  Appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the property is located; 
3.  Records of the secretary of state; and 
4.  Utility records of the town. 
f.  When the town mails a notice in accordance with this section to a property owner, lienholder, or mortgagee and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as "refused" or "unclaimed," the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered delivered. 
(2)  Abandoned conforming sign. An on-premises sign or sign structure must be removed on the first anniversary of the date the business or activity that the sign or sign structure identifies or advertises ceases to operate on the premises on which the sign or sign structure is located. If the premises containing the sign or sign structure is leased, the sign must be removed on the second anniversary after the date the most recent tenant ceases to operate on the premises. For purposes of this subsection, an "on-premises sign" means a freestanding sign identifying or advertising a business, person, or activity, and installed and maintained on the same premises as the business, person, or activity. 
(3)  Nonconforming signs. Removal of all other signs shall be accomplished by order of the municipal board on sign control in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 216, including the determination of compensation (if any) in connection therewith by the municipal board on sign control, refer to section 86-15. 
(Ord. No. 1282, § 2(Att.), 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 86-11. - Prohibited signs. 
    Any sign not specifically authorized by this Code is prohibited unless required by law. The following signs and conditions are prohibited: 
(1)  Signs shall have no: flashing copy or lights; revolving beacon lights; chasing, blinking, or stroboscopic lights; or, fluttering, undulating, swinging, or otherwise moving parts. For purposes of this Code an electronically controlled changeable-copy sign is not considered a flashing sign unless it directly falls under the definition of "flashing" as defined in this Code; 
(2)  No billboards shall be permitted; 
(3)  No off-premises signs shall be permitted, except as specifically authorized in this Code; 
(4)  Any sign located within, on, or projecting over a property line which borders a public or private street, highway, alley, lane, parkway, avenue, road, sidewalk, or other right-of-way, except as provided in this Code. The code enforcement officer may cause to be removed any temporary or portable sign erected or displayed upon, or projecting into public property; 
(5)  Any sign attached to any public utility pole or structure, street light, tree, fence, fire hydrant, bridge, curb, sidewalk, park bench, or other location on public property, except as provided herein; 
(6)  Any sign placed, which by reason of its location, will obstruct the view of any authorized traffic sign, signal or other traffic control device or which by reason of shape, color, or position interferes with or could be confused with any authorized traffic signal or device; 
(7)  Any sign which constitutes a traffic hazard including but not limited to signs containing words such as "stop," "look," "danger;" 
(8)  Any sign placed within a sight triangle; 
(9)  Any sign which is placed so as to prevent or inhibit free ingress to or egress from any door, window, or any exit way required by the International Building Code, or by town fire department regulations; 
(10)  Any sign which emits audible sound, odor, smoke, steam, laser or hologram lights, or other visible matter, including any sign that employs any stereopticon, or motion picture projection; 
(11)  Any sign placed, mounted, attached or painted on a trailer, boat, or motor vehicle when parked, stored, or displayed conspicuously on the public right-of-way or private premises in a manner intended to attract the attention of the public. This provision expressly excludes business signs that are permanently painted on, or magnetically attached to motor vehicles or rolling stock that are regularly and consistently used to conduct normal business activities; 
(12)  The canopy band face shall be flat with no projections or stripes, be non-plastic and generally a metal or masonry based material, be primarily one earth-tone color that matches or accents the primary building, may not be backlit or otherwise illuminated or used as signage, and should generally be no greater than four feet in size, except as follows: 
a.  The canopy band face may utilize one small button logo on each face that can be internally illuminated, as long as each button logo does not exceed 15 square feet for bands three feet in size and 20 square feet for bands four feet in size, is generally as tall as it is wide, and does not protrude more than 18 inches from the canopy in any direction. 
b.  The canopy band face may utilize an external LED halo type light, if properly shielded/recessed and oriented downward/upward so that only the "wash" is visible. 
c.  The canopy band face may utilize internally illuminated rings, as long as the source is LED, it is flush with the band face and only protrudes nominally (up to a maximum of six inches), and the size of the ring does not exceed more than 25 percent for single rings and 50 percent for multiple rings of the thickness of the canopy band face. 
(13)  Roof signs, excluding mansard roofs when constructed in compliance with this Code; 
(14)  Banners, pennants, ribbons, balloons, feather flags, temporary signs, inflatable signs, signs with arrows, and wind-driven signs except as provided herein; 
(15)  Signs or banners erected or affixed within or projecting over any public right-of-way except as provided herein; 
(16)  Bandit signs; 
(17)  Pole or pylon signs; 
(18)  Searchlights, or other unpermitted lighting that draws attention or is a nuisance; 
(19)  Any digital billboard located, relocated, or upgraded along a regulated highway within the corporate limits or ETJ of the town, unless otherwise authorized in an approved agreement by town council that requires the support pole to be encased in masonry and any associated lateral electric service lines to be buried; and 
(20)  Any sign on commercial property designating reserved business or "no parking" spaces, except with director approval. All non-white parking lot striping. 
(Ord. No. 1282, § 2(Att.), 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 86-12. - Exempt signs. 
    The following signs shall be exempt from obtaining a sign permit, but must meet the standards of this Code: 
(1)  Any public notice, or warning required by a valid and applicable federal, state, or local law, regulation or ordinance; 
(2)  Any sign inside a building, not attached to a window or door, that is located more than three feet from the window or door; 
(3)  Works of fine art; 
(4)  Holiday lights and decorations that do not meet definition of a sign; 
(5)  Government signs erected by the town, county, state, or federal government in furtherance of their governmental responsibility; 
(6)  Memorial signs or tablets and building markers displayed on public or private buildings and tablets or headstones in cemeteries; 
(7)  Signs prepared by or for the local, state or federal government marking sites or buildings of historical significance; 
(8)  Nameplates as defined herein; 
(9)  Announcement signs as defined herein; 
(10)  Incidental signs as defined herein; 
(11)  Signs for vendors that are exempt under the town's solicitor-vendors ordinance; and, 
(12)  Blades/panels on multi-tenant monument signs. 
(Ord. No. 1282, § 2(Att.), 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 86-13. - Permitted signs. 
    The following sign types are permissible upon issuance of a sign permit, unless exempted by section 86-12 of this Code or Table 86.1, subject to the following conditions and specifications listed in this section. Signs that do not comply with the following conditions and specifications are considered prohibited, including exempted signs. Table 86.1 identifies signs by type and land use category. 
(a)  Temporary signs. 
(1)  "A" and "T" frame signs. 
a.  Manner: 
1.  The maximum sign area is 12 square feet. 
2.  The maximum height is four feet. 
3.  No more than one per business or tenant on the property is allowed. 
b.  Place: 
1.  Signs shall be placed on an internal sidewalk or within the landscaping directly in front of the building or lease space in which the business is located and the property the business is located on. "A" and "T" frame signs are not permitted within the public right-of-way or the perimeter landscape buffer and sidewalk adjacent to the right-of-way. 
2.  An unobstructed pedestrian clearance of at least four feet in width must be provided adjacent to the sign. 
3.  Shall not be located in required parking spaces. 
4.  Shall be placed no closer than 20 feet from other "A" or "T" frame signs. 
c.  Time: During business hours only. 
(2)  Banner signs. 
a.  Manner: 
1.  Maximum sign area is 48 square feet, not to exceed 75 percent of the building or lease space width upon which the sign is to be located. 
2.  Maximum height is four feet. 
b.  Place: All four corners of a banner sign shall be securely attached to the building. 
c.  Time: One banner sign may be placed on a building for up to two weeks two times per calendar year. The periods may be combined. Each tenant space or building located on a single lot or in a complex shall be allowed an individual banner as allowed per this Code. 
(3)  Banner policy (non-profit organizations). For non-profit organizations, the use of temporary signs or banners shall be permitted in conformance with the provisions and standards set forth. Non-profits must comply with the following guidelines but are not required to obtain a sign permit. 
a.  Manner: 
1.  Maximum sign area for wall banner is 48 square feet, with a maximum height of four feet. 
2.  Freestanding banners may not be higher than six feet measured at ground level. 
b.  Place: 
1.  Temporary signs and banners shall not to be displayed within the public right-of-way or otherwise obstruct the vision of any driveways or intersections. 
2.  Banners must be located on property owned by the non-profit organization. 
c.  Time: 
1.  One freestanding banner and one wall banner sign may be placed on a property for up to 30 days prior to and during a special event before they must be replaced or removed. 
2.  No more than one freestanding banner sign and one banner sign placed on a building may be located on a property at a time. 
(4)  Development information signs (residential). 
a.  Manner: 
1.  Maximum sign area is 40 square feet. 
2.  Can be freestanding with a two-foot clear space above the ground (HAGL). 
3.  Maximum height is eight feet. 
4.  The allowed signage is based upon the number of lots each builder controls. If less than 100 lots, two signs. If between 100 and 500 lots, three signs. If between 500 lots and 1,000 lots, four signs. If greater than 1,000 lots, five signs. 
5.  Materials must be weather and fade resistant. 
b.  Place: 
1.  Development information signs shall be located on property within the project subdivision to which the signs pertain, or with HOA permission, can be located on HOA common area. 
2.  Development information signs shall be placed no closer than 100 feet apart and must not be located within the public right-of-way. 
c.  Time: 
1.  Displayed once the plat is recorded and shall be removed when 90 percent completion of each phase to which the sign is a part of. 
(5)  Future development signs (commercial). 
a.  Manner: 
1.  May be freestanding with a maximum four-foot HAGL: 
 A property of five acres or less may have a sign with a maximum square footage of 48 square feet and 10 feet in height. 
 A property between five and 20 acres may have a sign with a maximum square footage of 64 square feet and 10 feet in height. 
 A property over 20 acres may have a sign with a maximum square footage of 96 square feet and 12 feet in height. 
b.  Place: 
1.  On the property where the activity is to occur. 
2.  One freestanding sign per street frontage. 
3.  One banner sign per building. 
c.  Time: 
1.  Displayed no earlier than 30 days before the commencement of the activity and must be removed no later than 30 days after the activity is completed, or the installation of a permanent sign, whichever occurs first, unless otherwise approved by the director for a longer period of time. 
(6)  Garage sale signs. 
a.  Manner: The town shall issue five signs per garage sale per permit. All other signs shall be prohibited. Garage sales are regulated by chapter 26, article III, of the Little Elm Code of Ordinances. 
b.  Place: 
1.  Signs shall be located on private property and signs located on private property away from the sale site shall have permission from property owner. The permission of the property owner must be indicated by the property owner's signature on the back of the sign. 
2.  Signs are not allowed on utility poles, in easements, on public fences or buildings, or any right-of-way, public or private. 
c.  Time: 
1.  Signs shall be displayed no sooner than 24 hours prior to the first day of the sale. 
2.  All signs must be removed by 8:00 a.m. on the day following the last day of the sale. Signs removed by the town may be subject to a fine of $10.00 per sign removed due and payable by the owner of the property on which the sale occurred. 
(7)  Government signs. Per general provisions, section 86-10. 
(8)  Human signs. All human signs shall be located on-site on private property, out of the right-of-way, not utilize any luminous device or other item that will distract or otherwise interfere with motorists, and obtain a permit from the town. 
(9)  Inflatable signs are only allowed in association with a valid promotional event permit from the town . 
a.  Manner: 
1.  Shall not exceed 20 feet in height or ten feet in width. 
2.  Must be secured to the ground and not float above the ground. 
3.  Unprotected extension cords cannot cross pedestrian or vehicular access ways, unless otherwise authorized by the fire marshal and building official. 
b.  Place: May not be placed on a roof or suspended from a building, located in required parking spaces, driveways that provide access to parking spaces, or fire lanes, nor may the sign encroach into the right-of-way. The director has final discretionary approval authority on the location of inflatables. 
(10)  Model home signs. 
a.  Manner: 
1.  Maximum sign area is 40 square feet with monument style and no HAGL. 
2.  Maximum height is eight feet. 
3.  One sign per cluster of model homes per builder. 
4.  A nameplate sign that identifies the individual product name is exempt if it does not exceed three square feet or three feet in height. 
b.  Place: Must be placed in front of a cluster of one or more model homes per builder. 
c.  Time: All model home signage must be removed from the premises upon sale of the last model in the cluster. 
(11)  Real estate signs, residential. 
a.  Manner: 
1.  Maximum of one sign per street frontage. 
2.  Maximum of six square feet in area. 
b.  Place: Must be located only on the lot/property that is for sale or lease. 
c.  Time: No restrictions. 
(12)  Real estate signs, commercial. 
a.  Manner: 
1.  Maximum of one sign per street frontage. 
2.  Maximum of 40 square feet in area, can be freestanding, with a maximum height of eight feet and a maximum HAGL of two feet. 
b.  Place: Must be located only on the lot/property that is for sale or lease. 
c.  Time: Up to one year following the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy. Thereafter, a "for lease" or "for sale" banner may be securely attached to the building, one per street frontage or lease space, and up to 32 square feet in area. 
(13)  Stake signs. All stake signs are subjected to the following area and height restrictions unless otherwise specified: 
a.  Manner: 
1.  Maximum sign area is six square feet, except for signs identifying the presence of a home security system, which shall not exceed one square foot. 
2.  Maximum height is three feet, excluding yard signs. 
b.  Place: 
1.  Civic: Signs may be located in the right-of-way, excluding medians, or on private property. Signs located on private property away from the activity site shall have permission from the property owner. 
2.  Home improvement: Signs shall be placed on the lot to which home improvement is occurring. In general, signage shall not be located closer than ten feet to the edge of street pavement. 
3.  Open house: Signs shall be located on private property. Signs located on private property away from the activity site shall have permission from property owner. In general, signage shall not be located closer than ten feet to the edge of street pavement. 
4.  Yard signs: Shall be located only on lots with an occupied single-family, two-family, or multi-family dwelling generally within ten feet of the building footprint. 
c.  Time: 
1.  Civic: Signs shall be erected no more than seven days prior to the meeting or event and removed no more than 48 hours after the meeting or event. 
2.  Home improvement: Signs shall be removed no later than 30 days after installation. 
3.  Open house: Signs shall be erected no earlier than two hours prior to the time of the open house and shall be removed no later than two hours after the open house. 
4.  Yard sign: No restriction. 
(b)  Permanent signs. 
(1)  Awning and canopy signs. 
a.  Manner: 
1.  One per occupancy per building face. 
2.  Minimum eight feet pedestrian clearance above sidewalk level. 
3.  Ten square feet maximum sign area. 
4.  If acting as the main business sign, it shall not be in addition to a wall-mounted sign. 
5.  If acting as an auxiliary business sign, it shall be located on the valance only, and the height of the lettering shall not exceed four inches, unless it is a "ghosted-in" silhouette on the awnings. 
6.  Awnings shall not be internally illuminated, unless acting as the main business sign. 
7.  Awnings are subordinate to architectural masonry requirements in that awnings should be functional and decorative enhancements to a building and not a method to achieve additional branding beyond what is intended by this Code. 
b.  Place: Supporting structure of an awning or canopy may not encroach into or over the street right-of-way. 
c.  Other. Fuel canopies and similar structures shall abide by the sign restrictions within section 86-11 and not display prices. A canopy shall have its support structure (columns) encased in masonry with a pitched roof of standing seam metal. Associated exhaust valves for underground storage tanks shall be located outside the perimeter landscape area and painted an earth tone, non-white color. 
(2)  Building directory. 
a.  Manner : 
1.  Shall be contained within a shallow metal or wood case and the contents clearly visible through a glass front. 
2.  The display case shall be attached to the building wall, next to the main entrance, approximately five feet above ground level, and shall not project out from the wall more than six inches. 
3.  Maximum size shall be eight square feet. 
4.  It may be lighted. 
(3)  Directional. 
a.  Manner: 
1.  Maximum sign area is six square feet. 
2.  Maximum height is three feet. 
3.  Style of signs shall be consistent with building materials and architecture of building within the project site with a monument style base. 
4.  The director, or his or her designee, has the final discretion to approve or not approve a proposed directional sign based on its wording, location, or necessity. 
b.  Place: 
1.  Shall be located a minimum of 25 feet from street right-of-way. 
(4)  Flags. 
a.  Manner: 
1.  Maximum area is 60 square feet, excluding the American flag. 
2.  The maximum height of a flagpole or other supporting structure in the low-density residential L.U. category shall not exceed 20 feet. The maximum height in all other L.U. categories shall not exceed 35 feet. 
3.  Maximum of three flags per project site. 
b.  Place: Shall be located on the property and setback a minimum distance equal to the height of the pole from any property line. 
c.  Restrictions: Corporate and builder flags are prohibited. 
(5)  Information. 
a.  Manner: 
1.  Maximum sign area is 12 square feet. 
2.  Maximum height is five feet. 
3.  A maximum of one information sign shall be allowed for each publicly owned institution or non-profit organization. An information sign shall not be considered a pylon sign in this Code. 
b.  Place: 
1.  At a public building or church, such sign shall be located at or near the building entrance and not oriented towards motorists nor the right-of-way. 
2.  For a neighborhood, such sign shall be located within the subdivision at a commonly traveled location, for example, near the neighborhood park or amenity center, the main mail station, or the main entrance to the neighborhood. Such sign shall be located on property maintained by the neighborhood/homeowners association or with a written agreement between the property owner and the association. Such sign shall not be placed closer than 150 feet from the intersection of a collector street and a major or principal thoroughfare, as defined in the Little Elm Master Thoroughfare Plan. 
(6)  Menu board signs. 
a.  Drive-through menu board. 
1.  Manner: 
 Shall be a monument-style sign and does not have to meet illumination standards. 
 The design, materials, and finish shall match the front facade of the building(s) on the same lot. 
 One drive-through menu board per drive-through lane. 
 Maximum area is 60 square feet. 
 Maximum height is eight feet. 
2.  Place: Shall be located to the side or rear of the primary building(s) on the lot. 
b.  Drive-through pre-order sign. 
1.  Manner: 
 Shall be a monument-style sign. 
 The design, materials, and finish shall match the front facade of the building(s) on the same lot. 
 One sign per drive-through lane. 
 Maximum area is 36 square feet. 
 Maximum height is six feet. 
2.  Place: 
 Shall be located at the beginning of the drive-through lane. 
 Shall be located to the side or rear of the primary building(s) on the lot. 
c.  Drive-in menu board. 
1.  Manner: 
 Shall be a monument-style sign or attached directly to support columns of a canopy that covers the drive-in stalls. 
 The design, materials, and finish shall match the front facade of the building(s) on the same lot. 
 One drive-in menu board per ordering station. 
 Maximum area is nine square feet. 
 Maximum height is six feet. 
2.  Place: Shall be located adjacent to the drive-in stall or attached directly to support columns of a canopy that covers the drive-in stalls. 
(7)  Monument signs. 
a.  Manner: 
1.  The maximum area is 60 square feet. Tracts with 380 overlay zoning may go up to 100 square feet. 
2.  The maximum height is eight feet, and ten feet for U.S. 380 tracts. 
3.  One per lot or pad site. 
4.  A corner lot or lot with a total frontage of 400 feet shall be allowed one additional monument sign up to 40 square feet in size, including the masonry border. 
5.  The base of the sign shall be protected by a landscaped area to be maintained in a healthy condition. 
6.  Sign structure and base shall be masonry. The design and construction of monument signs shall be compatible with the architecture and style of the development of the project site. 
7.  Signs shall contain a minimum one-foot masonry (brick/stone) border around all sides of the sign. A sign constructed entirely of masonry materials shall satisfy the border requirement. The one-foot masonry border is included in the maximum area of a sign. 
8.  The street address shall be included on the sign and be a minimum eight inches in height, decorative metal, and of contrasting color with the monument. 
b.  Place: 
1.  Shall be located behind the property line. 
2.  Spacing of 75 feet shall be maintained between all monument signs. 
(8)  Multi-tenant monument sign. 
a.  Manner: 
1.  Shall include the name and address of the development when practical, as determined by the director. 
2.  The base of the sign shall be protected by a landscaped area to be maintained in a healthy condition. 
3.  Sign structure and base shall be masonry. The design and construction of monument signs shall be compatible with the architectural style, design, color, and material of the development(s) on the project site. 
4.  All blank panels shall be opaque and black, white, or earth tone in color. Business identifications on panels should generally occupy a panel size that proportionally corresponds to its presence within the commercial development. For example, a small individual tenant lease space should not occupy a larger panel, and a big box should occupy a larger panel. 
5.  The maximum area shall be based upon the size of the development and its number of tenant lease spaces. 
 Buildings with three or fewer tenant lease spaces, 80 square feet. 
 Five acres or less is 100 square feet with more than three tenant lease spaces. 
 For every acre over five acres, the sign size may be increased by ten square feet with the maximum allowed area of 200 square feet, except for signs located on property with 380 overlay zoning, in which case a maximum allowed area of 240 square feet is permitted. 
6.  The maximum height shall not exceed ten percent of the sign's maximum allowed area. 
7.  Signs shall contain a minimum one-foot masonry (brick/stone) border around all sides of the sign. A sign constructed entirely of masonry materials shall satisfy the border requirement. The one-foot masonry border is included in the maximum area of a sign. 
8.  A multi-tenant monument sign shall be located within a development that consists of multiple businesses with exterior entrances which are united through common building architecture, color, and materials, landscaping, and parking. 
9.  One multi-tenant monument sign is permitted per street frontage of a development. One additional multi-tenant monument sign is permitted along a street for each additional 750 linear feet of street frontage that exceeds 750 linear feet of street frontage. No more than four signs shall be allowed per development, with a minimum separation of 375 linear feet between each sign. 
10.  Shall be located behind the property line. 
11.  Where exists a contiguous and unified commercial development larger than five acres in size, multi-tenant signs will be allowed to advertise any off-site business residing in said development, with owner permission, so long as the business does not already have its own monument sign. Interior commercial pad sites can also elect to install an off-site monument within a unified commercial development if within a sign easement and not already on a multi-tenant sign. 
(9)  Projecting sign. 
a.  General. 
1.  A maximum of one per occupancy per building face. 
2.  A maximum area of six square feet in area, and a maximum of three feet in width. 
i.  The director may waive this requirement when projection signs are proposed with uses outlined in item 7. below. 
3.  Distance from the sidewalk to the lower edge of sign shall be higher than eight feet. 
4.  Minimum 15 foot distance between projecting signs. 
5.  The sign shall not project above the top edge of the wall it is attached to. 
i.  The Director may waive this requirement when projection signs are proposed with uses outlined in item 7. below. 
6.  Maximum sign area is included as part of the maximum area for wall signs. 
i.  The director may waive this requirement when projection signs are proposed with uses outlined in item 7. below. 
7.  The director may allow up to a maximum area of 200 square feet when proposed for structures with the following uses: 
i.  Theater, indoor (single tenant). 
ii.  Theater, drive-in (single tenant). 
iii.  Commercial amusement, indoor (single tenant). 
iv.  Mixed-use building. 
v.  Hotel. 
b.  Place. Located on the building in which the business or use is conducted or on the wall attached to said building. 
c.  Time. No restrictions. 
(10)  Scoreboards. Shall be located within the limits of and face into the athletic field or stadium. 
(11)  Subdivision entrance sign. 
a.  General. 
1.  Manner: 
 Shall be a monument sign constructed of stone, brick, or other maintenance free material. 
 The design and construction must be compatible with surrounding development. 
 Signage may appear on both sides of the entrance roadway within the recorded or master-planned subdivision. The maximum allowable sign face size limitations will apply separately to each side of the street. 
 Lighting shall be ground lights or lights attached to the top of the sign focused downward directly on the sign. 
 The developer shall represent in writing to the town its plan for perpetual maintenance of such signs by the homeowner's association or similar entity before a permit will be issued for such signs. 
2.  Place: 
 Shall be located outside sight triangles. 
 The town may enter into a license agreement to permit a subdivision identification sign to be located within public right-of-way. The license agreement shall be in a form acceptable to the town. 
3.  Time: A permit shall not be issued until the final plat is recorded. 
b.  Primary standards. 
1.  Manner: 
 Maximum sign area is 32 square feet for subdivisions containing 100 lots or less. For every 100 lots in the subdivision in addition to the first 100, the size can increase an additional ten square feet to a maximum size of 64 square feet of total sign face area. If the sign face is incorporated into landscape features, a wall, or architectural feature, the size of the sign face is determined by the area of the smallest rectangle within which the face of the sign can be enclosed. 
 When signage is incorporated into a wall, landscape or architectural feature, in addition to the allowed signage on both sides of a street pursuant to subsection (b)(11)a.1. above, a third location may be permitted within a landscaped median of the subdivision entrance street subject to a license agreement as specified in subsection (b)(11)a.2. above. The maximum square footage of primary subdivision entrance signage allowed may be distributed between the three signs. 
 The maximum height of signage shall be eight feet including any berms or landscape features or on an architectural element. The maximum height of an architectural element shall be 20 feet. 
2.  Place: 
 Located at the primary entrance into the subdivision. Primary entrance signage is permitted at only one entrance for each subdivision, except that a second location for primary subdivision entrance signage shall be permitted if two entrances to the subdivision are located on two different primary thoroughfare roadways, as designated in the Little Elm Master Thoroughfare Plan. In such case, primary entrance signage may be placed at each of the primary thoroughfare roadway entrances in accordance with this chapter. 
 A subdivision primary entrance sign must be located within the subdivision or at an off-premises location adjacent to an arterial roadway within 150 feet of the primary entrance to the subdivision. 
 An architectural element shall be located on private property and have a set back from the right-of-way line equal to its height. 
c.  Secondary standards. 
1.  Manner: Maximum sign area is 16 square feet. 
2.  Place: They are to be placed at an on-premises location within the subdivision and at entrances into the subdivision other than at the primary entrance. 
d.  Tertiary standards. 
1.  Manner: 
 Located at the entryway into sections within a subdivision that are 25 acres or greater in size, where the entire subdivision is equal to or greater than 50 acres. 
 Shall be comprised entirely of stone or masonry, with engraved lettering set within the stone. 
 They shall be monument signs only and shall be limited to a total monument size of ten square feet. 
(12)  Vending machine signs. 
a.  Manner: 
1.  Maximum sign area is restricted to the surface area of the vending machine or gasoline pump. 
2.  One four-square foot sign per machine or pump may project a maximum of two feet above the top of said machine or pump. 
b.  Place: Shall be located on the vending machine or pump, or placed at approximately eye level on the associated columns, within a frame or with durable backing, so as to be oriented to on-site customers and not the right-of-way. 
c.  Time: No restriction. 
(13)  Wall. 
a.  Manner: 
1.  For each one linear foot of the primary building face, two square feet of wall sign is allowed. A maximum of 200 square feet of wall signage is allowed per building or tenant. Big box primary tenants may use a total of 400 square feet. 
2.  Sign area allowance shall be calculated/applied cumulatively for all proposed wall signage. Secondary use wall signs shall not be installed without the primary use first having a compliant wall sign. The director can discretionarily provide minor waivers to area for corner locations with multiple fronts or in other similar situations. 
3.  Maximum height shall not project above the roof line, or top edge of parapet wall or mansard roof. 
4.  Signs that project three inches or more from the wall shall maintain a minimum clearance of nine feet from the ground. 
5.  The director shall ensure adequate proportion, separation, and scale for wall signs. 
b.  Place: Located on the building in which the business or use is conducted or on the wall attached to said building. Tenants within a shell strip building shall install the sign on the wall of the lease space they occupy and not elsewhere on the strip building. 
c.  Time: No restrictions. 
(14)  Window. 
a.  Manner: 
1.  Maximum sign area is 30 percent of the window area per wall. Signs exceeding 30 percent shall be calculated against the maximum wall sign area permitted, upon discretionary review and approval by the director. 
2.  Incidental signs shall count towards the maximum window sign area. "Open" signs are limited to one per primary business entrance. 
3.  Neon signs are allowed behind windows in commercial districts, but shall count toward the total window sign area. 
4.  Incidental signs, neon signs, and all other wall/window signage shall be static with no blinking, strobing, revolving, flashing, chasing, or other moving elements, to include "Open" signs. 
b.  Place: Per general provisions, section 86-10. 
c.  Time: No restrictions. 
(Ord. No. 1282, § 2(Att.), 7-7-2015; Ord. No. 1449, § 2, 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 86-14. - Political signs. 
(a)  Political signs may be erected in accordance with this Code upon private premises. Political signs are not allowed on utility poles, in public easements, on public fences or buildings, or any town property or town right-of-way. Political signs located on private property, which is not the property of the owner of the sign, shall have permission from property owner. 
(b)  Political signs may not: 
(1)  Have an effective area greater than 36 feet; 
(2)  Be more than eight feet in height; 
(3)  Be illuminated; or 
(4)  Have any moving elements. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, two political signs per candidate (or per measure or proposition) may be lawfully erected on any town-owned property that has been designated as an election polling place for the time period beginning with early voting by personal appearance and continuing through the completion of the election contest including, if applicable, any runoff election. The placement of such sign must comply with the Texas Election Code's location requirements and may not: 
(1)  Have an effective area greater than four feet; 
(2)  Be more than two feet in height; 
(3)  Be illuminated; or 
(4)  Have any moving elements. 
(Ord. No. 1282, § 2(Att.), 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 86-15. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Nonconforming sign structure. A sign that does not conform to the regulations relating to the structure of the sign prescribed in this Code, including but not limited to sign type, height, size, or location, and that existed lawfully on the date of adoption of this Code or amendment hereto (as applicable) shall be deemed a nonconforming sign structure. A nonconforming sign structure may be maintained in its current location until one of the conditions outlined in subsection (e) of this section occurs at which time the sign structure must be removed in accordance with this section or modified to bring the sign structure into conformance with current ordinances. The sign structure must be maintained and the degree of nonconformity may not be increased; however, a face change may occur without altering the nonconforming status of the sign structure and without the need to bring the structure into compliance with this Code, unless otherwise provided for herein. 
(b)  Nonconforming sign face. An internally illuminated sign face that does not conform to the regulations that impact the face of the sign prescribed in this Code, including but not limited to color of background and/or letters, and that existed lawfully on the date of adoption of this chapter or amendment hereto shall be deemed a nonconforming sign face. A nonconforming sign face may be maintained in its current location until one of the conditions outlined in subsection (d) of this section occurs at which time the sign face must be removed in accordance with this section or modified to bring the sign face into conformance with current ordinances. The sign face must be maintained and not moved, altered, removed, reinstalled or replaced until it is made to conform with this Code. 
(c)  Billboards. When a property with an existing billboard, whether legal nonconforming, illegal, legal, or any other status, applies for a permit from the town, the billboard shall have its support pole encased in masonry and any associated lateral electric service lines buried prior to any certificate of occupancy being issued for the parent project. 
(d)  Removal of nonconforming sign faces. The right to continue all nonconforming sign faces shall cease and such sign face shall be removed whenever: 
(1)  An approved application for certificate of occupancy or a certificate of occupancy for a change of business is issued as provided in the comprehensive zoning ordinance and the existing sign face is associated with the previous business. 
(2)  A change of occupancy classification occurs as described in the building code and the sign face is associated with the classification change. 
(3)  The business advertised on the sign ceases to operate on the premises on which the sign is located. 
(4)  A sign face is altered, repaired or reinstalled without a permit pursuant to the provisions of the chapter. 
(5)  A sign face, or a substantial part of the sign face, is blown down or otherwise destroyed, damaged or dismantled for any purpose other than maintenance operations or for changing the letters, symbols, or other matter on the sign face; for purposes hereof, a sign or substantial part of it is considered to have been destroyed if the cost to repair the sign face exceeds 60 percent of the cost of erecting a new sign face at the same location. 
(6)  A sign face has been blown down, dismantled, deteriorated or dilapidated, or has been otherwise deemed unsafe. 
(7)  An empty blade/panel on a multi-tenant sign with no advertising shall, upon notice by the town, convert any internally illuminated panels without opaque film to be compliant with the dark sky ordinance provisions of subsection 86-10(b). 
(e)  Removal of nonconforming sign structures. The right to continue all nonconforming sign structures shall cease and such sign structure and sign face shall be removed (compensation, if required for such removal, as determined by the board of adjustment in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 216, may be awarded) whenever: 
(1)  The property is rezoned and the existing business ceases to operate on the premises on which the sign structure is located, and the sign is no longer allowable in the new zoning classification. 
(2)  The structure is altered, remodeled, removed, or rebuilt and the costs of the alteration, remodel or rebuild exceeds 60 percent of the value of the altered structure, prior to the alteration, remodel or rebuild. Values shall be based upon Denton County Appraisal District records. 
(3)  The sign structure is altered, moved, repaired, or relocated without a permit pursuant to the provisions of the chapter. 
(4)  The sign, or a substantial part of the sign, is blown down or otherwise destroyed or dismantled for any purpose other than maintenance operations or for changing the letters, symbols, or other matter on the sign; for purposes hereof, a sign or substantial part of it is considered to have been destroyed if the cost to repair the sign exceeds 60 percent of the cost of erecting a new sign of the same type at the same location. 
(5)  The sign leans such that an angle between the sign and the ground is 70 degrees or less. 
(6)  The sign has been blown down, dismantled, deteriorated, hit by motorist, or dilapidated, or has been otherwise deemed structurally unsafe. 
(7)  An occupancy change occurs as described in subsections (d)(1), (2) or (3) of this section and the non-conforming sign structure is an off-premises or on-premises wall sign. 
(f)  Signs on property acquired by the town. 
(1)  A nonconforming sign situated on property which has been acquired by the town via a town-initiated process may be relocated on the site provided the sign is removed or rebuilt to conform to the ordinances which were applicable to the sign when erected within two years of the date of acquisition by the town. Relocation is limited to the same physical sign with no increase in height, area, or change in other physical attributes. The setback of the sign shall comply with the visibility standards. For the purposes of this provision, "a property acquisition initiated by the town" does not include right-of-way dedication in the subdivision plat process. 
(2)  In the event that any property in the Town of Little Elm upon which a billboard is located is fully or partially acquired by a governmental unit for the widening or reconstruction of a roadway, the billboard shall be allowed to be moved from its original location to another location along the same roadway in accordance with this subsection. The new location must comply with the following conditions and all other codes and ordinances of the town and all applicable laws and regulations of the State of Texas: 
a.  An application for the new location shall be made to the town's building safety department together with an application fee as required for building permits. The owner of the proposed tract of land shall sign the application. 
b.  The billboard shall be located no further than 1,000 feet from the original sign to be moved, except that no billboard may be place within 250 feet of a residence. 
c.  The reconstructed billboard shall be limited to a sign with the same physical characteristics as the original sign with no changes in area or other physical attributes. A billboard currently constructed with wooden poles may be reconstructed using a single metal pole. 
d.  The billboard shall be located on the new site so as to provide the maximum development potential of the site. 
e.  Electronically displayed messages, flashing or strobe lights shall be prohibited. 
f.  Nothing contained herein shall be construed to change the legal status of any relocated commercial billboard from its current nonconforming or illegal status. 
g.  All relocated structures shall have their support poles encased in masonry and any associated lateral electric service lines buried. 
(Ord. No. 1282, § 2(Att.), 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 86-16. - Hazardous signs. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by law or this Code, no person may install, maintain, or use a sign that: 
(1)  Obstructs a fire escape, required exit, window, or door used as a means of escape. 
(2)  Interferes with a ventilation opening, except that a sign may cover a transom window if otherwise in compliance with the International Building and Fire Codes. 
(3)  Substantially obstructs the lighting of public right-of-way or other public property, or interferes with a public utility or traffic control device; 
(4)  Contains or utilizes a supporting device placed on public right-of-way or other public area within the town limits or the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the town, unless the use of the public right-of-way or other public area has been approved by the town and a right-of-way joint use agreement and/or license agreement has been filed and approved. 
(5)  Is illuminated in such a way as to create a hazard to pedestrian, bicycle, or vehicular traffic. 
(6)  Creates a traffic hazard for pedestrians, bicyclists, or motorists, by restricting visibility at a curb cut or adjoining public street. 
(7)  Has less than 16 feet of clearance above street pavement grade and/or is located outside public right-of-way and within the sight triangle at an intersection that results in impaired sight distance of users of the intersection. 
(8)  Violates a requirement of the electrical code. 
(9)  Is determined by the building official to be dangerous. 
(b)  Notice that removal of a hazardous sign is required shall be given by the director in accordance with section 86-10(e) of this Code. Once notice is provided, the sign must be removed or appeal taken within 72 hours after receipt of such notice. 
(1)  If after such time the sign is not removed and no appeal is taken, the director may enter the premises and abate the hazardous condition. The reasonable cost of abating the hazardous sign, together with interest on the unpaid balance at the interest rate of ten percent, shall be taxed as a lien against the property on which the sign is located. Such lien shall attach in accordance with section 86-10(e). 
(2)  A sign removed under this provision shall be held for a period of no less than 60 days after its removal before disposal of the removed sign. If during this period the owner of the sign pays the storage fee, the director shall return the sign to its owner. This provision is not exclusive and in no way restricts or modifies any method authorized by law to seize evidence of a crime. 
(Ord. No. 1282, § 2(Att.), 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 86-17. - Notification. 
    Notification of violations of this chapter shall be consistent with the requirements of V.T.C.A., Government Code. 
(Ord. No. 1282, § 2(Att.), 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 86-18. - Variances. 
(a)  A variance to the provisions of this Code shall be considered an exception to the regulations, rather than a right. Whenever a sign to be erected is of such unusual size, shape or nature that the strict application of the requirements contained in this Code would result in substantial hardship or inequity, the board of adjustment, acting as the sign control board, may vary or modify, except as otherwise indicated, such requirements in accordance with the provisions listed below, so that the developer may erect a sign in a reasonable manner, but so that, at the same time, the public welfare and interests of the town are protected and the general intent and spirit of this Code is preserved. In no event, however, may a variance be granted to the administrative process, to the permit requirements, or allowing a prohibited sign as contained in this Code. 
(1)  Jurisdiction. When a written request for a variance from the design requirements of this Code is filed: 
a.  After conducting a public hearing concerning such requested variance(s), the board of adjustment may approve or deny a request for a variance to the design standards and such variance(s), if granted, shall also be considered to be a modification of the sign regulations, applicable to the specified property within such development within the town limits or ETJ. 
(2)  Approval . In granting approval of a request for variance, the board of adjustment shall conclude that the variance is not contrary to the public interest and, due to special conditions; a literal enforcement of this Code would result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the variance observes the spirit of this Code and concludes that substantial justice is done. The board of adjustment shall meet these requirements by making findings that: 
a.  The public convenience and welfare will be substantially served; 
b.  The appropriate use of surrounding property will not be substantially or permanently impaired or diminished; 
c.  The applicant has not created the hardship from which relief is sought; 
d.  The variance will not confer upon the applicant a special right or privilege not commonly shared or available to the owners of similar and surrounding property; 
e.  The hardship from which relief is sought is not solely of an economic nature; 
f.  The variance is not contrary to the public interest; 
g.  Due to special conditions, the literal enforcement of this Code would result in an unnecessary hardship; and 
h.  In granting the variance, the spirit of this Code is observed and substantial justice is done. 
(3)  Appeal. The board of adjustment's decision can be appealed in accordance with the provisions set forth in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 216 following the board's decision. 
(Ord. No. 1282, § 2(Att.), 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 86-19. - Amendments. 
    The council may, from time to time, adopt, amend and make public rules and regulations for the administration of this Code. This Code may be enlarged or amended by the council after public hearings before the planning and zoning commission and the town council, due notice of which shall be given as required by law. 
(Ord. No. 1282, § 2(Att.), 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 86-20. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this Code or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this Code shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the maximum permissible fine allowed by state law and a separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(b)  Administrative action. The town and/or the town manager shall enforce this Code by appropriate administrative action, including but not limited to the rejection of plans, maps, plats, and specifications not found to be in compliance with this Code and good engineering practices, and the issuance of stop work orders. 
(c)  Court proceedings. Upon the request of the town council, the town attorney or other authorized attorney shall file an action in the district courts to enjoin the violation or threatened violation of this Code, or to obtain declaratory judgment, and to seek and recover court costs and attorney fees, and/or recover damages in an amount sufficient for the town to undertake any construction or other activity necessary to bring about compliance with a requirement regarding the property and established pursuant to this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1282, § 2(Att.), 7-7-2015) 
Table 86.1
Allowed Sign Types by Land Use Category 
Sign Type Land Use Category SF Residential Multi-Family Commercial Temporary Signs "A" and "T" Frame X X C Banner X P P Development Information P X X Future Development X P P Garage Sale P P X Government C C C Human X P P Inflatable X X X Model Home P X X Real Estate, Commercial X P P Real Estate, Residential C X X Stake Signs C C C Permanent Signs Awning/Canopy X P P Building Directory X C C Directional X P P Flags C C C Information C C C Menu X X P Monument X P P Multi-Tenant Monument X X P Multi-Tenant Panel X X C Projecting X X P Scoreboard P P P Subdivision Entrance P X X Vending X C C Wall X P P Window X X C  
X Not allowed P Allowed only with permit C Allowed in compliance with Code; no permit required  
(Ord. No. 1282, § 2(Att.), 7-7-2015) 
Chapter 90 - STREETS, ROADS, AND OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- General authority of home-rule municipalities concerning highways, streets and alleys, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 311.001; general authority of home-rule municipality regarding sidewalks, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 311.004; use of municipal streets and sidewalks for public convenience and amenities, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 316.001 et seq.; consent of governing body required for utility use of streets and ways, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. Art. 1175; local authorities may regulate parades and assemblages on highways, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(3); municipal management of public rights-of-way used by telecommunications providers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 283.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 90-1. - Smoking prohibited on town property. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person smokes or possesses a burning tobacco, weed, or other plant product or uses a smokeless tobacco product in town hall or any other facility owned, operated, or managed by the town. 
(b)  The town secretary is hereby authorized and directed to post, in a conspicuous location, a sign at town hall and at other facilities owned, operated, or managed by the town which contain the words "No Tobacco Use, Town of Little Elm Ordinance", or "Tobacco Free Area, Town of Little Elm Ordinance", or the universal symbol for no smoking, or other language that clearly prohibits smoking and/or the use of tobacco. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this article, and any person violating or failing to comply with any provision hereof shall be fined, upon conviction, in an amount not more than $500.00, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 425, §§ 1-3, 10-19-1998) 
Sec. 90-2. - Improper use of bridge. 
(a)  No person shall be permitted to fish, dive, jump or swim from the bridge located on Highway 720, which bridge extends over the Lewisville Lake. 
(b)  Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not to exceed $200.00. In addition to any other penalty imposed pursuant to the provisions of this article, the license shall be revoked by the town council or by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 65, §§ 65-1, 65-2, 8-7-1975) 
Secs. 90-3-90-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CULVERT INSTALLATION 

Sec. 90-23. - Permit required for culvert placement. 
    From and after the effective date of this article, any person desiring to place a culvert in the right-of-way of a street or roadway in the town limits of the town, shall apply to the town for a permit. A fee of $25.00 shall be required to obtain such permit. 
Sec. 90-24. - Minimum length of culvert. 
    Any culvert installed within the right-of-way of any street or roadway in the town limits of the town shall be a minimum of 20 feet in length. However, if conditions warrant a length in addition to that, the town administration shall specify and require a length in excess of said 20 feet. 
Sec. 90-25. - Inside diameter of culvert. 
    The inside diameter of any culvert installed in the right-of-way of any street or roadway in the town limits of the town shall be a minimum of 12 inches. However, if conditions warrant a diameter in excess of said 12 inches, the town administration shall have the right to require a culvert with a larger diameter than 12 inches. 
Sec. 90-26. - Violation. 
    Any person who violates this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined any sum not exceeding $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 142, 2-10-1981) 
Secs. 90-27-90-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STREET NUMBERING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 90-56. - Numbering scheme adopted. 
    The street numbering scheme promulgated by the planning and zoning commission of the town is hereby adopted as the official street numbering scheme for the town. A copy of the map and scheme are on file with the town administrator at town hall and shall be binding hereafter upon the town and all persons residing in or owning land in the town. 
(Ord. No. 175, § 1, 4-12-1983) 
Sec. 90-57. - Information to be sent to addressees. 
    The town manager is hereby instructed to send to all residents and businesses in the town written information concerning this article and the new address of the house or building owned or occupied by such person so as to notify such parties concerning the numbering thereof. 
(Ord. No. 175, § 2, 4-12-1983) 
Sec. 90-58. - Penalty. 
    All residents and parties owning land in the town are automatically bound by the terms hereof. Any person, firm, or corporation who violates materially any provision of this article by intentionally incorrectly numbering any property in the town, or by intentionally incorrectly notifying third parties of the address of such property shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction therefore, shall be fined any sum not exceeding $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 175, § 3, 4-12-1983) 
Secs. 90-59-90-89. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HOUSE NUMBERING 

Sec. 90-90. - House numbers declared public property. 
    House numbers shall be public property and shall be subject to change by the town, with or without notice, at the discretion of the town council. 
(Ord. No. 220, § I(1), 6-10-1986) 
Sec. 90-91. - Public works director or designee to assign number. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the public works director or designee to assign the proper numbers for houses upon application. 
(b)  A complete, current record of the numbering of all houses and buildings in the town shall be prepared by the public works director or designee and filed in the office of the town secretary as a public record. 
(Ord. No. 220, § I(2), 6-10-1986) 
Sec. 90-92. - Owner or occupant to place numbers. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of every house and building in the town shall place the street number assigned by the town secretary in some conspicuous place on or near such house or building so that the same may be plainly seen from the street. 
(b)  The house numbers shall be at least three inches high and shall be made of some bright metal or other visibility enhancing material. 
(Ord. No. 220, § I(3), 6-10-1986) 
Sec. 90-93. - Base lines. 
    Hwy. 720 and its continuation by imaginary line through the town from east to west, and Clark Street and its continuation by imaginary line north through the town and Hardwicke Lane and its continuation by imaginary line south through the town are hereby established as the base lines from which all houses in the town are to be numbered. 
(Ord. No. 220, § I(4), 6-10-1986) 
Sec. 90-94. - Directional prefixes. 
    The letters N., E., S., and W., indicating the four cardinal points of the compass, shall be added as a prefix to the names of all streets, avenues and thoroughfares in the town, as their direction from the base lines may indicate. 
(Ord. No. 220, § I(5), 6-10-1986) 
Sec. 90-95. - Numbering from base lines. 
    All houses and buildings shall be numbered from the base line of the street on which they are located, continuing out such street to the corporate limits of the town, or to the terminus of the street, in regular order, the even numbers on the right and the odd numbers on the left of such street. 
(Ord. No. 220, § I(6), 6-10-1986) 
Sec. 90-96. - Blocks. 
(a)  Three hundred feet is hereby designated as a block, and 100 numbers shall, if practicable, be placed in each block. 
(b)  As the blocks progress in distance from the base line, the beginning number shall be raised 100 with each block. 
(Ord. No. 220, § I(7), 6-10-1986) 
Sec. 90-97. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall be charged and cited, and upon conviction, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not less than $1.00, but not to exceed $200.00 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 175, 4-12-1983; Ord. No. 220, § 2, 6-10-1986) 
Secs. 90-98-90-146. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY USE AND MANAGEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1092, § 2, adopted Jan. 3, 2012, amended art. IV, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. IV, §§ 90-147-90-188, was entitled "Street Excavation", and derived from: Ord. No. 420, §§ 2-43, adopted Dec. 21, 1998. 

Sec. 90-147. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following words shall be defined herein below: 
    Certificated telecommunications provider or "CTP" means a person who has been issued a certificate of convenience and necessity, certificate of operating authority, or service provider certificate of operating authority by the Texas Public Utility Commission or "PUC" to offer local exchange telephone service or a person who provides voice service as defined by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 283 or "the Act". 
    Construction means any work performed above the surface, on the surface or beneath the surface of a public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, installing, servicing, repairing, upgrading, or modifying any facility(s) in, above or under the surface of the public right-of-way, and restoring the surface and subsurface of the public right-of-way, subject to the provisions of section 90-150. The phrase "construction" does not include the installation of facilities necessary to initiate service to a customer's property, or the repair or maintenance of existing facilities unless such installation, repair or maintenance requires the breaking of pavement, excavation or boring. 
    Construction permit means the permit which, pursuant to this article, must be obtained before an owner may construct facilities in a right-of-way. A construction permit allows the holder to construct facilities in that part of the right-of-way described in such permit. 
    Construction security means any of the following forms of security provided at the owner's option: 
(1)  Individual project or performance bond; 
(2)  Cash deposit; 
(3)  Security of a form listed or approved under State of Texas Statutes; or 
(4)  Letter of credit, in a form acceptable by the town. 
    Department means the engineering department of the town. 
    Director means the town engineer or his or her designee. 
    Emergency means a condition that: (1) poses a clear and immediate danger to life or health, or an immediate and significant loss of property; or (2) requires immediate repair or replacement of facilities in order to restore service to a customer. 
    Facility or facilities shall include, but not be limited to, any and all cables, pipelines, splice boxes, tracks, tunnels, utilities, vaults, and other appurtenances or tangible things owned, leased, operated, or licensed by an owner or owners, that are located or are proposed to be located in the public right-of-way. 
    Municipal authorization means the individual grant to use the public rights-of-way issued by the town and accepted by the individual owners in accordance with the ordinances of the town, a franchise agreement, a license, or under operation of state law which provides a specific grant of authority to use the rights-of-way. 
    Network node means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communication network. 
    Network provider means a wireless service provider, or a person that does not provide wireless services and that is not an electric utility but builds or installs, on behalf of a wireless service provider, network nodes or node support poles or any other structure that supports or is capable of supporting a network node. 
    Owner means any person who owns any facility or facilities that are or are proposed to be installed or maintained in the public right-of-way. Included within this definition is the owner's contractor, subcontractor, agent or authorized representative. 
    Permit or permit to construct means a permit to perform construction in accordance with this article. 
    Person means any natural or corporate person, business association or other business entity including, but not limited to, a partnership, a sole proprietorship, a political subdivision, excluding the town, a public or private agency of any kind, a utility, a successor or assign of any of the foregoing, or any other legal entity. 
    Public rights-of-way means the area of land within the town that is acquired by, dedicated to, or claimed by the town in fee simple, by easement, or by prescriptive right and that is expressly or impliedly accepted or used in fact or by operation of law as a public roadway, highway, street, sidewalk, alley, or utility access easement. The term includes the area on, below, and above the surface of the public right-of-way. The term applies regardless of whether the public right-of-way is paved or unpaved. The term does not include airwaves above the public right-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications. 
    Restore or restoration means the process by which a right-of-way is returned to a condition that is equal to or better than the condition that existed before construction. 
    Town means the Town of Little Elm, Texas, or its designated agent of the town. 
    Transport facility means each transmission path physically within a public right-of-way, extending with a physical line from a network node directly to the network, for the purpose of providing backhaul for network nodes. 
    Wireless service means any service using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using a network node. 
    Wireless service provider means a person that provides wireless services to the public. 
(Ord. No. 1092, § 2, 1-3-2012; Ord. No. 1409, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 90-148. - Right-of-way occupancy. 
(a)  Any person prior to constructing facilities in, on or over the public rights-of-way, must first obtain separate municipal authorization. 
(b)  This article does not constitute or create authority to place, reconstruct, or alter facilities in, on or over the rights-of-way, nor to engage in construction, excavation, encroachments, or work activity within or upon any public right-of-way, and said authority must be obtained in accordance with the terms of this article. 
(c)  Any person with a current, unexpired franchise, municipal authorization, license or other authorization from the town (grant) or state to use the public right-of-way that is in effect at the time this article takes effect, shall continue to operate under and comply with that grant, and in the event the ordinance from which this article derives conflicts with existing authorization, the more restrictive provision shall apply unless in direct conflicts with an unexpired franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 1092, § 2, 1-3-2012) 
Sec. 90-149. - Registration. 
    In order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, all owners of facilities in the right-of-way will register with the town. Registration and permits will be issued in the name of the person who will own the facilities. Registration must be renewed on or before January 31 of each year. The town shall provide written notification of this renewal requirement. If a registration is not renewed, and subject to 60 calendar days notification to the owner, the facilities of the user will be deemed to have been abandoned. When any information provided for the registration changes, the owner will inform the town of the change no more than 30 days after the date the change is made. Registration shall include: 
(1)  The name, address(es) and telephone number(s) of the owner; 
(2)  The names, address(es) and telephone number(s) of the contact person(s) for the owner; 
(3)  The name(s), address(es) and telephone number(s) of any contractor(s) or subcontractor(s) who will be working in the right-of-way on behalf of the owner. If the names of contractors and subcontractors are not available at the time of permit application, they must be submitted to the town prior to permit issuance; 
(4)  The name(s) and telephone number(s) of an emergency contact who shall be available 24 hours a day; 
(5)  The source of the owner's municipal authorization (e.g., franchise, state law, etc.). If the owner is a certificated telecommunications provider, the certificate number issued by the Texas Public Utility Commission; 
(6)  The owner shall submit two-year projections of their plans for the construction of facilities in the town at the time of registration renewal; and 
(7)  Registration shall be a prerequisite to issuance of a construction permit. Each owner shall update and keep current its registration with the town at all times. 
(Ord. No. 1092, § 2, 1-3-2012) 
Sec. 90-150. - Construction permits. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  No owner shall perform any construction or installation of facilities in the right-of-way without first obtaining a construction permit, except as provided herein. Permit applications are required for construction of new, replacement or upgrades of the company's facilities in the right-of-way, whether aerial or underground. 
(2)  Emergency responses related to existing facilities may be undertaken without first obtaining a permit; however, the department shall be notified in writing within two business days of any construction related to an emergency response, including a reasonably detailed description of the work performed in the right-of-way. An updated map of any facilities that were relocated, if applicable, shall be provided within 90 days. 
(3)  A permit is not required under subsection (a) if the activity in the public right-of-way consists exclusively of: 
a.  A residential service connection on the same side of the public right-of-way, if the connection does not require a pavement cut; or 
b.  The replacement of a single damaged pole. 
(4)  Unless approved by the town engineer, the owner or contractor shall not close any traffic lanes or otherwise impede rush hour traffic on major thoroughfares during the morning or evening rush hours on weekdays during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. or 3:30 p.m. to 6:30 p.m. Any closure of a traffic lane for more than two hours during any nonpeak traffic period shall also require a permit, unless waived by the director. 
(5)  All construction and installation in the right-of-way shall be in accordance with the permit for the facilities. The director shall be provided access to the work and to such further information as he or she may reasonably require to ensure compliance with the permit. 
(6)  A copy of the construction permit and approved engineering plans shall be maintained at the construction site and made available for inspection by the director at all times when construction work is occurring. 
(7)  All construction work authorized by permit must be completed in the time specified in the construction permit. If the work cannot be completed in the specified time periods, the owner may request an extension of the time period from the director. The director will use his/her best efforts to approve or disapprove a request for permit as soon as possible. If the request for the extension is made prior to the expiration of the permit, work may continue while the request is pending. 
(8)  Construction, excavation or work area. No owner or contractor shall perform construction, excavation or work in an area larger or at a location different than that specified in the permit or permit application. If, after construction, excavation, or work is commenced under an approved permit, it becomes necessary to perform construction, excavation or work in a larger or different area than originally requested under the application, the owner or contractor shall notify the director immediately and, within 24 hours, shall file a supplementary application for the additional construction, excavation or work. 
(9)  A copy of any permit or approval issued by federal or state authorities for work in federal or state right-of-way located in the Town of Little Elm shall be provided, if requested by the department. 
(b)  Permit application. 
(1)  The permit shall state to whom it is issued, location of work, location of facilities, dates and times work is to take place and any other conditions set out by the director. If the owner fails to act upon any permit within 90 calendar days of issuance, the permit shall become invalid, and the owner will be required to obtain another permit. No permit shall be transferable. 
(2)  The permit will be in the name of the person who will own the facilities to be constructed. The permit application must be completed and signed by a representative of the owner of the facilities to be constructed. 
(3)  Any person requesting a permit will provide the director with documentation in the format specified by the department, at the time of permit submittal, describing: 
a.  The proposed location and route of all facilities to be constructed or installed and the owner's plan for right-of-way construction. 
b.  Three sets of engineering plans, including plan and profile, which will be on a reasonable scale, acceptable to the department, unless waived by the director. When required by the Texas Engineering Practice Act, as amended, the plans must be sealed by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Texas. 
c.  Detail of the location of all right-of-way and utility easements that owner plans to use. 
d.  Detail of existing utilities located in the right-of-way, including the town's utilities, in relationship to owner's proposed route. 
e.  Detail of what owner proposes to construct including size of facilities, materials used, such as pipe size, number of ducts, valves, etc. 
f.  Detail of plans to remove and replace asphalt or concrete in streets in accordance with exhibit A, (exhibit A is on file with the town) standard specifications and details for restoration within public rights-of-way. 
g.  Drawings of any bores, trenches, handholes, manholes, switch gear, transformers, pedestals, etc., including depth located in public right-of-way. 
h.  Typical details of manholes and/or handholes owner plans to use or access. 
i.  Complete legend of drawings submitted by owner, which may be provided by reference to previously submitted documents acceptable to the town. 
j.  The construction methods to be employed for the protection of existing structures, fixtures, and facilities within or adjacent to the right-of-way, and the dates and times work will occur, all of which (methods, dates, times, etc.) are subject to approval of the director. 
k.  Proof of insurance and bonds as required by section 90-161. 
(4)  A request for a permit must be submitted at least 15 business days before the proposed commencement of work identified in the request, unless waived by the director. 
(5)  Requests for permits will be approved or disapproved by the director within a reasonable time of receiving all the necessary information. The director will use his/her best efforts to approve or disapprove a request for permit as soon as possible. The director will consider all information submitted by the applicant including a review of the availability of space in the right-of-way based on the applicant's proposed route and location. The director will provide a written notification of denial for rejected permits. 
(6)  The department or the owner can request a preconstruction meeting with the construction contractor. 
(Ord. No. 1092, § 2, 1-3-2012) 
Sec. 90-151. - Construction standards. 
(a)  In general. All construction must be done in a good and workman-like manner and in faithful and strict compliance with the permit, this article, other town ordinances, and the North Central Texas Council of Governments specifications relating to construction within the public right-of-way. The public service provider shall maintain the construction area in a manner that avoids health hazards, and hazards to vehicular and pedestrian traffic until the public right-of-way are permanently restored. Specific construction requirements are contained in the right-of-way construction and permitting procedures manual, as amended. 
(b)  Abandonment. Facilities of a public service provider that are not conformed within the 120-day notice period or within the approved schedule will be deemed abandoned, and the town, and any person working under contract with the town, will not be liable for any damage to or destruction or removal of the facilities, or for any interruption or termination of service through the facilities, caused by the activity of the town, or its contractors, described in this article. 
(c)  Alteration to landscape material. Any alteration to landscape material located within any public right-of-way requires prior notification to the adjacent property owner. No person shall cut, deface or in any way injure any landscape material located within a public median without prior approval from the parks and recreation department. Landscape material shall include, but is not limited to, canopy and ornamental trees, shrubs, groundcover, lawn, earthwork and irrigation systems. Proper trimming of trees for overhead utility service is excluded from this subsection. 
(d)  Alternate access. If a street or alley must be totally closed for any duration, the public service provider shall provide for reasonable alternative access to the adjacent properties at all times. If a sidewalk is to be closed or blocked for longer than one day, the public service provider shall provide a reasonable alternative for pedestrian access. Sidewalks designated as school routes shall be open at all times, or a reasonable alternative shall be provided before work commences. Reasonable alternatives for sidewalks shall provide 36 inches minimum surface width. 
(e)  Barricades and warning signs. When making a pavement cut or excavation, or placing soils or excavated material in or along a public right-of-way, the public service provider shall place barricades, warning signs, and warning lights at the location sufficient to warn the public of the hazard of the open cut, excavation, spoils or excavated material. 
(f)  Contractor's agent on-site. The contractor will maintain at all times on the job site a responsible person authorized to receive and relay instructions from the town. 
(g)  Coordination. The public service provider has the exclusive responsibility to coordinate with other public service providers to protect all existing facilities in the public right-of-way in which the construction occurs. Acceptance of the plans and issuance of a permit does not constitute liability on the town's part for any damage to existing facilities. 
(h)  Coverage area. All damage caused directly or indirectly to the public right-of-way surface or subsurface outside the construction area will be regarded as part of the construction and must be included in the total area repaired. 
(i)  Emergency activity. Construction in the public right-of-way may commence prior to obtaining a permit if the public service provider determines a valid need to perform emergency activity. Immediate notice, including the reasons for the emergency activity, must be given to the director. The public service provider shall provide a written description of the emergency activity required not later than the second business day following commencement of the emergency activity, and application for a permit must be made as soon as possible. 
(j)  Emergency repair during construction. If the director determines during construction that an emergency repair to a public right-of-way is necessary to correct a situation that is hazardous to the public, the director shall immediately notify the public service provider. If the public service provider does not commence the emergency repair within 24 hours, the director may, (with sole discretion) cause performance of such emergency repair work as is necessary to correct the hazardous situation. The public service provider shall reimburse the town for the actual direct and indirect cost of the work necessary to correct the hazardous situation. The public service provider shall maintain the emergency repair until the public service provider completes construction and final repairs. 
(k)  Emergency repair for existing facility. If the director determines that a problem with a public service provider's existing facility in a public right-of-way requires an emergency repair to correct a situation that is hazardous to the public, the director shall immediately notify the public service provider. If the public service provider does not commence the emergency repair within 24 hours, the director may, with sole discretion, cause performance of such emergency repair work as is necessary to correct the hazardous situation. The public service provider shall reimburse the town for the actual direct and indirect cost of the work necessary to correct the hazardous situation. The public service provider shall maintain the emergency repair until the public service provider completes construction and final repairs. 
(l)  Excavated materials. The public service provider and any person responsible for construction shall protect the public right-of-way surface, and all existing facilities and improvements both above and below ground from excavated materials, equipment operations, and other construction activities. Particular attention must be paid to ensure that no excavated material or contamination of any type is allowed to enter or remain in a water or wastewater main or access structure, drainage facility, or natural drainage feature. 
(m)  Excavation safety. On construction projects in which excavation will exceed a depth of five feet, the public service provider must have detailed plans and specifications for excavation safety systems. The term "excavation" includes trenches, structural or any construction that has earthen excavation subject to collapse. The excavation safety plan shall be designed in conformance with state law and Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) standards and regulations. 
(n)  Locate extent of right-of-way. The public service provider has the exclusive responsibility to locate the extent of the public right-of-way. Acceptance of the plans and issuance of a permit does not constitute liability on the town's part for any facilities placed on private property. If facilities are placed on private property, it is the public service provider's responsibility to contact property owners and acquire easements. 
(o)  Location flags. All locate flags shall be removed during the cleanup progress by the public service provider or his/her contractor, or subcontractor at the completion of the work. 
(p)  Location of facilities. All facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  The public service provider shall use best efforts to install its facilities within its existing underground duct or conduit whenever excess capacity exists within such facility. 
(2)  If installing overhead facilities, the public service provider shall use best efforts to utilize existing utility poles to the extent surplus space is reasonably available. If the installation of a new pole or poles is necessary, the number, location and installation of same shall be as designated by town. 
(3)  Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities, or telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a public right-of-way, and the public service provider currently occupies overhead facilities in the same public right-of-way, the public service provider shall use best efforts to determine the feasibility of relocating its facilities underground concurrently. 
In determining whether any requirement under this section is unreasonable or unfeasible, the town manager or his designee shall consider, among other things, whether the requirement would subject the public service provider or other affected provider to an unreasonably increased risk of service interruption, to an unreasonably increased liability for accidents, to an unreasonable delay in construction or in the availability of its services, or to any other unreasonable technical or economic burden. 
(q)  Newly constructed or overlayed streets. No pavement cuts in newly constructed, reconstructed, or resurfaced (greater than one inch) asphalt streets may be made for 36 months after the substantial completion of the street work. With sole discretion, the director may grant an exception based on the public service provider's written demonstration that the following criteria have been met: 
(1)  Boring or jacking without disturbing the pavement is not practical due to physical characteristics of the street or alley or other utility conflicts; 
(2)  Alternative utility alignments that do not involve excavating the street or alley are found to be impracticable; and 
(3)  The proposed excavation cannot reasonably be delayed after the three-year deferment period has lapsed. 
(r)  Exemptions for emergency operations. Emergency maintenance operations shall be limited to circumstances involving the preservation of life, property, or the restoration of customer service. Public service provider with prior authorization from the town engineer to perform emergency maintenance operations within the public rights-of-way shall be exempted from this section. Any public service provider commencing operations under this section shall submit detailed engineering plans, construction methods, and remediation plans no later than the next business day after initiating the emergency maintenance operation. 
(s)  Protection of trees and landscaping. Each public service provider shall protect trees, landscape and landscape features as required by the town and shall be responsible for supplemental maintenance and watering during construction and until restoration is complete. All protective measures shall be provided at the expense of the public service provider. 
(t)  Protection of property. Each public service provider shall protect from injury any public rights-of-way and adjoining property by providing adequate support and taking other necessary measures. Public service provider shall, at its own expense, shore up and protect all buildings, walls, fences, or other property likely to be damaged during the work and shall be responsible for all damage to public or private property resulting from failure to properly protect and carry out work in the public rights-of-way. 
(u)  Responsibilities. A public service provider shall: 
(1)  Properly construct, install, repair, relocate, and/or upgrade its existing facilities within the public right-of-way; and 
(2)  Repair or restore any damage to other facilities, the public right-of-way, or private property that occurs as a result of improper construction, installation, repair, relocation, or upgrade of the public service provider's facilities. 
(v)  Restoration of right-of-way. A public service provider performing construction in the public right-of-way shall restore the public right-of-way to a condition that is equal to or better than the condition prescribed by the right-of-way construction and permitting procedures manual, as amended, and consistent with this article. 
(w)  Settling of backfill. The director shall notify the public service provider in writing if the backfill on a permitted pavement cut or excavation settles at any time during the two-year maintenance period, causing subsidence in the pavement of one-half inch or more, vertically measured in any three-foot horizontal direction. Upon notification, the public service provider shall commence repair work within ten days and notify the director 24 hours in advance of commencement of the repair work. If the repair work is not commenced within ten days, the repair work may be performed by the town, and billed to the public service provider for compensation. 
(x)  Signage. Three feet by three feet information signs stating the identity of the public service provider doing the work, telephone number, a public service provider's identity and telephone number shall be placed at the location where construction is to occur 48 hours prior to the beginning of work in the right-of-way and shall continue to be posted at the location during the entire time the work is occurring. An informational sign will be posted on public right-of-way 100 feet before the construction location commences and each 100 feet thereafter, unless other posting arrangements are approved or required by the director. 
(y)  Time limit for open trenches, open pits or street cuts. Permanent repairs of utility cuts, open trenches, open pits, or street cuts in existing streets, alleys or easements will be completed by the public service provider within 30 calendar days of beginning the work. If a public service provider does not believe that it will be able to meet this schedule, the public service provider must contact the director concerning an alternative schedule for the repairs. Any alternative schedule must be approved by the director prior to the beginning of the work. The public service provider will be responsible for any maintenance of the repair for a period of two years after the repair is complete. Erosion control measures (e.g., silt fence) and advance warning signs, markers, cones and barricades must be in place before work begins. 
(z)  Trenchless technology or boring. The director may require the use of trenchless technology or boring based on the following criteria: 
(1)  It is in the best interest of the town; 
(2)  It is technically, commercially and economically feasible; 
(3)  It is not in violation of federal or state regulations or industry safety standards; 
(4)  All concrete driveways and streets shall be bored rather than open cut. The length of the bore must be sufficient for meeting the fully improved (ultimate) roadway width as specified in the thoroughfare development plan if sufficient right-of-way exists. If the concrete street is subject to reconstruction within two years, or for other good cause, the director may grant an exception upon request; and 
(5)  All boring by a public service provider along or across any right-of-way which contains an existing storm sewer or sanitary sewer must be checked with a camera upon completion of the boring activity. The camera recording must sufficiently record the storm sewer or sanitary sewer, and must demonstrate no damage has occurred to the existing storm sewer or sanitary sewer as a result of the boring activity. The camera recording of the existing storm sewer or sanitary sewer must be completed the same day the public service provider completes the boring activity. A copy of the camera recording must be delivered to the town's engineering department within 24 hours of completion of the boring activity. 
(aa)  Two-year maintenance period. All construction performed under any permit granted to a public service provider by the town under this article must be maintained to the satisfaction of the director for two years after substantial completion of construction or repair. 
(bb)  Variances. Any variance from the requirements of this article must be approved in advance by the director. The director may grant a variance only if an extreme hardship exists and the public health, safety, welfare, and convenience are not adversely affected by granting the variance. The director may not approve any variance that would give a competitive advantage to one public service provider over another public service provider providing the same or similar service. The director may not grant a variance from the indemnity requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1092, § 2, 1-3-2012) 
Sec. 90-152. - As-built plans. 
(a)  Right-of-way users will provide the director with "as-built plans" within 90 days of completion of facilities in the right-of-way. The plans shall be provided to the town with as much detail and accuracy as required by the director. All the requirements specified for the plans submitted for the initial permit, as set forth in section 90-150 shall be submitted and updated in the "as-built plans." Users which have facilities in the right-of-way existing as of the date of this article who have not provided "as built plans" shall provide one-quarter of the information concerning facilities in town right-of-way within one year after the passage of the article and one-quarter each six months thereafter. The detail and accuracy will concern issues such as location, size of facilities, materials used, and any other health, safety and welfare concerns. Submittal of "as-built plans" shall be in digital format compatible with town hardware and software or shall be subject to a conversion fee. Owner shall include one set of plans in a paper format. 
(b)  If as-built plans submitted under this section include information expressly designated by the owner as a trade secret or other confidential information protected from disclosure by state law, the director may not disclose that information to the public without the consent of the owner, unless otherwise compelled by an opinion of the attorney general pursuant to the Texas Public Information Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 552, as amended, or by a court having jurisdiction of the matter pursuant to applicable law. This subsection may not be construed to authorize an owner to designate all matters in its as-built plans as confidential or as trade secrets. 
(c)  This requirement, or portions of this requirement, may be waived by the director for good cause. 
(Ord. No. 1092, § 2, 1-3-2012) 
Sec. 90-153. - Conformance with public improvements. 
(a)  Whenever by reasons of widening or straightening of streets, sidewalks, water or sewer line projects, or any other town project, it shall be deemed necessary by the governing body of the town to remove, alter, change, adapt, or conform an owner's underground or overhead facilities within the right-of-way to another part of the right-of-way, such alterations shall be made by the owner of the facilities at the owner's expense (unless provided otherwise by state law, a franchise, a license or a municipal authorization until that grant expires or is otherwise terminated). The owner shall be responsible for conforming its facilities within mutually agreed upon time limits if no time limits can be agreed upon, the time limit shall be 90 days from the day the town secures any additional right-of-way and transmits final plans and notice to make the alterations. The owner of facilities shall be responsible for any direct costs associated with project delays associated with failure to conform facilities within the mutually agreed upon time limits. Reimbursement for all costs provided for by this subsection shall be made within 30 calendar days. 
(b)  An owner may trim trees in or over the public rights-of-way for the safe and reliable operation, use and maintenance of its facilities. All tree trimming shall be performed in accordance with standards promulgated by the National Arborist Association and the International Society of Arbor Culture. Should the owner, its contractor or agent, fail to remove such trimmings within 24 hours, the town may remove the trimmings or have them removed, and upon receipt of a bill from the town, the owner shall promptly reimburse the town for all costs incurred within 30 calendar days. 
(c)  An owner shall temporarily remove, raise or lower its aerial facilities to permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures. The owner shall temporarily remove, raise or lower its aerial facilities within 15 working days of receiving a copy of a permit issued by the town. The expense of these temporary rearrangements shall be paid by the party or parties requesting and benefiting from the temporary rearrangements. The owner may require prepayment or prior posting of a bond from the party requesting the temporary move. 
(Ord. No. 1092, § 2, 1-3-2012) 
Sec. 90-154. - Improperly installed facilities. 
(a)  Any owner doing work in the town right-of-way shall properly install, repair, upgrade and maintain facilities. 
(b)  Facilities shall be considered to be improperly installed, repaired, upgraded or maintained if: 
(1)  The installation, repair, upgrade or maintenance endangers people or property; 
(2)  The facilities do not meet the applicable town codes; 
(3)  The facilities are not capable of being located using standard practices; 
(4)  The facilities are not located in the proper place at the time of construction in accordance with the directions provided by the department or the plans approved by the department. 
(Ord. No. 1092, § 2, 1-3-2012) 
Sec. 90-155. - Location of utility structures. 
(a)  Utility structures not exceeding 20 cubic feet are allowed in the right-of-way or utility easements, subject to available room and located as approved by the director. The placement of utility structures larger than 20 cubic feet, but not exceeding 30 cubic feet will be reviewed on a case by case basis by the director. Such structures shall not encroach within a sidewalk area, including a vertical clearance of 71/2 feet above the sidewalk or within the sight visibility area. 
(b)  Utility structures larger than 30 cubic feet shall be located as close as practical to the back of a public or private utility easement and subject to available room and located as approved by the director. 
(c)  Above ground facilities such as pedestals, switching boxes and similar facilities shall be located no less than three feet from the edge of an alley or the back of street curbs and such that they do not create a physical or visual barrier to vehicles leaving or entering roads, driveway or alleys. They shall also not be located in front of residential lots creating an unreasonable visual or aesthetic impairment for the property owner. 
(d)  The owner's identity and telephone number shall be placed on all utility structures placed in the rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1092, § 2, 1-3-2012) 
Sec. 90-156. - Restoration of property. 
(a)  Owners shall restore property affected by construction of facilities to a condition that is equal to or better than the condition of the property prior to the performance of the work. Owners shall submit photographs and/or a video of the construction area at the time of the issuance of the permit. Restoration must be approved by the department. 
(b)  Restoration must be made within ten working days of completion of trench backfill for a length of 300 feet, or within the limits of one town block, unless otherwise approved by the director. If restoration is not satisfactory and performed in a timely manner, after written notice, then all work in progress, except that related to the problem, including all work previously permitted but not complete may be halted and a hold may be placed on any future permits until all restoration is complete. 
(c)  Upon failure of an owner to perform such restoration, and five days after written notice has been given to the owner by the town, and in the event restoration has not been initiated during such five-day period, the town may repair such portion of the public rights-of-way as may have been disturbed by the owner, its contractors or agents. Upon receipt of an invoice from the town, the owner will reimburse the town for the costs so incurred within 30 calendar days from the date of the town invoice. 
(d)  If the town determines that the failure of an owner to properly repair or restore the public rights-of-way constitutes a safety hazard to the public, the town may undertake emergency repairs and restoration efforts, after emergency notice has been provided, to the extent reasonable under the circumstances. Upon receipt of an invoice from the town, the owner shall promptly reimburse the town for the costs incurred by the town within 30 calendar days from the date of the town invoice. If payment is not received within the 30 calendar days, the town shall initiate a claim for compensation with the appropriate bonding company. 
(e)  Should the town reasonably determine, within two years from the date of the completion of the repair work, that the surface, base, irrigation system or landscape treatment requires additional restoration work to meet the standards of subsection (a), an owner shall perform such additional restoration work to the satisfaction of the town, subject to all town remedies as provided herein. 
(f)  Restoration must be to the reasonable satisfaction of the department. The restoration shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Replacing all groundcover with the type of groundcover damaged during work to a condition equal to or better either by sodding or seeding, or as directed by the department; 
(2)  Adjusting of all manholes and handholes, as required; 
(3)  Backfilling all bore pits, potholes, trenches or any other holes shall be completed daily, unless other safety requirements are approved by the department. Holes with only vertical walls shall be covered and secured to prevent entry. If bore pits, trenches or other holes are left open for the continuation of work, they shall be fenced and barricaded to secure the work site as approved by the department; 
(4)  Leveling of all trenches and backhoe lines; 
(5)  Restoration of excavation site to town specifications; 
(6)  Restoration of all paving, sidewalks, landscaping, groundcover, trees, shrubs and irrigation systems; 
(7)  Removal of all locate flags during the cleanup process by the owner or his/her contractor at the completion of the work. 
(Ord. No. 1092, § 2, 1-3-2012) 
Sec. 90-157. - Revocation or denial of permit. 
    If any of the provisions of this article are not followed, a permit may be revoked by the director or designee. If a person has not followed the terms and conditions of this article in work done pursuant to a prior permit, new permits may be denied or additional terms required. Revocation shall be effective upon the expiration of 15 days after written notice of the violation(s), unless cured during that period, except for violations which pose a threat to public safety or health, for which the revocation will be immediate upon delivery of written notice. 
(Ord. No. 1092, § 2, 1-3-2012) 
Sec. 90-158. - Appeals. 
(a)  Applicability. Appeals may be filed pursuant to this section for decisions of the director related to the denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit. However, the appeal process provided by this section shall not be available for criminal violations of this article. 
(b)  Appeal to town manager. A permittee may appeal decisions referred to in subsection (a) above, by filing a written appeal with the town manager within seven working days of receipt of denial, suspension or revocation of the permit. An appeal filed pursuant to this section shall specifically state the basis for the aggrieved party's challenge to the town's authority under this article. 
(c)  Issuance of decision by town manager. Decisions of the town manager shall be issued within five working days of receipt of the written appeal. Decisions of the town manager shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1092, § 2, 1-3-2012) 
Sec. 90-159. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions or terms of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined a sum not exceeding $2,000.00 for each violation, and each day that such violation shall continue to exist constitutes a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1092, § 2, 1-3-2012) 
Sec. 90-160. - Indemnity. 
(a)  Each owner placing facilities in the public rights-of-way shall promptly defend, indemnify and hold the town harmless from and against all damages, costs, losses or expenses: (i) for the repair, replacement, or restoration of town's property, equipment, materials, structures and facilities which are damaged, destroyed or found to be defective as a result of the owner's acts or omissions; (ii) from and against any and all claims, demands, suits, causes of action, and judgments for: (a) damage to or loss of the property of any owner (including, but not limited to, the owner, its agents, officers, employees and subcontractors, town's agents, officers and employees, and third parties); and/or (b) death, bodily injury, illness, disease, loss of services, or loss of income or wages to any owner (including, but not limited to the agents) arising out of, incident to, concerning or resulting from the negligent or willful act or omissions of the owner, its agents, employees, and/or subcontractors, in the performance of activities pursuant to this article. 
(b)  This indemnity provision shall not apply to any liability resulting from the negligent or willful acts of the town, its officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors. 
(c)  The provisions of this indemnity are solely for the benefit of the town and is not intended to create or grant any rights, contractual or otherwise, to any other owner or entity. 
(Ord. No. 1092, § 2, 1-3-2012) 
Sec. 90-161. - Insurance requirements. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  An owner must provide acceptable proof of insurance in the total amount required by this section for permits for construction within public rights-of-way, or make other provisions acceptable to the director. 
(2)  The coverage must be on an "occurrence" basis and must include coverage for personal injury, contractual liability, premises liability, medical damages, underground, explosions and collapse hazards. 
(3)  Each policy must include a cancellation provision in which the insurance company is required to notify the town in writing not fewer than 30 days before canceling, failing to renew, or reducing policy limits. 
(4)  The owner shall file the required original certificate of insurance prior to the issuance of a permit. The certificate shall state the policy number, name of the insurance company; name and address of the agent or authorized representative of the insurance company; name, address and telephone number of insured; policy expiration date; and specific coverage amounts. 
(5)  The owner shall file an annual surety bond, which will be valid for one full year, from a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Texas in the amount equal to the estimated amount of the cost to restore the right-of-way for the work anticipated to be done in that year, in the event the owner leaves a job site in the right-of-way unfinished, incomplete or unsafe. Owner may make other provisions, in lieu of a bond, as acceptable to the director. The director may waive the requirement if the owner submits documentation, in a form acceptable to the town attorney, that demonstrates the owner has assets in excess of $10,000,000.00. 
(6)  The owner shall file a maintenance bond for 25 percent of the cost of restoring the right-of-way for the preceding year. Said bond shall be in force for two years. Owner may make other provisions, in lieu of a bond, as acceptable to the director. The director may waive the requirement if the owner submits documentation, in a form acceptable to the town attorney, that demonstrates the owner has assets in excess of $10,000,000.00. 
(7)  The above requirements in subsections (a)(1)-(6) may be met by utilities with a current franchise, license or municipal authorization if their current franchise, license or municipal authorization adequately provides for insurance or bonds or provides an indemnity in favor of the town. 
(8)  The town will accept certificates of self-insurance issued by the State of Texas or letters written by the agency in those instances where the state does not issue such letters, which provide the same coverage as required herein. However, certificates of self-insurance must be approved in advance by the risk manager for the town. 
(9)  An insurer has no right of recovery against the town. The required insurance policies shall protect the agency or public infrastructure contractor and include the town as an additional insured. The insurance shall be primary coverage for losses covered by the policies. 
(10)  Each policy must include a provision that requires the insurance company to notify the town in writing at least 30 days before canceling or failing to renew the policy or before reducing policy limits or coverages. 
(b)  Insurance requirements. 
(1)  Owners. Each owner applying for a permit shall obtain, maintain, and provide proof of the each of the following types of insurance and coverage limits: 
a.  Commercial general liability on an occurrence form with minimum limits of $5,000,000.00 per occurrence and $10,000,000.00 aggregate. This coverage shall include the following: 
1.  Products/completed operations to be maintained for one year; 
2.  Personal and advertising injury; 
3.  Owners and contractors protective liability; and 
4.  Explosion, collapse, or underground (XCU) hazards. 
b.  Automobile liability coverage with a minimum policy limits of $1,000,000.00 combined single limit this coverage shall include all owned, hired and non-owned automobiles. 
c.  Workers compensation and employers liability coverage. Statutory coverage limits for coverage A and $500,000.00 coverage B employers liability is required. 
(2)  Contractors and subcontractors. Each contractor and subcontractor applying for a permit shall obtain, maintain, and provide proof of insurance for the same types of insurance coverages outlined in subsection (b)(1) above; however, the policy limits under the general liability insurance shall be $1,000,000.00 per occurrence and $2,000,000.00 aggregate. All other coverage provisions outlined in subsection (b)(1) above shall apply. 
(3)  An owner or contractor that has registered and filed proof of insurance under this article is not required to furnish separate proof of insurance under this section when obtaining a permit but must comply with all other requirement of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1092, § 2, 1-3-2012) 
Sec. 90-162. - Certified telecommunication providers. 
(a)  Certificated telecommunications providers authority required/nonexclusive use. A CTP must provide evidence that the CTP has acquired authorization from the PUCT pursuant to state law, prior to obtaining a permit to use public right-of-way. The CTP's right to use and occupy the public right-of-way shall not be exclusive, and the town shall have the right to exercise its police powers and manage its public right-of-way, based on the Act and all other state or federal laws. 
(b)  Transfer and notice. A CTP shall notify the right-of-way manager of any sale, transfer, merger or assignment of the ownership or control of a CTP's business within 30 days of such sale, transfer, merger or assignment. A CTP shall also maintain and provide current point-of-contact information with the right-of-way manager at all times during which the CTP uses the right-of-way. 
(c)  Exemption from fees. CTPs are exempted from the following fees provided for in this article: 
(1)  Permit application fee, including expedited application fee and permit expiration fee; 
(2)  Additional permit fee; 
(3)  Saturday inspection fee; 
(4)  Registration fee. 
(d)  Waiver bonds. Unless determined otherwise by the right-of-way manager a CTP will be exempt from the bonding requirements of this chapter, however, in the event that the right-of-way manager determines, based upon reasonable grounds, that a bond is necessary to protect the public assets, and/or the health and safety of the public, then the right-of-way manager may require that a CTP post a reasonable bond not to exceed $100,000.00. Factors to be considered in determining reasonable grounds may include, but are not limited to, a conviction for violation of this article, a general pattern of substandard adherence to the provisions of this article or the failure to comply with this article. If three years pass from the date that the right-of-way manager requires a bond of a CTP and it has not been necessary for the town to seek performance under the bond, then a bond will no longer be required pursuant to this section. 
(e)  CTP indemnity. A CTP shall indemnify the town as specified by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 283.057, as may be amended. A CTP shall be exempt from all indemnity requirements of this article that are inconsistent with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 283.057, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1409, § 3, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 90-163. - Network providers. 
(a)  Network provider's authority required/nonexclusive use. A network provider must provide evidence that the network provider has acquired all required authorization pursuant to state law, prior to obtaining a permit to use public right-of-way. The network provider's right to use and occupy the public right-of-way shall not be exclusive, and the town shall have the right to exercise its police powers and manage its public right-of-way, based on the V.T.C.A. Texas Local Government Code ch. 284 and all other state or federal laws. 
(b)  Transfer and notice. A network provider shall notify the right-of-way manager of any sale, transfer, merger or assignment of the ownership or control of a network provider's business within 30 days of such sale, transfer, merger or assignment. A network provider shall also maintain and provide current point-of-contact information with the right-of-way manager at all times during which the network uses the right-of-way. 
(c)  Network provider indemnity. A network provider shall indemnify the town as specified by the Texas Local Government Code, as may be amended. 
(d)  Compliance with design manual. A network provider shall comply with the Town of Little Elm, Texas, Public Right-of-Way Wireless Communication Facilities Design Manual, adopted August 15, 2017, and as amended, for the installation of network nodes and node support poles, as amended by the right-of-way manager. 
(Ord. No. 1409, § 4, 8-15-2017) 
Editor's note- The Public Right-of-Way Wireless Communication Facilities Design Manual as referenced above has not been set out, but may be inspected at the town office. 
Chapter 94 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Taxes to be levied and collected by general laws and for public purposes only, Tex. Const. Art. 8, Sec. 3; power authorized by charter to impose taxes and impose charges for delinquency, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 302.102(b); power of home-rule municipality to levy general or special property taxes for lawful purposes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 302.001(c); residence homestead exemption, Tex. Const. Art. 8, Sec. 1-b; residence homestead exemptions, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.13; municipal sales and use tax act, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.001 et seq.; municipal hotel occupancy tax, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.001 et seq., 25 Tex. Admin. Code §§ 3.161-3.163. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 94-1. - Tax on telecommunications services. 
(a)  A tax is hereby authorized on all telecommunications services sold within the town. For purposes of this section, the sale of telecommunications services is consummated at the location of the telephone or other telecommunications device from which the call or other communication originates. If the point of origin cannot be determined, the sale is consummated at the address to which the call or other communication is billed. 
(b)  The rate of the tax imposed by this section shall be as authorized by the legislature of the state. 
(Ord. No. 286, §§ 1, 4, 7-6-1992) 
Secs. 94-2-94-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXATION 

Sec. 94-21. - Homestead exemption for the disabled. 
(a)  The town council provides for and adopts an exemption from taxation of $10,000.00 of the appraised value of the residence homestead of a disabled person in accordance with V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.13(d), (e). 
(b)  The term "disabled" means under a disability for purposes of payment of disability insurance benefits under Federal Old Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance. 
(Ord. No. 289, §§ 1, 2, 8-17-1992) 
Sec. 94-22. - Cap on increased ad valorem taxes under certain conditions. 
(a)  In accordance with Article 8, Section 1-b(h) of the Texas Constitution (the "Constitution") and V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.261 (the "Code") and effective with tax year 2005, the town council of the Town of Little Elm, Texas (the "town") does hereby establish and provide that if a person who is disabled or is 65 years of age or older receives a residence homestead exemption prescribed or authorized by Article 8, Section 1-b of the Constitution, the total amount of ad valorem taxes imposed on that homestead by the town may not be increased while it remains the residence homestead of that person or that person's spouse who is disabled or 65 years of age or older and receives a residence homestead exemption on the homestead, except as provided by Article 8, Section 1-b of the Constitution, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.261, or as otherwise provided by law. 
(b)  The application and implementation of the provisions of this section shall be in conformance with the terms and provisions of Article 8, Section 1-b(h) of the Constitution and V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.261. 
(Ord. No. 705, §§ 1, 2, 5-3-2005) 
Sec. 94-23. - Taxation of tangible personal property in transit. 
(a)  Definitions. The following terms have the same meaning as defined in section 11.253 of the Texas Tax Code, as amended. 
(1)  The terms "dealer's motor vehicle inventory," "dealer's vessel and outboard motor inventory," "dealer's heavy equipment inventory," and "retail manufactured housing inventory" have the meanings assigned by Subchapter B, Chapter 23 of the Texas Tax Code, as amended. 
(2)  The term "goods-in-transit" is defined to mean tangible personal property that: 
a.  is acquired in or imported into this state to be forwarded to another location in this state or outside this state; 
b.  is detained at a location in this state in which the owner of the property does not have a direct or indirect ownership interest for assembling, storing, manufacturing, processing, or fabricating purposes by the person who acquired or imported the property; 
c.  is transported to another location in this state or outside this state not later than 175 days after the date the person acquired the property in or imported the property into this state; and 
d.  does not include oil, natural gas, petroleum products, aircraft, dealer's motor vehicle inventory, dealer's vessel and outboard motor inventory, dealer's heavy equipment inventory, or retail manufactured housing inventory. 
(3)  The term "location" means a physical address. 
(4)  The term "petroleum product" means a liquid or gaseous material that is an immediate derivative of the refining of oil or natural gas. 
(b)  A person is not entitled to an exemption from taxation of the appraised value of that portion of the person's property that consists of goods-in-transit. A person's property consisting of goods-in-transit is hereby subject to ad valorem taxation pursuant to Section 11.253 of the Texas Tax Code, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 868, § 2, 11-6-2007) 
Secs. 94-24-94-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX 

Sec. 94-41. - Definitions. 
    In this article: 
(1)  Consideration means the cost of a hotel room only if the room is ordinarily used for sleeping, and does not include the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the room or a person in the room unless related to the cleaning and readying of the room for occupancy. 
(2)  Hotel means a building in which members of the public may obtain sleeping accommodations for consideration. The term includes a hotel, motel, tourist home, tourist house, tourist court, lodging house, inn, rooming house, or other building where a room is furnished for a consideration, but does include a hospital, sanitarium, or nursing home. 
(3)  Tourism means the guidance or management of tourists. 
(4)  Tourist means an individual who travels from the individual's residence to a different municipality, county, state, or country for pleasure, recreation, education, or culture. 
(Ord. No. 874, § 2, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 94-42. - Tax levied; exceptions. 
(a)  A tax of seven percent of the consideration paid for a hotel room is levied, within the town limits and the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the town, on a person who, under a lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract, or agreement, pays the consideration for the use or possession or for the right to the use or possession of a hotel room that costs $2.00 or more each day and is ordinarily used for sleeping. 
(b)  This article does not impose a tax on: 
(1)  A person who has the right to use or possess a hotel room for at least 30 consecutive days, so long as there is no interruption of payment for the period; or 
(2)  The United States, a governmental entity of the United States, or an officer or employee of the United States. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in Section 156.103 of the Texas Tax Code, as amended, the State of Texas, or an agency, institution, board, or commission of the State of Texas other than an institution of higher education, as that term is defined by Section 61.003 of the Texas Education Code, as amended, shall pay the tax imposed by this article and is entitled to a refund of the amount of tax paid. 
(d)  A person entitled to a refund of tax paid under this section shall make an application for a refund in the form prescribed by the town. 
(Ord. No. 874, § 2, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 94-43. - Collection of tax generally. 
(a)  A person who owns, operates, manages, or controls a hotel or collects payment for the use or possession or for the right to the use or possession of a hotel room shall collect the tax levied by this article for the town. 
(b)  A person who collects the tax shall deposit the tax proceeds into in a separate liability account and may not use the tax proceeds for any purpose other than payment to the town. 
(c)  Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax levied by this article for the town. The hotel operator shall be entitled to one percent of the hotel occupancy tax revenues collected as reimbursement for the operator's administrative costs for collecting the tax. However, as further described in this article, this reimbursement may be forfeited at the discretion of the town if the hotel operator fails to timely pay over the tax or timely file a report as required by the town or files a false report with the town. 
(Ord. No. 874, § 2, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 94-44. - Quarterly reports; payments. 
(a)  A quarterly period under this section is based on the town's fiscal year, with the first quarter beginning on October 1 and ending on December 31. 
(b)  On or before the last day of the month following each quarterly period, a person required to collect the tax imposed under this article shall: 
(1)  File a written report with the town for that quarterly period, with a copy of the report for state hotel occupancy taxes required by Section 156.151 of the Texas Tax Code, as amended, for the same quarterly period; and 
(2)  Pay the tax due for the quarter. 
(c)  A report under this section shall be in the form prescribed by the town and shall include: 
(1)  The total consideration paid for rooms subject to the tax in the preceding quarter; 
(2)  The total amount of tax collected; and 
(3)  The total amount of tax exemptions granted. 
(d)  If requested by the town, a person responsible for collecting the tax shall provide the town with: 
(1)  The names, addresses, and identification relied upon to grant an exemption from the tax; and 
(2)  Any other information the town may reasonably require. 
(e)  The town manager may request, and a person required to collect the tax shall provide within a reasonable time, additional documentation verifying the information contained in the report to the town. 
(Ord. No. 874, § 2, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 94-45. - Collection procedure on purchase of a hotel. 
(a)  If a hotel owner sells a hotel, the purchaser or his assignee shall withhold an amount of the purchase price sufficient to pay the amount of tax due until the seller provides: 
(1)  A receipt issued by the town showing that the amount of tax due has been paid; or 
(2)  A certificate issued by the town showing that no tax is due. 
(b)  A purchaser of a hotel who fails to withhold the amount of the purchase price as required by this section is liable for the unpaid tax required to be withheld to the extent of the value of the purchase price. 
(c)  The purchaser of a hotel may file a written request with the town for the issuance of a certificate stating that no tax is due or for a statement of the amount required to be paid before a certificate may be issued. The town shall issue the certificate or statement not later than the 60th day after the date that the town receives the request. 
(d)  If the town fails to issue the certificate or statement within the period provided by subsection (c), the purchaser is released from the obligation to withhold the amount of tax from the purchase price or pay the amount of tax due. 
(Ord. No. 874, § 2, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 94-46. - Rules; access to records. 
(a)  The town manager may promulgate rules to effectively collect the tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  Upon reasonable notice, a person responsible for collecting the tax shall give the town access to the records necessary to determine the accuracy of a report filed or the amount of tax due under this article. 
(Ord. No. 874, § 2, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 94-47. - Allocation and use of hotel occupancy tax revenue. 
(a)  The revenue derived from the tax authorized by this article may be used only as provided by Chapter 351 of the Texas Tax Code, as amended, to promote tourism and the convention and hotel industry as follows: 
(1)  The acquisition of sites for and the construction, improvement, enlarging, equipping, repairing, operation, and maintenance of convention center facilities or visitor information centers, or both; 
(2)  The furnishing of facilities, personnel, and materials for the registration of convention delegates or registrants; 
(3)  Advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional programs to attract tourists and convention delegates or registrants to the town or its vicinity; 
(4)  The encouragement, promotion, improvement, and application of the arts, including instrumental and vocal music, dance, drama, folk art, creative writing, architecture, design and allied fields, painting, sculpture, photography, graphic and craft arts, motion pictures, radio, television, tape and sound recording, and other arts related to the presentation, performance, execution, and exhibition of these major art forms; 
(5)  Historical restoration and preservation projects or activities or advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional programs to encourage tourists and convention delegates to visit preserved historic sites or museums: 
a.  At or in the immediate vicinity of convention center facilities or visitor information centers; or 
b.  Located elsewhere in the town or its vicinity that would be frequented by tourists and convention delegates; and 
(6)  Expenses, including promotion expenses, directly related to a sporting event in which the majority of participants are tourists who substantially increase economic activity at hotels and motels within the town or its vicinity. 
(b)  Revenue derived from the tax shall only be expended to directly enhance and promote tourism and the town's convention and hotel industry. Tax revenue may not be used as general revenue for general governmental operations of the town. 
(Ord. No. 874, § 2, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 94-48. - Penalties; interest. 
(a)  In addition to the tax imposed under this article, a person shall pay a penalty of five percent of the tax due if the person: 
(1)  Fails to file a report on or before the due date; 
(2)  Fails to pay the tax imposed on or before the due date; or 
(3)  Files a report containing false information. 
(b)  A person who fails to pay any amount of the tax and penalty due under subsection (a) on or before the 60th day after the tax is due shall pay an additional five percent penalty on the unpaid tax. A delinquency penalty shall not be less than $1.00. 
(c)  Beginning on the 61st day after the due date, delinquent taxes shall draw interest at a rate of ten percent per annum. 
(Ord. No. 874, § 2, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 94-49. - Offenses. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person violates or fails to perform an act required by this article, or files a report containing false information. Each instance of a violation of this article is a separate offense, and each day that a person remains in violation constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  An offense under this article is a Class C misdemeanor, punishable as provided in section 1-10. 
(Ord. No. 874, § 2, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 94-50. - Additional enforcement authority. 
    The town may take the following actions against a person who has failed to file a required report, failed to collect the tax imposed, failed to pay the taxes over to the town when due, or filed a false report: 
(1)  Bring suit to collect the unpaid tax or to enjoin the person from operating a hotel in the town until the tax is paid or the report filed, as applicable, as provided by the court's order; and 
(2)  Any other remedy provided under state law. 
(Ord. No. 874, § 2, 12-18-2007) 
Chapter 98 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Powers of local authorities regarding regulation of traffic, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202; limitations on local authorities, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.203; municipal restrictions on use of state highways, 25 Tex. Admin. Code §§ 25.601-25.603; local authority to regulate or prohibit turning, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(7); municipal regulation of loads and equipment, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 621.303. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 98-1. - Adoption of relevant state law. 
(a)  Uniform Act regulating traffic on highways. It shall be the duty of the town marshal of the town and all police officers of said town to enforce all the applicable provisions of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 541.001 et seq., within the corporate limits of the town; said title and chapter being the Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways. 
(b)  Motor vehicle and traffic ordinances. It shall be the duty of all police officers of the town to enforce all ordinances of the town, and all laws of the state applicable to motor vehicles and traffic within the corporate limits of the town. 
(Ord. No. 6, § A-B, 10-27-1966) 
State Law reference- Rules of the Road, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 541.001 et seq. 
Sec. 98-2. - Procedure upon arrest. 
(a)  Notice to appear in court-Written promise to appear. Whenever a person is arrested for any violation of traffic ordinances of the town and such person is not immediately taken before the judge of the corporation court, the arresting officer shall prepare in duplicate written notice to appear in the corporation court of the town, containing the name and address of such person, the license number of his vehicle, when and where such person shall appear in court; provided, however, that the offense of speeding shall be the only offense making mandatory the issuance of a written notice to appear in court and only then if the arrested person gives his written promise to appear in court by signing in duplicate the written notice prepared by the arresting officer; and provided further that it shall not be mandatory for an officer to give a written notice to appear in court to any person arrested for the offense of speeding when such person is operating a vehicle licensed in a state or country other than the state or who is a resident of a state or country other than the state. The time specified in said notice to appear must be at least ten days after such arrest unless the person arrested shall demand an earlier hearing. The arrested person, in order to secure release as provided in this article, must give his written promise to so appear in court by signing in duplicate the written notice prepared by the arresting officer. The original of said notice shall be retained by said officer and the copy thereof delivered to the person arrested; thereupon, said officer shall forthwith release the person arrested from custody. 
(b)  Violation of promise to appear. Any person violating his written promise to appear before the corporation court, given as provided in this article, is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he was originally arrested, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not to exceed $100.00. A written promise to appear before the corporation court may be complied with by an appearance by counsel. 
(Ord. No. 5, § A-C, 10-27-1966) 
State Law reference- Promise to appear, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 543.009(b). 
Secs. 98-3-98-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to regulate by traffic control devices, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(1). 

Sec. 98-23. - Manual on uniform traffic control devices. 
    All traffic control devices including signs, signals and markings (pavement and/or curb) installed or used for the purpose of directing and controlling traffic within the town shall conform with the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, Volumes I and II (hereafter called the manual). Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d states: all signs, signals and markings erected or used by the town shall be uniform and be located so far as practicable according to the directions shown in the manual throughout the town. All existing traffic control devices and those erected in the future by the town being consistent with the manual, state law and this article shall be official traffic control devices. 
(Ord. No. 129, § 1, 12-6-1979) 
Sec. 98-24. - Traffic-control devices must be obeyed. 
    The driver of any vehicle, motor vehicle or animal shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device, sign, signal or marking applicable thereto placed in accordance with this article unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 129, § 2, 12-6-1979) 
Sec. 98-25. - Noninterference with traffic signs and devices. 
(a)  No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any highway, street or alley any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official control device or any railroad sign or signal. 
(b)  No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway, street or alley any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. 
(c)  This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways, streets or alleys of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs. 
(d)  Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the chief of police is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be moved without notice. 
(Ord. No. 129, § 3, 12-6-1979) 
Sec. 98-26. - Unlawful to deface or remove traffic-control devices. 
    No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic-control device, sign or signal or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield, or insignia thereon, or any part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 129, § 4, 12-6-1979) 
Sec. 98-27. - Duty of chief of police. 
(a)  The town council of the town shall by ordinance direct that the chief of police shall have the duty of erecting or installing upon, over, along, or cause the same to be erected, installed or placed in accordance with this article and consistent with the manual. Said traffic-control devices shall be installed immediately, or as soon as such specific device, sign or signal can be procured. 
(b)  Whenever the chief of police has erected and installed any official traffic-control device, signal, or sign at any location in the town, or has caused the same to be done under his direction, in obedience to this article and the manual shall thereafter file a report with the town secretary in writing and signed officially by the chief of police stating the type of traffic-control device, sign or signal, and when and where the same was erected and installed. The town secretary shall file and maintain such report among the official papers of the office of the town secretary. 
(Ord. No. 129, § 5, 12-6-1979) 
Sec. 98-28. - Unlawful installation. 
    It being unlawful for any person other than the chief of police, acting pursuant to an ordinance of the town, to install or cause to be installed any signal, sign or device purporting to direct the use of the streets or the activities on those streets of pedestrians, vehicles, motor vehicles, or animals, proof, in any traffic ordinance of the town, that any traffic-control device, sign, signal or marking was actually in place on any street shall constitute prima facie evidence that the same was installed by the chief of police pursuant to the authority of this article and of the ordinance directing the installation of such device, signal or marking. 
(Ord. No. 129, § 6, 12-6-1979) 
Sec. 98-29. - Penalty. 
    Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished by a fine of not less than $1.00 nor more than $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 129, § 7, 12-6-1979) 
Secs. 98-30-98-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - INTERSECTION DESIGNATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to designate yield intersections, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(8). 

Sec. 98-47. - Designation of intersections. 
    The town council of the town, may by majority vote of those members present at a duly called and properly noticed council meeting, designate any street intersection contained within the corporate limits of the town, as a stop intersection and designate the streets upon which vehicles shall stop before entering such intersections. 
(Ord. No. 263, § 1, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 98-48. - Identification of designated intersections. 
    Whenever any intersection has been so designated as a stop intersection by the town council, the chief of police for the town shall cause the same to be identified by the erection of stop signs indicating which vehicles approaching the intersection shall stop. 
(Ord. No. 263, § 2, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 98-49. - Duty of driver. 
    It shall be the duty of the driver of any vehicle to bring such vehicle to a complete stop at a designated stop intersection. Such driver, after having so yielded, may proceed and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching on the intersection street shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle so proceeding into or across the intersection. 
(Ord. No. 263, § 3, 10-1-1990) 
Sec. 98-50. - Penalty. 
    Any person found violating any provision of this article by a police officer of the town shall be so charged and cited, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 263, § 4, 10-1-1990) 
Secs. 98-51-98-73. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SPEED REGULATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Municipalities may alter speed limits subject to state law requirements, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(12). 

Sec. 98-74. - Prima facie speed limits and posting requirements. 
    The town council of the town, may by majority vote of those members present at a duly called and properly noticed council meeting at which a quorum of said council is present, and where such action is reflected properly in the minutes of the council meeting wherein such action is taken, designate any maximum speed limit with respect to vehicular travel on any street, road, or right-of-way within the inconsistent state law, and may designate the streets and/or roadways upon which such prima facie maximum speed limit signs may be erected; provided, however, that any road, street, or right-of-way with respect to which a prima facie maximum speed limit is designated pursuant hereto shall be marked by posting traffic control signs in the description, manner and in at least as many locations as required by appropriate provisions of state law, prior to said prima facie maximum speed limit or amendment thereto becoming effective. 
(Ord. No. 216, § I, 2-11-1986) 
Sec. 98-75. - Identification of speed limits. 
    Whenever any street, road, and/or right-of-way has been assigned a specific prima facie maximum speed limit with respect to vehicular travel on any certain road, street, or right-of-way by the town council, the chief of police for the town, shall cause the same to be identified by the erection of speed limit signs indicating to all approaching vehicles, and vehicles traveling within the special controlled area, the prima facie maximum speed limit accorded that street, road, and/or right-of-way. Such signs shall be erected and maintained in such manner and description and location and with such frequency as is required by applicable state law. Further, whenever a prima facie maximum speed limit as referenced herein has been designated, said speed shall be deemed to be the maximum reasonable and prudent speed for vehicular travel in the particular designated area. 
(Ord. No. 216, § II, 2-11-1986) 
Sec. 98-76. - Duty of driver. 
    It shall be the duty of the driver of any vehicle approaching or operating a vehicle within an area on a road, street, or right-of-way controlled by any referenced maximum speed limit sign erected and/or maintained pursuant hereto to operate such vehicle at or below the speed limit specified, except when directed to proceed at a speed other than that specified or lower, by a police officer, a traffic-control device, or a road construction and/or repair crew. Upon compliance with the specified prima facie maximum speed limit, and where said driver is operating said vehicle in compliance with all other traffic laws and regulations as established by the state; said driver shall be conclusively presumed to be operating said vehicle at a reasonable and prudent speed. 
(Ord. No. 216, § III, 2-11-1986) 
Sec. 98-77. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall be charged and cited, and upon conviction, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not less than $1.00, but not to exceed $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 216, § IV, 2-11-1986) 
Sec. 98-78. - Speed in school zones. 
    No person shall operate a motor or any other vehicle in any school traffic zone at a greater speed than 20 miles per hour and any speed in excess of 20 miles per hour shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable or prudent and it is unlawful. The police chief shall designate school traffic zones with appropriate street markings and signs. The speed limit designated for school traffic zones shall be effective only at such times as appropriate signs advising motorists to this effect are placed in conspicuous places. 
(Ord. No. 63, § 63-1, 1-16-1975) 
Secs. 98-79-98-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PARKING, DRIVEWAYS AND VEHICULAR USE AREAS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 825, § 2, adopted May 15, 2007, amended art. V in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, said article pertained to similar subject matter as enacted by Ord. No. 218, § 1, adopted April 8, 1986. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of amendment. 

Sec. 98-100. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Automobile means a four-wheeled, self-propelled vehicle designed for passenger transportation. 
    Bus means every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten passengers and used for the transportation of persons, and every motor vehicle other than a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation. 
    Commercial motor vehicle means any motor vehicle designed or used for the transportation of property, or for delivery purposes, operating primarily for profit, not including a passenger automobile, passenger bus, motorcycle, panel delivery truck, pickup truck or vehicle used in the delivery of the United States Mail. 
    Driveway means a private roadway leading from a public street to a garage or other shelter for a motor vehicle or an entrance to private land for any purpose, to be used by a motor vehicle. 
    Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is self-propelled by mechanical power such as automobiles, trucks, motorcycles or buses designed to carry one or more persons; but excluding construction equipment, forklifts and farm implements. 
    Oversized vehicle means any vehicle designated in this definition, or any vehicle designed for the transport of property or cargo where the vehicle has a rated capacity in excess of one and one-half tons, or any vehicle that is more than 20 feet in length from end to end, more than seven feet in width at their widest point, or more than seven feet in height at their highest point including, but not limited to, the following designated vehicles: dump trucks, truck-tractors, tractor-trailers, semitrailers, concrete mixing trucks, stake-bed trucks, buses, trailers, or other similar vehicles. The term "oversized vehicle" shall exclude any self-contained recreational vehicle, which has a kitchen, bath or sleeping quarters and is designed for recreational purposes. 
    Park or parking means to stand an occupied or unoccupied vehicle, other than temporarily while loading or unloading merchandise or passengers. 
    Parking space means an area not less than 180 square feet (measuring nine feet by 20 feet) not on a public street or alley, surfaced with concrete, enclosed or unenclosed, together with a concrete driveway connecting the parking space with a public street or alley permitting free ingress and egress. 
    Public street means the width between the boundary lines of a publicly maintained way, any part of which is open to the public, other than the berm or shoulder, that is improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicular portable structure designed for a temporary or short-term occupancy for travel, recreation or vacation including, but not limited to, recreational vehicles, travel trailers, boats, boat trailers, utility trailers or other trailers, in excess of eight and one-half feet in width, or 14 feet in height, or 36 feet in length. The term "recreational vehicle/travel trailer/camper" does not include mobile homes and/or HUD-Code manufactured homes, as these terms are defined by Texas Occupations Code Ch. 1201, which are designed for year round occupancy. The term recreational vehicle shall include travel trailers, campers, motor homes or any other type of mobile dwelling unit, specifically excluding HUD-Code manufactured dwellings and/or mobile homes, not otherwise defined in this Code. 
    Semitrailer means every vehicle without motor power, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by the motor vehicle including, but not limited to, lowboys, goosenecks, fifth wheels and other similar vehicles. 
    Stand or standing means to halt an occupied or unoccupied vehicle, other than temporarily while receiving or discharging passengers. 
    Tractor-trailer means a combination of a truck-tractor and semitrailer. 
    Trailer means every vehicle without motor power, designed for carrying persons or property on its own structure exclusively and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle including, but not limited to, pop-up campers/tent trailers, flatbeds and other similar vehicles. 
    Truck-tractor means every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing/hauling other vehicles and not constructed to carry a load other than part of the weight of the vehicle and load being drawn or that is engaged with a semitrailer in the transportation of automobiles or boats and that transports the automobiles or boats on part of the truck-tractor. 
    Vehicle means every mechanical device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn or moved upon a public street, highway, waterway or airway, except devices moved exclusively by human power, or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks including, but not limited to, a motor vehicle, truck-tractor-trailer or semitrailer. 
    Vehicular use areas means privately owned or publicly owned off-street paved areas for the access, parking, maneuvering, storage or placement of vehicles. 
    To the extent not otherwise defined, all words and phrases used in this section shall have the same meaning as set forth in pertinent sections of the Texas Transportation Code § 541.001 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 825, § 2, 5-15-2007) 
Sec. 98-101. - Parking zones enumerated. 
(a)  The requirements set forth in the Texas Transportation Code regulating the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles shall be applicable upon all public streets and highways within the town, and no person shall allow, suffer or permit any vehicle to stand or be parked in or upon any public street or highway in the town in violation of any of the provisions of this section regulating stopping, standing or parking of vehicles. 
(b)  No person shall permit a vehicle to stand or be parked at a location where signs or markings prohibit such standing or parking. The parking prohibition provided for in this subsection 98-101(b) shall not be in effect until appropriate informational signs, containing language reasonably calculated to provide notice of parking restrictions have been provided at the location giving notice to motorists. 
(c)  Within the town there shall be certain locations, adopted and enumerated by resolution, where it shall be unlawful for a person to park, stand or stop a commercial or private vehicle at all hours. Such locations shall be enumerated and established as necessary, from time to time, by resolution. Parking, stopping or standing at such location designated by resolution pursuant to this ordinance shall be unlawful on the date the resolution establishing the locations is adopted. The parking, standing, stopping prohibition at each location shall remain in effect until such time as the enumerated location is specifically repealed. 
(d)  The town may take into custody and dispose of any vehicle found on public property in violation of this section in the manner and pursuant to the procedures provided for abandoned motor vehicles in division 3, article III of chapter 46 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 825, § 2, 5-15-2007) 
Sec. 98-102. - Parking of oversized vehicles or commercial motor vehicles. 
    Parking of oversized vehicles or commercial motor vehicles shall comply with the following provisions: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or store, or allow to be parked or stored, any oversized vehicle or commercial motor vehicle upon any public street, alley, parkway, boulevard, public place, public right-of-way or railroad right-of-way within the corporate limits of the town. This subsection shall not apply to street construction equipment, maintenance and repair equipment or trucks, rollers and implements, equipment trailers or vehicles used by public service utility companies engaged in repairing or extending public service utilities when used, or intended for use, in the general vicinity; motor buses when taking on or discharging passengers at the customary bus stops; vehicles parked in a designated loading zone while in the act of accepting from the immediate shipper or delivering to a consignee or addressee any transportable thing; or vehicles with mechanical defects during the time it takes to make emergency repairs. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or store, or allow to be parked or stored, any oversized vehicle or commercial motor vehicle upon property within any residentially zoned district or any property used for residential purposes, within the corporate limits of the town. This subsection shall not prevent the parking or standing of the above-described vehicles in such zoned areas for the purpose of expeditiously loading and unloading passengers, freight or merchandise. 
(3)  For subsections (1) and (2) of this section, the court may take judicial notice of an owner's manual, dealer brochure and other such similar informational literature, which may constitute a prima facie presumption of the size and weight of the vehicle. This presumption is rebuttable and shall have the effects and consequences set forth in V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 2.05. 
(Ord. No. 825, § 2, 5-15-2007) 
Sec. 98-103. - Parking in nonresidential districts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or store, or allow to be parked or stored, a truck-tractor, tractor-trailer, or recreational vehicle on any public street, alley, parkway, boulevard, public right-of-way, public access drive, public parking area, or public thoroughfare in any nonresidentially zoned district (or use thereof) for a period longer than a two-hour duration. 
(b)  The parking or storing of any automobile, boat, trailer, or any other motor vehicle is prohibited on lots without a primary structure in existence that is actively occupied, used, and in possession of a valid certificate of occupancy. Undeveloped lots shall not have vehicles stored on them. 
(c)  Display of vehicles for sale or storing vehicles for profit is prohibited, except for where prescribed by chapter 106 (Zoning) of this Code. 
(d)  All new parking and vehicular use areas must be constructed with concrete to the town's engineering design criteria. 
(e)  Parking shall be provided according to the parking regulations in chapter 106 (Zoning) of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 825, § 2, 5-15-2007; Ord. No. 1107, § 2, 8-21-2012) 
Sec. 98-104. - Parking in residential districts. 
(a)  Parking in residential districts (to include residential uses and all residential areas) shall comply with the following provisions: 
(1)  No recreational vehicle, travel trailer, motorhome, boat, boat trailer, jet skis, or stock trailer shall be parked or stored on a public thoroughfare in any residential district. The provisions of this section shall not prevent the parking or standing of such vehicles upon the public thoroughfare in such zoned district for a period not to exceed 72 hours. 
(2)  No motorized vehicle or other equipment shall encroach upon public sidewalks or alleys. 
(3)  Display of vehicles for sale or storing vehicles for profit is prohibited, unless legally parked in the driveway and not otherwise a junked or inoperable vehicle. 
(4)  No junked vehicle, as defined in article III of chapter 46 of this Code, shall be parked or stored in violation of article III of chapter 46 of this Code. Any such vehicle shall be subject to the procedures set forth in chapter 46. 
(5)  For the purposes of this section, a vehicle shall be considered stored if it has remained parked at or nearly the same location for a continuous period of time in excess of five days. A stored vehicle is deemed to be a vehicle, which is illegally parked on public property, and such vehicle shall be subject to removal and disposal as an abandoned vehicle according to division 3, article III of chapter 46 of this Code. 
(6)  No recreational vehicle, motorhome, travel trailer, boat, boat trailer, camper, camper top, or any other type of vehicle shall be connected to utilities except for the purpose of maintenance. Utilities shall only include electricity and water. Habitation is prohibited. 
(7)  No person as driver or owner shall leave, park or stand, or allow or suffer another to leave parked or standing, any truck-tractor, semi-trailer, pole trailer, commercial vehicle or trailer, or any vehicle or trailer not listed in subsection (1) of this section upon any public thoroughfare or public property. This subsection shall not prevent the parking or standing of the above-described vehicles in such areas for the purpose of expeditiously loading and unloading passengers, freight, equipment or merchandise. 
(8)  All new parking and drives must be constructed with concrete to the town's engineering design criteria. Where drives exceed 100 feet in length, an all-weather surface is permitted beyond the drive approach. Vehicles stored legally in the rear yard and/or side yard are exempt from needing a concrete parking space. 
(b)  Parking on private residential property shall also comply with the following provisions: 
(1)  The parking or storing of any vehicle, including but not limited to, trailers, farm implements, recreational vehicles, or forklifts, is prohibited on lots without a primary structure in existence that is actively occupied, used, and in possession of a valid certificate of occupancy. Undeveloped lots shall not have vehicles stored on them. 
(2)  No vehicle shall be parked or stored between the building and street frontage, unless parked on the driveway. Parking off the driveway in the front yard area (area between building and the street, to include the side yard of corner and irregular shaped lots) is prohibited. 
(3)  All parked or stored vehicles not on the driveway shall be located in the rear yard area, enclosed by a permitted fence, generally screened from public view, and at least ten feet from adjoining property lines. Up to one water craft or trailer may be parked in the side yard when sufficient space exists and stored neatly adjacent to the primary structure. 
(4)  A maximum of four recreational vehicles can be parked or stored on a residentially zoned lot, excluding enclosed garage spaces. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, the court may take judicial notice of an owner's manual, dealer brochure, and other such similar literature, which may constitute a prima facie presumption of the size and weight of the vehicle. This presumption is rebuttable and shall have the effects and consequences set forth in V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 2.05. 
(Ord. No. 825, § 2, 5-15-2007; Ord. No. 841, § 2, 8-8-2007; Ord. No. 1107, § 2, 8-21-2012; Ord. No. 1345, § 2, 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 98-105. - Prohibited parking in certain places. 
    It is an offense for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law, or the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  In any clearly marked lane for vehicular traffic movement on any lane roadway unless specially allowed by official signs. 
(2)  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant or fire department sprinkler and standpipe connection. 
(3)  In front of any entrance which provides access to hotels, to theaters or to the upper floors of any building four or more stories in height. Such entrances shall remain open for fire or other emergency purposes. 
(4)  On the side of any public street adjacent to any school property when such parking would interfere with traffic or create a hazard. 
(5)  In any manner or location that prevents access to a mailbox, postal drop box, or similar postal receptacle used by the United States Postal Service, during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. It is an exception to and not a violation of the prohibition stated in this subsection that a vehicle stops or parks momentarily to engage in loading or unloading passengers or cargo. 
(6)  In a manner or location that prevents access to a trash container by a trash collection truck which is attempting to empty the trash container. 
(7)  In such a manner and under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet in width of the roadway open for the free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(8)  On a public street or roadway within 30 feet of any intersection of two or more roadways within the town. 
(Ord. No. 825, § 2, 5-15-2007) 
Sec. 98-106. - Parking for certain purposes. 
    No person shall park a vehicle upon any public street for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Display of such vehicle for sale. 
(2)  Washing, greasing, dismantling or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(Ord. No. 825, § 2, 5-15-2007) 
Sec. 98-107. - Fire lanes. 
(a)  Pursuant to and in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 431.001, it is hereby declared unlawful to park or stand a vehicle in any designated fire lane appropriately marked on privately owned property unless loading or unloading. 
(b)  After due study and investigation, the fire chief upon the advice of the fire marshal may designate fire lanes on any public streets or public property, on private property of shopping centers, apartment projects, churches, schools, theaters and commercial and industrial areas. 
(Ord. No. 825, § 2, 5-15-2007) 
Sec. 98-108. - Declared a public nuisance. 
    The presence of any vehicles within the corporate limits of the town in violation of this article is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 825, § 2, 5-15-2007) 
Sec. 98-109. - Penalties for violation of article. 
(a)  Any person found in violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00. When any person refuses to comply with the provisions of this article or in emergency circumstances, then pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 431.001, the offending vehicle may be impounded or the tires blocked to prohibit the vehicle from moving. The impounded vehicle shall be taken into custody and have fees assessed in the same manner as the procedures regarding abandoned motor vehicles in division 3, article III, chapter 46 of this Code. 
(b)  If any vehicle is found in violation of any provision of this article or of state statute regulating the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle, and the identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner or person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall constitute a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle is the person who committed the violation. This presumption is rebuttable and shall have the effects and consequences set forth in V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 2.05. 
(c)  The state department of transportation's computer-generated record of the registered vehicle owner is prima facie evidence of the contents of the record. 
(Ord. No. 825, § 2, 5-15-2007) 
Sec. 98-110. - Special event parking. 
    Authority of the police chief to impose and enforce temporary regulations for parking and other traffic control measures for special events, emergency situations, and special conditions. 
(1)  The chief of police (or his/her designee), by and with the approval of the town manager, is hereby empowered to impose and enforce regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the town, and to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergency or special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than 45 days. 
(2)  In addition to the powers granted by subsection (1) above, the chief of police (or his/her designee), by and with the approval of the town manager, is hereby empowered to impose and enforce regulations necessary to regulate parking and vehicular traffic at special events held in or near the town including, but not necessarily limited to, water carnivals, boat regattas, music festivals, dramatic presentations, special recreation programs, sporting events and others events which, in the opinion of the chief of police (or his/her designee), will create traffic congestion and/or parking problems on a temporary basis as a result of the event. 
(3)  After taking into consideration the anticipated parking and traffic congestion problems reasonably likely to occur as a result of the special event including, but not necessarily limited to, on street parking problems, congestion created by on-street parking, and traffic safety and danger to vehicles and pedestrians in the area of the special event, the chief of police (or his/her designee), by and with the approval of the town manager, is hereby empowered to impose and enforce regulations necessary to regulate parking and vehicular traffic at special events held in or near the town including, but not necessarily limited to the following enumerated powers: 
a.  To install traffic control devices and signage, and to regulate the operation of vehicles upon the streets of the town impacted by the special event including, but not necessarily limited to, the placement of temporary "no parking" signs in locations as necessary to prohibit parking along streets, in fields, and in other areas determined to be inappropriate for parking for the special event. 
b.  To establish and designate temporary fire lanes in which the parking of vehicles is prohibited. 
c.  To designate areas available for public parking, reserved or permitted parking, and no parking, and to designate times and dates for which the parking restrictions are to be in place. 
d.  To redesignate otherwise designated handicapped parking spaces as nonhandicapped public parking spaces; provided that other parking and transportation arrangements are made for those persons who would have been entitled to lawfully park in the otherwise designated handicapped parking spaces. 
e.  To designate areas as "no camping" areas during certain times and dates for which camping will be prohibited. 
f.  To designate nonpolice personnel and appointed civilians to direct traffic by voice, hand, or signal as conditions may require. 
(4)  A vehicle parked in violation of a parking restriction, or in violation of a "no camping" restriction, established under the authority of this section is hereby deemed injurious to the health, safety and general welfare of the public within the town. The chief of police (or any other officer of the police department of the town) and the town's fire marshal (or any official of the office of the fire marshal of the town) is authorized to order the removal of such vehicle and/or camping equipment, including the immediate impounding and towing of the vehicle, at the vehicle owner's expense, as provided for in section 98-109 of this chapter. 
(5)  A driver of a motor vehicle shall obey the instructions of any temporary traffic control device, sign, signal or marking, as well as the directions of authorized personnel, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(6)  Temporary traffic control devices and signage, parking regulations, fire lanes, and other measures temporarily established pursuant to the authority of this section need not comply with the standards required for permanent traffic control devices and related measures including, but not necessarily limited to, the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and other standards promulgated by the town for permanent traffic control devices and related measures. 
(7)  All temporary traffic control devices and signage established under the authority of this section shall be subject to the enforcement provisions of article II, "Traffic Control Devices," of this chapter. All parking regulations established under the authority of this section shall be subject to the enforcement provisions of article V, "Parking, Driveways and Vehicular Use Areas," of this chapter. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction be subject to a fine not to exceed the sum of $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 1107, § 2, 8-21-2012) 
Secs. 98-111-98-123. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SCOOTERS 

Sec. 98-124. - Definitions. 
    When used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
    Adult means an individual 18 years of age or older. 
    Child means any individual less than 18 years of age. 
    Helmet means properly fitted protective headgear that is not structurally damaged and that conforms to the standards of the American National Standards Institute, the American Society for Testing and Materials, the Snell Memorial Foundation or any federal agency having regulatory jurisdiction over bicycle helmets, as applicable, at the time of the manufacture of the helmet. 
    Motor-assisted scooter shall have the same meaning assigned by the V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 551.301(2), as amended or superseded, and includes a self-propelled device with: (i) at least two wheels in contact with the ground during operation; (ii) a braking system capable of stopping the device under typical operating conditions; (iii) a gas or electric motor not exceeding 40 cubic centimeters; (iv) a deck designed to allow a person to stand or sit while operating the device; and (v) the ability to be propelled by human power alone. 
    Parent means the natural or adoptive parent or court-appointed guardian or conservator of a child. 
    Public way or public property means real, property owned, leased or controlled by a political subdivision of the state, a governmental entity or agency, or similar entity, or any property that is publicly owned or maintained or dedicated to public use, including, but limited to, a path, trail, sidewalk, alley, street or highway and a public park facility. 
    Wearing a helmet means that the person has a helmet fastened securely to the person's head with the straps of the helmet securely tightened in the manner intended by the manufacturer to provide maximum protection. 
(Ord. No. 668, § 2, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 98-125. - Restrictions and prohibitions for motor assisted scooters. 
(a)  Location of use. 
(1)  It is unlawful for a child to operate or ride a motor assisted scooter on any path, trail, alley, street or highway within the town, except on paths and trails set aside for the exclusive operation of bicycles or on a sidewalk. 
(2)  It is unlawful for a parent of a child to allow or permit the child to operate or ride a motor assisted scooter on any path, trail, alley, street or highway within the town, except on paths and trails set aside for the exclusive operation of bicycles or on a sidewalk. 
(3)  If a child operates or rides a motor assisted scooter in violation of subsection (a)(1) of this section, it is presumed that a parent of the child allowed the child to so operate or ride the motor assisted scooter. 
(4)  It is unlawful for an adult to operate or ride a motor assisted scooter on any public way or public property for which the posted speed limit is more than 35 miles per hour. The motor assisted scooter may cross a road or a street at an intersection where the road or street to be crossed has a posted speed of more than 35 miles per hour. 
(b)  Helmets required. The following criteria shall apply to the operation of motor assisted scooters: 
(1)  It is unlawful for any child to operate or ride a motor assisted scooter unless the child is wearing a helmet. 
(2)  It is unlawful for a parent of a child to knowingly allow or permit the child to operate or ride a motor assisted scooter unless the child is wearing a helmet. 
(3)  If a child operates or rides a motor assisted scooter in violation of subsection (b)(1) of this section, it is presumed that a parent of the child allowed the child to operate or ride a motor assisted scooter without wearing a helmet. 
(4)  It is a defense to prosecution that the motor assisted scooter was not being operated upon public property or a public way at the time of the alleged offense. 
(Ord. No. 668, § 3, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 98-126. - Penalty. 
(a)  (1)  An offense under subsection 98-125(b) is a misdemeanor, and a person who violates any provision of subsection 98-125(a) shall, upon conviction, be fined an amount of not exceeding $500.00. 
(2)  The purpose of subsection 98-125(a) is to promote safety and discourage the use of motor assisted scooters in unsafe areas. The courts may consider deferred dispositions under the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as it exists or may be amended, whenever the circumstances warrant deferred dispositions. 
(b)  (1)  An offense under subsection 98-125(b) is a misdemeanor, and a person who violates any provision of subsection 98-125(b) shall, upon conviction, be fined an amount of not less than $10.00 or more than $50.00. 
(2)  The municipal court shall dismiss a charge against a child and/or parent for a first offense under subsection 98-125(b) upon receiving proof that: 
a.  The defendant acquired a helmet for the child who was operating or riding the motor assisted scooter in violation of subsection 98-125(b); and 
b.  The defendant acquired the helmet on or before the tenth day after receiving the citation of violation. 
(3)  The purpose of this subsection is to promote safety and encourage the use of helmets. The courts may consider deferred dispositions under the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as it exists or may be amended, whenever the circumstances warrant deferred dispositions. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this article, and any person violating or failing to comply with any provision hereof shall be fined, upon conviction, as set forth herein, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 668, § 4, 9-7-2004) 
Secs. 98-127-98-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - AUTOMATED RED LIGHT ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 98-150. - Purpose. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this article to implement a photographic traffic signal enforcement system program in order to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the town by reducing the hazards of running red lights. 
(b)  This article shall apply within the corporate boundaries of the town. 
(Ord. No. 955, § 2, 5-27-2009) 
Sec. 98-151. - Definitions. 
    The following terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Contracting entity shall mean the entity with which the town contracts for the installation, administration and enforcement of the photographic traffic signal enforcement system. 
    Department means the police department of the town. 
    Motor vehicle or vehicle shall mean any motor vehicle subject to registration pursuant to the Texas Certificate of Title Act (V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 501). 
    Owner shall mean the owner of a motor vehicle as shown on the motor vehicle registration records of the state department of transportation or the analogous department or agency of another state or country. 
    Photographic traffic signal enforcement system or system means a system that: 
(1)  Consists of a camera system and vehicle sensor installed to exclusively work in conjunction with an electrically operated traffic control signal; and 
(2)  Is capable of producing at least two recorded images that depict the license plate attached to the front or rear of a motor vehicle that is not operated in compliance with the instructions of the traffic control signal. 
    Recorded image means a photographic or digital image that depicts the front or the rear of a motor vehicle. 
    Traffic-control signal has the meaning assigned by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 541.304. 
(Ord. No. 955, § 2, 5-27-2009) 
Sec. 98-152. - Imposition of civil penalty for violations. 
(a)  The owner of a motor vehicle is liable for a civil penalty of $75.00 if, while facing only a steady red signal displayed by an electrically operated traffic-control signal located in the town, the vehicle is operated in violation of the instructions of that traffic-control signal, as specified by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 544.007(d). 
(b)  An owner who fails to pay the civil penalty within the time allowed by this article shall be subject to a late payment penalty of $25.00. 
(Ord. No. 955, § 2, 5-27-2009) 
Sec. 98-153. - Enforcement; procedures. 
(a)  The department is responsible for the enforcement and administration of this article. 
(b)  Any and all locations selected for installation of a photographic traffic signal enforcement system must be approved by the town council by resolution prior to installation of such system. 
(c)  In order to impose a civil penalty under this article, a notice of violation shall be mailed to the owner of the motor vehicle against whom the town seeks to impose a civil penalty not later than the 30th day after the date the violation is alleged to have occurred to: 
(1)  The owner's address as indicated on the registration records of the state department of transportation; or 
(2)  If the vehicle is registered in another state or country, the owner's address as shown on the motor vehicle registration records of the department or agency of the other state or country that is analogous to the state department of transportation. 
(d)  A notice of violation issued under this article shall contain the following: 
(1)  A description of the violation alleged; 
(2)  The location of the intersection where the violation occurred; 
(3)  The date and time of the violation; 
(4)  The name and address of the owner of the vehicle involved in the violation; 
(5)  The registration number displayed on the license plate of the vehicle involved in the violation; 
(6)  A copy of a recorded image of the violation limited solely to a depiction of the area of the registration number displayed on the license plate of the vehicle involved in the violation; 
(7)  The amount of the civil penalty for which the owner is liable; 
(8)  The number of days the person has in which to pay or contest the imposition of the civil penalty and a statement that the person incurs a late payment penalty of $25.00, if the civil penalty is not paid or imposition of the penalty is not contested within that period; 
(9)  A statement that the owner of the vehicle in the notice of violation may elect to pay the civil penalty by mail sent to a specified address instead of appearing at the time and place of the administrative adjudication hearing; and 
(10)  Information that informs the owner of the vehicle named in the notice of violation: 
a.  Of the owner's right to contest the imposition of the civil penalty in an administrative adjudication hearing; 
b.  That the imposition of the civil penalty may be contested by submitting a written request for an administrative adjudication hearing before the expiration of the period specified under subsection (d)(9) of this section; 
c.  That failure to pay the civil penalty or contest liability for the penalty in a timely manner is an admission of liability and a waiver of the owner's right to appeal the imposition of the civil penalty; and 
d.  That if the owner of the motor vehicle fails to timely pay the amount of the civil penalty imposed against the owner: 
1.  An arrest warrant will not be issued for the owner; and 
2.  The imposition of the civil penalty will not be recorded on the owner's driving record. 
(e)  A notice of violation under this article is presumed to have been received on the fifth day after the date the notice of violation is mailed. 
(f)  In lieu of issuing a notice of violation, the department may mail a warning notice to the owner. 
(Ord. No. 955, § 2, 5-27-2009) 
Sec. 98-154. - Admission of liability. 
    A person who fails to pay the civil penalty or to contest liability for the penalty in a timely manner or who requests an administrative adjudication hearing to contest the imposition of the civil penalty against the person and fails to appear at that hearing is considered to: 
(1)  Admit liability for the full amount of the civil penalty stated in the notice of violation mailed to the person; and 
(2)  Waive the person's right to appeal the imposition of the civil penalty. 
(Ord. No. 955, § 2, 5-27-2009) 
Sec. 98-155. - Presumption. 
(a)  It is presumed that the owner of the motor vehicle committed the violation alleged in the notice of violation mailed to the person if the motor vehicle depicted in a photograph or digital image taken by a photographic traffic signal enforcement system belongs to the owner of the motor vehicle. 
(b)  If, at the time of the violation alleged in the notice of violation, the motor vehicle depicted in a photograph or digital image taken by a photographic traffic signal enforcement system was owned by a person in the business of selling, renting, or leasing motor vehicles or by a person who was not the person named in the notice of violation, the presumption under subsection (a) is rebutted on the presentation of evidence establishing that the vehicle was at that time: 
(1)  Being test driven by another person; 
(2)  Being rented or leased by the vehicle's owner to another person; or 
(3)  Owned by a person who was not the person named in the notice of violation. 
(c)  Notwithstanding section 98-157, the presentation of evidence under subsection (b) by a person who is in the business of selling, renting or leasing motor vehicles or did not own the vehicle at the time of the violation must be made by affidavit, through testimony at the administrative adjudication hearing under section 98-157, or by a written declaration under penalty of perjury. The affidavit or written declaration may be submitted by mail to the town through the contracting entity. 
(d)  If the presumption established by subsection (a) is rebutted under subsection (b), a civil penalty may not be imposed on the owner of the vehicle or the person named in the notice of violation, as applicable. 
(e)  If, at the time of the violation alleged in the notice of violation, the motor vehicle depicted in the photograph or digital image taken by the photographic traffic signal enforcement system was owned by a person in the business of renting or leasing motor vehicles and the vehicle was being rented or leased to an individual, the owner of the motor vehicle shall provide to the town through the contracting entity the name and address of the individual who was renting or leasing the motor vehicle depicted in the photograph or digital image and a statement of the period during which that individual was renting or leasing the vehicle. The owner shall provide the information required by this subsection not later than the 30th day after the date the notice of violation is received. If the owner provides the required information, it is presumed that the individual renting or leasing the motor vehicle committed the violation alleged in the notice of violation and a notice of violation may be sent to that individual at the address provided by the owner of the motor vehicle. 
(f)  The town reserves the right to nominate the name and address of the operator of a vehicle in violation of this article when the vehicle is owned by the town. The town must follow the procedures set forth in subsection (e) above. 
(Ord. No. 955, § 2, 5-27-2009) 
Sec. 98-156. - Affirmative defenses. 
    The owner of the motor vehicle shall be responsible for a violation of this article, unless the owner can, by preponderance of the evidence, prove that: 
(1)  The traffic-control signal was not in proper position and sufficiently legible to an ordinarily observant person; 
(2)  The operator of the motor vehicle was acting in compliance with the lawful order or direction of a police officer; 
(3)  The operator of the motor vehicle violated the instructions of the traffic-control signal so as to yield the right-of-way to an immediately approaching authorized emergency vehicle; 
(4)  The motor vehicle was being operated as authorized emergency vehicle under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 546 and the operator was acting in compliance with that chapter; 
(5)  The motor vehicle was a stolen vehicle and being operated by a person other than the owner of the vehicle without the effective consent of the owner; 
(6)  The license plate depicted in the recorded image of the violation was a stolen plate being displayed on a motor vehicle other than the motor vehicle for which the plate has been issued; 
(7)  The presence of ice, snow, unusual amounts of rain or other unusually hazardous road conditions existed that made compliance with this article more dangerous under the circumstances than noncompliance; or 
(8)  The person who received the notice of violation was not the owner of the motor vehicle at the time of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 955, § 2, 5-27-2009) 
Sec. 98-157. - Administrative adjudication hearing. 
(a)  A person who receives a notice of violation under this article may contest the imposition of the civil penalty specified in the notice of violation by filing a written request for an administrative adjudication hearing. The request for a hearing must be filed on or before the date specified in the notice of violation, which may not be earlier than the 30th day after the date the notice of violation was mailed. 
(b)  On receipt of a timely request for an administrative adjudication hearing, the department or contracting entity shall notify the person of the date and time of the hearing. 
(c)  A hearing officer designated by the town manager shall conduct the administrative adjudication hearing and shall have the authority to administer oaths and issue orders compelling the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents. 
(d)  In an administrative adjudication hearing, the issues must be proven by a preponderance of the evidence. 
(e)  The reliability of the photographic traffic signal enforcement system used to produce the recorded image of the motor vehicle involved in the violation may be attested to by affidavit of an officer or employee of the town or the contracting entity and who is responsible for inspecting and maintaining the system. 
(f)  An affidavit of an officer or employee of the town or contracting entity that alleges a violation based on an inspection of the applicable recorded image is: 
(1)  Admissible in the administrative adjudication hearing and in an appeal under section 98-159; and 
(2)  Evidence of the facts contained in the affidavit. 
(g)  At the conclusion of the administrative adjudication hearing, the hearing officer shall enter a finding of liability for the civil penalty or a finding of no liability for the civil penalty. A finding under this subsection must be in writing and be signed and dated by the hearing officer. 
(h)  A finding of liability for a civil penalty must specify the amount of the civil penalty for which the person is liable. If the hearing officer enters a finding of no liability, a civil penalty for the violation may not be imposed against the person. 
(i)  A finding of liability or a finding of no liability entered under this section may: 
(1)  Be filed with the town clerk; and 
(2)  Be recorded on microfilm or microfiche or using data processing techniques. 
(j)  A person who is found liable for a civil penalty after an administrative adjudication hearing shall pay the civil penalty within ten days of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 955, § 2, 5-27-2009) 
Sec. 98-158. - Untimely request for administrative adjudication hearing. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, a person who receives a notice of violation under this article and who fails to timely pay the amount of the civil penalty or fails to timely request an administrative adjudication hearing is entitled to an administrative adjudication hearing if: 
(1)  The person submits a written request for the hearing to the designated hearing officer, accompanied by an affidavit that attests to the date on which the person received the notice of violation; and 
(2)  The written request and affidavit are submitted to the hearing officer within the same number of days after the date the person received the notice of violation as specified under subsection 98-153(d)(9). 
(Ord. No. 955, § 2, 5-27-2009) 
Sec. 98-159. - Appeal. 
(a)  The owner of a motor vehicle determined by a hearing officer to be liable for a civil penalty may appeal that determination to the municipal court judge of the town by filing an appeal petition with the clerk of the town's municipal court. 
(b)  The petition must be: 
(1)  Filed before the 31st day after the date on which the administrative adjudication hearing officer entered the finding of liability for the civil penalty; and 
(2)  Accompanied by payment of the costs required by law for the court. 
(c)  The municipal court clerk shall schedule a hearing and notify the owner of the motor vehicle and the department of the date, time and place of the hearing. 
(d)  An appeal stays enforcement and collection of the civil penalty imposed against the owner of the motor vehicle. The owner shall file a notarized statement of personal financial obligation to perfect the owner's appeal. 
(e)  An appeal under this section shall be determined by the municipal court by trial de novo. 
(f)  A person who is found liable for a civil penalty after an appeal hearing shall pay the civil penalty within ten days of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 955, § 2, 5-27-2009) 
Sec. 98-160. - Effect of liability; exclusion of civil remedy; enforcement. 
(a)  The imposition of a civil penalty under this article is not a conviction and may not be considered a conviction for any purpose. 
(b)  The implementation of a photographic traffic signal enforcement system by the town under this article does not prohibit a peace officer from arresting a violator of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 544.007(d) as provided by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 543 if the peace officer personally witnesses the violation or from issuing the violator a citation and notice to appear as provided by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 543. 
(c)  No civil penalty may be imposed under this article on the owner of a motor vehicle if the operator of the vehicle was arrested, was issued a criminal citation and notice to appear or was issued a warning by a duly authorized peace officer for a violation of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 544.007(d) recorded by the photographic traffic signal enforcement system. 
(d)  If the owner of the motor vehicle fails to timely pay the amount of the civil penalty imposed against the owner: 
(1)  An arrest warrant will not be issued for the owner; and 
(2)  The imposition of the civil penalty will not be recorded on the owner's driving record. 
(e)  The town attorney is authorized to file suit to enforce collection of a civil penalty assessed under this article. 
(Ord. No. 955, § 2, 5-27-2009) 
Secs. 98-161-98-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS ON PUBLIC STREETS 

Sec. 98-200. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Daytime means the hours during a day after dawn and before dusk. 
    Golf cart means a motor vehicle designed by the manufacturer primarily for transporting persons on a golf course, as defined in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, § 502.001, as amended. A golf cart shall include a motor vehicle which must have a minimum of no less than three wheels, and have an attainable top speed not greater than 25 miles per hour on a paved level surface, which is manufactured primarily for transporting persons on a golf course in compliance with federal motor vehicle safety standards for low-speed vehicles. 
    Public safety personnel means any employee or officer of a governmental law enforcement agency or the Little Elm Fire Department. 
    Public street means a publicly-owned or dedicated road, street, drive, or other right-of-way for the use of vehicles within the corporate boundaries of the Town of Little Elm. 
(Ord. No. 1100, § 2, 5-1-2012) 
Sec. 98-201. - Golf carts permitted and restricted. 
    A person may operate a golf cart on a public street, if: 
(1)  The public street has a maximum posted speed limit of not more than 35 miles per hour and the golf cart is operated during the daytime; 
(2)  The person possesses a valid drivers license; 
(3)  The person maintains current financial responsibility for the golf cart, as required of other passenger vehicles in the V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 601.051; 
(4)  The person complies with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and ordinances; 
(5)  The golf cart has the following equipment: 
a.  Parking brake; and 
b.  Mirrors. 
(6)  While the golf cart is in motion: 
a.  The driver shall operate the golf cart as near to the right-hand curb as practical; 
b.  The driver and each passenger in the golf cart is seated in a seat designed to hold a passenger. No person may stand on a golf cart or ride in the lap of the driver and/or other passenger of a golf cart while it is moving. 
(7)  Crossing certain roadways: A golf cart may cross intersections, including a road or street that has a posted speed limit of more than 35 miles per hour (V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 551.405). 
(Ord. No. 1100, § 2, 5-1-2012) 
Sec. 98-202. - Prohibition. 
(a)  No person may operate a golf cart in violation of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  No person may operate a golf cart in a negligent manner. For purposes of this article, "operate a golf cart in a negligent manner" shall mean the operation of a golf cart in such a way as to endanger any person or property, to obstruct, hinder or impeded the lawful course of travel of any motor vehicle or the use of a golf cart on a sidewalk, path, trail, walkway or park. 
(Ord. No. 1100, § 2, 5-1-2012) 
Sec. 98-203. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Public safety personnel may operate a golf cart on any public street without any further restrictions when the golf cart is used in the performance of his/her duties. 
(b)  A golf cart operated solely on private property is not subject to the regulations set forth in this article. 
(c)  A golf cart operated by town-authorized personnel on town property is not subject to the regulations set forth in this article. Town-authorized personnel shall mean any person who is employed by or volunteering for the town and instructed by a town official, or designee, to operate the golf cart on town property. This exception does not include public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1100, § 2, 5-1-2012) 
Secs. 98-204-98-209. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - USE OF HAND-HELD WIRELESS COMMUNICATION DEVICES WHILE DRIVING 

Sec. 98-210. - Regulating the use of hand-held wireless communication devices while driving. 
(a)  Definitions. In this section: 
(1)  Engaging in a call means talking, dialing, or listening on a hand-held wireless communication device, including holding a wireless communication device to activate or deactivate the device. 
(2)  Hand-held wireless communication device means a text-messaging device or other electronic, two-way communication device that uses a commercial mobile service, as defined by 47 United States Code § 332, that is designed to receive and transmit voice communication, text message or pictorial communication, or both, whether by internet or other electronic means. The term also includes devices such as mobile telephones, personal digital assistants (PDA), MP3 or other portable music players, electronic reading devices, laptop computers or tablets, portable computing devices, portable global positioning or navigation systems, pagers, electronic game devices and broadband personal communication devices. 
(3)  Hands-free wireless communication device means a mobile telephone, a device with speakerphone capability, a telephone attachment, or another function or other piece of equipment, regardless of whether or not permanently installed in a motor vehicle, that allows use of the wireless communication device without use of either of the operator's hands (or prosthetic device or aid, in the case of a physically disabled person). 
(4)  Operating a motor vehicle includes motor vehicle that is moving, stopped or standing on a public street, highway or right-of-way, unless it is lawfully parked, as that term is defined herein. 
(5)  Park or parked shall mean for the operator to completely cease movement of a motor vehicle in a lawful manner and location. For the purposes of this section, "parked" does not mean a vehicle stopped in a lane of traffic due to either a lawful traffic control device, or the conditions on the roadway, or traffic congestion patterns then existing. 
(6)  Text message means a two-way communication (whether real-time or asynchronous) in which data (composed in whole or in part of text, numbers, images, or symbols) is sent, entered, or received by a method other than by voice and transmitted through either a short message service (SMS) or a computer network. This term includes instant messaging and e-mail. The term does not include a communication transmitted through a global positioning or navigation system. 
(b)  Offense. 
(1)  It is an offense if the person uses a hand-held wireless communication device while operating a motor vehicle to: 
a.  Engage in a call; 
b.  Send, read or write a text message; 
c.  Take or view pictures or written text whether transmitted by internet or other electronic means, or access or view an internet website or software application; 
d.  Engage in gaming; or 
e.  Engage in any other use of the device while operating a motor vehicle. This includes holding the hand-held wireless communication device. 
(2)  This section does not apply to an operator of a motor vehicle using a hand-held wireless communication device: 
a.  While the vehicle is legally parked as that term is defined herein, or is being driven on private property; 
b.  That is used with a hands-free wireless communication device; 
c.  If the operator is a law enforcement officer, firefighter, member of a governmental emergency medical services function, or member of a governmental emergency management function, and the operator is using the device to conduct official business related to the position; or 
d.  Who is licensed by the Federal Communications Commission while operating a radio frequency device, other than a hand-held wireless communication device; or an operator using a two-way radio communication device. 
(3)  It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that the person was using a hand-held wireless communication device for the purpose of: 
a.  Reporting illegal activity to a law enforcement agency; 
b.  Communicating with an emergency response operator, a fire department, a law enforcement agency, a hospital, a physician's office, or a health clinic regarding a medical or other emergency situation; or 
c.  In the reasonable belief that a person's life or safety is in immediate danger. 
(4)  Only warning citations may be issued from the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, through February 29, 2016, so that an educational effort by the town may be conducted to inform the public about the importance and requirements of this section. Thereafter, a person convicted of an offense under this section shall be fined in accordance with the following: 
a.  First offense shall have a minimum fine of $100.00 and a maximum fine of $500.00; 
b.  Second offense shall have a minimum fine of $200.00 and a maximum fine of $500.00; and 
c.  Third and subsequent offenses shall have a minimum fine of $500.00. 
d.  Each day's violations shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. Any prior conviction under this article will count towards a second and third charge regardless of when it occurred. 
(5)  An offense under this section is not a moving violation and may not be made a part of a person's driving record or insurance record. 
(6)  To the extent that this section conflicts with V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.424, as amended, regarding the use of wireless communication devices while operating a motor vehicle by minors, or V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.425, as amended, regarding use of wireless communication devices in school crossing zones, state law shall control. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 2, 1-5-2016) 
Sec. 98-211. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - DOCKLESS MOBILITY SYSTEM 

Sec. 98-212. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article: 
    Customer means a person who rents or otherwise uses a unit from a dockless mobility system operator. 
    Dockless bicycle or dockless tricycle means a dockless mobility unit consisting of two or three wheels held in frame, propelled by pedals and steered with handlebars, including electric-assist bicycles that are part of a publically offered transportation system that does not require a fixed apparatus for its receipt or return. 
    Dockless mobility system means a mobility system or service permitted by the town, comprised of unit(s) for the purpose of transportation or conveyance. 
    Dockless mobility unit means a singular vehicle used in a greater, publicly offered transportation dockless mobility system for the conveyance of people, goods, or services that does not require fixed docking stations or apparatus to receive or return a unit. 
    Dockless scooter means a dockless mobility unit consisting of a footboard mounted on two or more wheels and a steering handle that is part of a publicly offered transportation system that does require a fixed apparatus for its receipt or return. 
    Electric assist means an electric motor affixed to a dockless mobility unit that assists the efforts of the driver when they are pedaling. 
    Home zone means an area designated by the town staff, typically delineated with traffic grade striping or paint, where dockless mobility units must be parked. Home zones located on private property must also have the consent of the property owner. A map of home zones will be provided to the operator upon approval of the permit. 
    Operator means a person(s) who holds a permit issued by the town under chapter 98 of the Code of Ordinance to operate a town-wide service. The term includes any employee, agent, or independent contractor hired by the permit holder. 
    Unit means a singular vehicle used for the transportation or conveyance of people, goods, or services. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 3-19-2019) 
Sec. 98-213. - Dockless mobility units requirements. 
(a)  Dockless mobility units shall: 
(1)  Prominently display the name of the operator, their current contact information, and a unique unit number; 
(2)  Be equipped with a brake, and for those units that operate at nighttime, a front light that emits white light and a red light and reflector at the rear of the unit, pursuant to of the V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 551.104. All dockless mobility units must have always-on front and back lights that are visible from a distance of at least 500 feet under normal atmospheric conditions at night. Front and rear lights must stay on at least 90 seconds after the unit has stopped; 
(3)  Be equipped with an on-board GPS unit or equivalent that can report the location of a unit at any time for the purposes of use, recovery, repair, data collection, and incident investigation; 
(4)  Be high quality, sturdily built to withstand the rigors of outdoor storage and constant use; 
(5)  Employ tamper-resistant security hardware; 
(6)  Be able to securely stand upright when parked; and 
(7)  Be inspected when removed from routine service, to ensure that all of its components are present and function properly. 
(b)  Electric-assist dockless mobility units used in systems issued a permit must employ an electric motor of less than 750 watts (1 h.p.); 
(c)  Bicycles used in dockless mobility systems issued a permit shall meet standards outlined in the Code of Federal Regulation (CFR) under Title 16, Chapter II, Subchapter C, Part 1512 - Requirements for Bicycles. Additionally, permits systems shall meet the safety standard outlined in the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 43.150 - Cycles, subsection 4210; 
(d)  Electric bicycles used in dockless mobility systems shall meet the most up-to-date definition of low-speed electric bicycle outlined in CPSC Public Law 107-309 for Low Speed Electric Bicycle and 15 U.S.C. Chapter 47 Section 2085 and be equipped with fully operable pedals and shall be subject to the same requirements as ordinary bicycles; 
(e)  Scooters used in dockless mobility systems shall meet the most up-to-date equivalent safety standards as those outlined in the Code of Federal Regulations and the International Organization for Standardization for bicycles. Currently, scooters shall meet COSC in Public Law 107-309 for standards around weight bearing; and 
(f)  For all dockless electric scooters and bicycles used in dockless mobility systems, the maximum motor-assist speed for permitted units shall be 20 mph, when ridden in the street environment. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 3-19-2019) 
Sec. 98-214. - Dockless mobility system permit. 
(a)  To obtain a permit for a dockless mobility system, a person must submit an application on a form provided for that purpose to the development services department. The application must contain the following: 
(1)  The name, street address, mailing address, email address, and telephone number of the applicant; 
(2)  If the applicant is a partnership, a corporation, or limited liability company, the application shall list the names of all partners, directors, members, and officers, as applicable, of the applicant; 
(3)  A non-refundable permit fee in the amount of $500.00; and 
(4)  Local point of contact for operator staff that are capable removing or relocating units based on the time frames listed in section 98-217. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 3-19-2019) 
Sec. 98-215. - Granting, renewing permit and permit terms. 
(a)  A person may operate a dockless mobility system only with a properly granted or renewed town permit as set forth in this article, and only in accordance with applicable law. 
(b)  A dockless mobility system permit shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed by applying in accordance with section 98-214. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 3-19-2019) 
Sec. 98-216. - Operating requirements. 
(a)  Provide a mechanism for customers to notify the operator that there is a safety or maintenance issue with the unit, and to include a telephone number, web address, and email address that must be properly established, maintained and available 24 hours a day. 
(b)  Maintain sufficient staff to relocate or rebalance units on a regular basis as needed, in addition to handling local issues as they arise, including timely removals, installation or maintenance of equipment and other issues arising pursuant to this article requiring local action on the part of operator. 
(c)  Assume responsibility for the cost and all obligations associated with properly maintaining its units in good, safe operating condition, including fixing, repairing, or correcting each unit that is considered inoperable, unsafe, or otherwise in violation of the standards under this article before re-deployment back into service. 
(d)  Be responsible for repair and payment of actual costs of repair to public infrastructure damaged by the use of operator's units, including reimbursement to town if town makes such repair, and including payment of costs incurred by the town to remove and/or store units that have been improperly parked or otherwise are required to be removed from the public right-of-way or other areas pursuant to this article. Payment shall be due within 30 days of written notice by town to operator. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 3-19-2019) 
Sec. 98-217. - Parking requirements. 
(a)  Dockless units shall prominently display the operator's current contact information for the purposes of requesting removal, relocation, or retrieval of the unit. 
(b)  All units deployed by an operator shall be parked: 
(1)  In an upright position on top of a hard surface; 
(2)  In a manner that does not detrimentally impact vehicular or pedestrian traffic; and 
(3)  Only within a home zone. 
(c)  Units shall not be parked adjacent to or within: 
(1)  Transit zones, including bus stops and shelters; 
(2)  Loading zones; 
(3)  ADA handicap parking zones; 
(4)  Street furniture that requires pedestrian access; 
(5)  Curb ramps; 
(6)  Entryways and driveways; 
(7)  Within the visibility triangle at intersections; 
(8)  Rail road tracks and crossings; 
(9)  Passenger loading zones or valet parking service areas; and 
(10)  A place where the town determines poses an unreasonable risk to the health, safety, and welfare of the general public. 
(d)  Operator shall relocate or remove from the public right-of-way or anywhere within the town each unit that is inoperable, unsafe, or otherwise failing to meet the standards under this article, within the following times: 
(1)  Within two hours of when operator becomes aware of or receives notice between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., seven days per week, except a holiday observed by the closure of town offices; and 
(2)  Within 12 hours of when operator becomes aware of or receives notice during all other times. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 3-19-2019) 
Sec. 98-218. - Safety requirements. 
(a)  All units deployed by an operator shall meet the standards outlined in the following: 
(1)  Code of Federal Regulations, Title 16, Chapter II, Subchapter C, Part 1512 - Requirements for Bicycles, as may be amended; 
(2)  International Standards Organization 43.150 - Cycles, subsection 4210, as may be amended; and 
(3)  V.T.C.A. Transportation Code § 551.104 , as may be amended, regulating the safety equipment of bicycles. 
(b)  All operators shall have visible language on signs approved by the town in designated parking areas or other appropriate places that notify the user that: 
(1)  Helmet use is encouraged while riding the unit for users 18 years of or older, and required for users under 18 years of age; 
(2)  User shall yield to pedestrians on sidewalks; and 
(3)  When riding on a street, users must follow the rules of the road as one would in a motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 3-19-2019) 
Sec. 98-219. - Relocation, removal, or impoundment. 
    The town has the right to relocate, remove, or impound any obstruction or encumbrance caused by a unit anytime such unit poses a threat to the health, safety and welfare of the general public or anytime a unit has been parked or otherwise located in violation of this article. In such case, the operator will be fined an impoundment fee in the amount of $50.00 per unit. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 3-19-2019) 
Sec. 98-220. - Survey, records, and data sharing. 
    Dockless bike share operators are required to report monthly information to the town regarding their operations, fleet, and membership. The goal of these reports is to better understand how the entire dockless mobility system is being utilized and to better inform future policy changes. Operators will work with the town to provide the following information on their operations in the town: 
(1)  Number of units in their dockless mobility system; 
(2)  Origin and destination data; 
(3)  Usage (total trips, per timeframe, per location, per unit); 
(4)  Total number of customers; 
(5)  Customer survey and general demographics (if available); 
(6)  Reported repairs, collisions; 
(7)  Removal or relocation data including response times and locations; and 
(8)  Any other data determined by town as necessary to ensure compliance with this article and with applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 3-19-2019) 
Sec. 98-221. - Indemnity. 
    By making application for a permit, the operator, its assigns, successors, and representatives agree to, and shall, defend, indemnify, release, and hold the town, its agents, employees, officers, volunteers, and legal representatives harmless for all claims, causes of action, liabilities, fines, and expenses (including, without limitation, attorneys' fees, court costs, and all other defense costs and interests) for injury, death, damage, or loss to personal or real property sustained in connection with or incidental to the activity related to operating a dockless mobility system in the town and as may be authorized by the permit. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 3-19-2019) 
Sec. 98-222. - Insurance, performance bond and fees. 
    The following types of insurance must be procured and maintained by operator: 
(1)  Commercial general liability with minimum limits of liability per occurrence of $1,000,000.00 with $2,000,000.00 general aggregate. 
a.  Policy shall be written by a licensed carrier authorized to do business in Texas, rated A:VI or better under the current A. M. Best Key Rating Guide. 
b.  Policy shall be endorsed to name the Town of Little Elm as an Additional Insured, with a waiver of subrogation rights and "primary and non-contributory" language with regard to any self-insurance or insurance the town may have or obtain. 
c.  Policy shall not exclude: personal and advertising liability, contractual liability (for the indemnity provided herein), products/completed operations; independent contracts. 
(2)  Business automobile liability. 
a.  Policy shall be written by a licensed carrier authorized to do business in Texas rated A:VI or better under the current A. M. Best Key Rating Guide. 
b.  Policy shall name the Town of Little Elm as an additional insured, with a waiver of subrogation rights and "primary and non-contributory" language with regard to any self-insurance or insurance the town may have or obtain. 
c.  Minimum combined single limit of liability of $1,000,000.00 for bodily injury and property damage. 
d.  Coverage shall include any autos, owned autos, leased or rented autos, non-owned autos and hired autos. 
(3)  Workers' compensation insurance. 
a.  Statutory limits required. 
b.  Employer's liability minimum limits of liability of $1,000,000.00 for each accident/each disease/each employee. 
c.  "Texas Waiver of Our Right to Recover From Others Endorsement, WC 42 03 04." 
d.  Texas must appear in Item 3A of the workers' compensation coverage or Item 3C must contain the following: "All States except those listed in Item 3A and the States of NV, ND, OH, WA, WV, and WY." 
    Operator shall provide the town with evidence of required coverage on the most current State of Texas Department of Insurance-approved form. Carrier may be an eligible non-admitted insurer in the State of Texas. 
    Policy shall not be canceled, non-renewed, suspended or reduced in limits of liability until the town has received 30 days' written notice of such change. Should policies lapse or expire, the permit shall automatically be suspended and operator shall discontinue its dockless mobility system within the town. Such permit suspension shall be in effect until operator provides town with evidence of a replacement policy. If operator fails to provide evidence of replacement policies acceptable to the town within five business days following the policy lapse, the permit shall terminate automatically. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 3-19-2019) 
Sec. 98-223. - General. 
(a)  The director of development services shall approve any dockless mod type and technology, prior to approving unit deployment. 
(b)  No dockless system may operate within the Town of Little Elm right-of-way, parks, or trails without obtaining a permit. 
(c)  The director of development services shall determine all permit terms, conditions, fines and other standard or special requirements. 
(d)  units are eligible to be placed into operation immediately, upon authorization issued by the director of development services. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 3-19-2019) 
Sec. 98-224. - Revocation, suspension or denial of a permit. 
(a)  The director of development services may immediately revoke or suspend the permit, or deny either the issuance or renewal thereof, if it is found that: 
(1)  The operator has violated or failed to meet any of the provisions of this article or conditions of the permit; 
(2)  The operator has violated any federal, state, or town law, or regulation; 
(3)  The chief of the police department or the chief of the fire department has determined that the dockless mobility system would pose a serious threat to public health, safety, or welfare; or 
(4)  The applicant has made a false statement of material fact on an application for a dockless mobility system permit. 
(b)  The director of development services may terminate a permit at any time for cause and require that the entire fleet of units be removed from town streets, within ten calendar days. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 3-19-2019) 
Sec. 98-225. - Notice to applicant/operator; appeals. 
(a)  Upon denial, suspension or revocation, the director of development services shall notify the applicant or operator in writing either in person or by certified mail to the address listed on the application of the action taken and the reasons therefore. A person may appeal a decision to deny, revoke, or suspend a permit to the town council. Appeals shall be submitted to the town secretary in writing within 15 days following the date the applicant or operator receives the decision. A hearing on the denial, suspension, or revocation will be scheduled for the next regular meeting of the town council that is more than six days away. The council will render a decision on the appeal within ten days of the hearing. An operator shall not operate a dockless mobility system during the appeal process. 
(b)  At the appeal hearing on a denial of an initial permit application, the appealing party must present evidence clearly indicating that the director of development services was incorrect in determining that the stated grounds for the permit denial existed. 
(c)  At the appeal hearing on a permit suspension, revocation, or refusal to renew, the director of development services must present evidence clearly indicating that the stated grounds for such action existed. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 3-19-2019) 
Sec. 98-226. - Violation; penalties. 
    It shall be unlawful for a dockless mobility operator to operate, maintain or conduct within the town a dockless mobility system without first securing a permit, and/or without complying with all of the provisions of this article or any other law. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 3-19-2019) 
Chapter 102 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal utility systems, general powers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 402.001 et seq.; water systems in home-rule municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 402.017; municipal jurisdiction over water and sewer utility rates, operations and services, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 13.042(a). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 102-1. - Public works director; duties. 
(a)  That the town council hereby establishes the position of director of public works for the town. 
(b)  The director of public works shall perform supervisory work of average difficulty in overseeing the construction, operation and maintenance of streets and drainage systems, water and sewer systems and perform related work as required and directed by the town manager. Such duties shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Administers and directs the operation of the department. 
(2)  Responsible for the management and administration of all employees in the department. 
(3)  Plans and schedules work projects. 
(4)  Actively participates in the work with crews engaged in the construction and maintenance of streets, alleys and draining systems, involving building form and pouring concrete, patching, spreading sand, gravel and asphalt, laying drainage pipe, building catchbasins and storm sewers, cutting, collecting and disposing of trees, limbs, leaves and debris. 
(5)  Actively participates in the work with crews engaged in the construction and maintenance of water and sewer systems. 
(6)  Ensures the efficient and safe operation of heavy equipment, such as, backhoes, graders, rollers, asphalt trucks and related equipment. 
(7)  Recommends and implements policies and procedures within the department of public works. 
(8)  Order and maintain materials and supplies. 
(9)  Prepares and administers the departmental budget. 
(10)  Maintains operational records and makes monthly reports to the mayor and town council. 
(11)  Investigates complaints and takes or recommends appropriate actions. 
(Ord. No. 283, §§ 1-3, 12-2-1991) 
Sec. 102-2. - Public works inspection fees. 
(a)  Public works inspection fees are established as follows: 
(1)  For the development of any subdivision, the developer/owner shall pay an administrative inspection fee of 2.5 percent of the total contract amount of the work involving the installation or improvement of any of the following items intended for dedication to the town, located on town-owned property, and/or within a public easement: Streets, alley ways, water, sewer, drainage or storm sewer systems, sidewalks, screening and/or retaining walls, and/or fences. Fifty percent of this fee must be paid at the time of the preconstruction meeting; the remaining 50 percent must be paid prior to final acceptance of the subdivision by the town. 
(2)  An additional fee of $40.00 per hour, with a two hour minimum, shall be assessed for any inspections scheduled after regular town business hours (Monday through Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.), or on holidays. After-hour and holiday inspection requests must be scheduled at least 24 hours in advance, and the fee paid at the time of the inspection request. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall apply to any subdivision for which building permits have not yet been issued as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(c)  The town reserves the right to review and audit, should same be necessary, the contract amounts as supplied by the developer/owner for accounts calculated pursuant to this article. 
(d)  The fees provided for herein shall be cumulative of all other fees which may be required by law. 
(Ord. No. 405, §§ 1-4, 12-29-1997) 
Secs. 102-3-102-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND SEWER SERVICES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipality may provide sanitary sewer system and require connections, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.003; water systems in home-rule municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 402.017. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 102-23. - Charge. 
(a)  Purpose of article; vested right not to be created . The intent and purpose of this article is to provide an equitable charge whereby water and/or sanitary sewer service can be provided or standard mains can be constructed to serve property not previously served within the boundaries of the town, or its extraterritorial jurisdiction. This service charge shall represent a proportionate distribution of the cost of water and sewer main extensions and shall be uniformly enforced against all property, as required, under the terms of this article and shall be due and payable before service is provided. No person shall acquire any vested rights under the terms and provisions of this article. 
(b)  Definitions . All the words used in this article shall carry their customary meanings except where specifically defined as follows: 
    Applicant shall mean an individual owner of a lot or tract of land, or his agent, requesting water or sanitary sewer service to said lot or tract of land which is not intended to be subdivided or developed for resale, rent or lease purposes. 
    Approach main shall mean that portion of a water or sanitary sewer main extension for which the applicant or developer has paid the total construction cost and which will provide service to adjacent properties over which said applicant or developer has no vested interest or control. 
    Boundary main shall mean that portion of a water or sanitary sewer main extension for which the applicant or developer has paid the total construction cost and which provides services adjacent to the applicant or developer's property but which can also provide service to the property on the opposite side of the street, alley or easement and over which said applicant or developer has no vested interest or control. 
    Developer shall mean the owner or agent of the owner developing a lot or tract of land for resale, rent or lease as residences, apartments, businesses, commercial or industrial use. 
    Director shall mean the director of the Little Elm Water Utilities Department or his duly authorized representative. 
    Engineer shall mean professional engineer licensed and authorized to practice engineering by the state. 
    Front footage shall mean the length in feet along the property line of a lot or tract of land which abuts a dedicated street, alley, easement, or right-of-way on which water and/or sewer service is received, and on which the pro rata charge is based. In the case where any property abuts more than one street, easement, alley, or right-of-way, the front footage will be determined by that side from which the property is served. 
    Person. See "Applicant." 
    Town shall mean the Town of Little Elm, Texas. 
    Town council shall mean the council of the Town of Little Elm, Texas. 
    Town manager shall mean the manager of the Town of Little Elm, Texas. 
(c)  Establishing pro rata charge . There shall be a service charge due on all property to which water and/or sewer mains are extended to serve after the adoption of this article or when service is provided from an existing pro rata main which was constructed between January 1, 1982, and the adoption of this article. This charge shall be called the pro rata charge for water and/or sewer and shall be due and payable before service is provided. The pro rata charge shall represent a portion of the cost of providing water or sewer facilities to serve the property on which the pro rata charge is paid. 
(d)  Determining property frontage . The front foot charge contained herein shall apply to property fronting on utility mains from which service will be provided. In the case where water and/or sewer service will be provided from a main located in an alley, easement or side street adjacent to said property, the pro rata charge shall be determined by the property frontage as outlined above. 
(e)  Irregular shaped lots or tracts of land . Where lots or tracts of land are so situated or shaped that the property frontage rule creates an inequitable basis for the pro rata charge when compared between it and other lots or tracts of land in the town, then in that event, the water utilities department shall establish the proper charge in accordance with the intent and purpose of this article. This charge shall be based upon equivalent rectangular lots or tracts using one front foot for each 150 square feet of area or the average frontage of other rectangular lots or tracts which have approximately the same total area. 
(f)  Rights under previous ordinance . The rights of persons entitled to refunds under previous ordinance where the installations have actually been made for water and/or sewer mains shall remain unaffected by this article. All rights and remedies which have accrued in favor of the town under this article shall be and are preserved for the benefit of the town. 
(g)  Existing mains exempt. All property platted into lots or tracts and having existing water and/or sewer mains installed either by the town or by a developer prior to this article, shall be exempt from the pro rata charges when water and/or sewer service connections are to be provided from such existing mains. Where such property is later developed or subdivided and a main extension is required or where such property has never taken service and the existing mains are replaced with larger sized pro rata mains, then the terms of this article shall apply. 
(h)  Certain projects of the town . The pro rata charges may either be waived or required for certain water and/or sewer extension projects of the town. When town funds or other resources are used to pay part or all of the cost of such improvements, the provisions of this subsection may apply to any industrial park or other development projects as may be designated by the town council, provided however, nothing contained herein shall be construed to eliminate or waive any other charges. 
(i)  Connection fee for extension of from existing pro rata main . When a water and/or sewer main extension is required to serve any property that will require connecting to an existing pro rata main, the person requesting the extension shall pay a nonrefundable pro rata main connection charge. This charge shall be in addition to any other pro rata charges or main extension costs that are required and shall be as follows: Each time an extension connection is made at any point on the existing pro rata main, a main connection charge in the amount of $200.00 per diameter inch of the extension shall be paid to the water utilities department. If applicable, this payment shall be applied to the existing pro rata main refund contract, otherwise it shall be deposited in the proper pro rata fund. 
Sec. 102-24. - Termination of provisions concerning pro rata water and sewer mains. 
(a)  All provisions in this article concerning the extension or addition of "pro rata" water or sewer mains, restricting or limiting applicable charges, are inapplicable and void as of the date of September 11, 1984. 
(b)  Effective September 11, 1984, all charges in this article previously limited or restricted to "pro-rata" mains are applicable and chargeable to the extension or addition of all water and sewer mains without regard to whether the particular line being extended constitutes a pro-rata water or sewer main line, or some other character of water or sewer main line. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to amend or modify the calculation of any refund entitlements or credit or the manner in which a particular type of main line is defined or the method of determination thereof. 
(Ord. No. 200, §§ 1-3, 9-11-1984) 
Sec. 102-25. - Adoption of Texas Administration Code. 
(a)  The rules (rules), Title 30 Texas Administrative Code (TAC) sections 285.1-285.91 and 30 TAC chapter 30, promulgated by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality for on-site sewage facilities, as the same may be hereafter amended or superseded, are hereby adopted, and all officials and employees of the town having duties under said rules are authorized to perform such duties as are required of them under said rules. 
(b)  The rules shall apply to all of the area lying within the incorporated limits of the town. Any permit issued for an on-site sewage facility within the jurisdictional area of the town must comply with the rules. 
(c)  The town clearly understands that there are technical criteria, legal requirements, and administrative procedures and duties associated with the regulating on-site sewage facilities, and will fully enforce V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 366, V.T.C.A., Water Code chs. 7 and 37, and the rules. 
(d)  The town recognizes and understands that it may and has the authority to adopt rules and standards which are more stringent that the rules and that, if such rules and standards are adopted and are more stringent than the rules, the more stringent rules and standards shall take precedence over the corresponding Texas Commission on Environmental Quality requirements; the town reserves its right and authority to adopt such rules and regulations. 
(e)  The town recognized that its on-site sewage facilities inspector must be certified by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality before assuming the duties and responsibilities. 
(f)  All fees collected for permits and/or inspections shall be made payable to the town. 
(g)  Persons aggrieved by an action or decision of the designated representative (inspector) may appeal such action or decision to the town council of the town. 
(Ord. No. 752, § 3, 1-3-2006) 
Sec. 102-26. - Cross connection and backflow prevention policy adopted. 
    The town hereby approves and adopts the Town of Little Elm Cross Connection Control Policy (hereinafter referred to as the "policy"), which is attached to Ordinance No. 1098 and kept on file with the town, and incorporated herein for all purposes as Exhibit A. The town commits to implement the requirements and procedures set forth in the adopted policy. 
(Ord. No. 1098, § 2(exh. A), 5-15-2012) 
Secs. 102-27-102-51. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WATER AND SEWER SERVICE FOR INDIVIDUAL OWNERS 

Sec. 102-52. - Pro rata charges for water and sewer service. 
(a)  Within the town limits . When a person desires water and/or sewer service to property within the town limits that requires an extension from existing facilities or when the service connection will be made to either an existing pro rata main or a main constructed after the adoption of this article, the person desiring such service shall pay a nonrefundable charge hereafter called the "pro rata charge." 
(1)  When the main is adjacent to the property desiring service, the pro rata charge shall be based on the "actual" total construction cost, including engineering, across the entire front footage of the property desiring service, and no adjustments or deductions shall be made for crossing street intersections, alleys, or property already served. 
(2)  Where the main is not adjacent to the property desiring service, a payment of the water or sewer pro rata charge shall be based on the "estimated" total construction cost of the required extension, including engineering. This charge shall be adjusted based on the actual construction cost, including engineering, upon completion of the extension. The payment of the pro rata charge shall entitle the person requesting service to acquire an extension of a water or sewer main a distance equal in length to the frontage on which the pro rata charge is paid. If the footage of pipe required for an extension is greater than a distance equivalent to the frontage on which the pro rata charge is paid, the person desiring service shall pay the actual total construction cost, including engineering, for the footage of pipe which is in excess of that distance equal to his frontage. The actual total construction cost shall include extending the main across the entire frontage of the property desiring service, and no adjustments or deductions shall be made for crossing street intersections, alleys, or property already served. That portion of the total cost in excess of the frontage of the property desiring service shall be refundable as provided herein for an approach main. 
When two or more individual desire water or sewer service, the main may be extended a distance equivalent to the combined frontage on which the pro rata charges are paid. When such distance is not adequate to provide service to all the requesting parties, the service requests shall be considered individually and the terms provided herein for approach mains shall apply. Pro rata water and/or sewer mains shall be provided only to property adjacent to, or served by, dedicated streets, alleys, or utility easements of record which are consistent with the town's comprehensive and master plans. Easements required for pro rata extensions shall be provided by the applicant who shall bear the full cost of acquisition of same. The cost of acquisition of said easements may be included in the pro rata refund contract with the applicant and said cost to be assessed along the front footage. 
(b)  Outside the town limits . All service connections or main extensions outside the town limits shall conform to the policy adopted by the town council for said connections or extensions. In order to initiate a request for water and/or sewer service connections or main extensions outside the town limits, the person desiring service shall submit to the water utilities department the following: 
(1)  A check, cash, or money order in an amount equal to the pro rata charge due, including the required tapping fee and deposit; 
(2)  A letter describing the type of service being requested (water, sewer, or both); the location, owner and applicant, if different from the owner; the nature of the use for which the service is being requested; and the size of service or extension requested, three-quarter inch or larger for water, four inches or larger for sewer. 
Pro rata charges for water and/or sewer service to property outside the town limits that requires an extension from existing facilities or requires a service connection to an existing pro rata main, or a main constructed after the adoption of this article, shall be computed on the same basis as those charges established in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 177, § 2, 5-24-1983) 
Secs. 102-53-102-77. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WATER AND SEWER SERVICES FOR DEVELOPERS 

Sec. 102-78. - Main extensions to serve property being subdivided or platted for development. 
    When extensions of water and sanitary sewer mains are required to serve any property which is being subdivided or platted in accordance with the subdivision regulations of the town, the owners or developers of such property shall pay the total cost of the extensions necessary to completely serve the property. The extensions required to completely serve the property shall conform to the "Standard Design Criteria" and "Master Utility Plan" of the water utilities and shall include the requirements for domestic service and fire protection service to the areas through which the lines extend. It shall be mandatory that water service lines and/or sewer service wyes and service lines be installed by and at expense of the owners or developer on all water and/or sewer main extensions. That portion of the extension cost paid by the owners or developers for approach mains or boundary mains shall be refundable as provided herein for such mains. 
(Ord. No. 177, § 3, 5-24-1983) 
Sec. 102-79. - Engineering to be furnished by developer. 
(a)  The developer shall engage the engineer or engineering firm of his choice, and said engineer shall be duly licensed to perform engineering work in the state. The developer's engineer shall prepare and submit to the water utilities department the following date for preliminary approval: 
(1)  One copy of a general area map, plat or sketch, showing general location of area to be served in relation to existing roads, streets, and known points and further showing the approximate location of all existing water and wastewater facilities within the general area. 
(2)  Three copies of a recorded plat or map of the subdivision or area to be served, showing all dedicated streets, easements and rights-of-way within and immediately adjoining the area to be served. Said plat or map shall show contour elevations of the area, based on USC and G.S. datum, in sufficient detail for preliminary study. Said plat or map shall further show the proposed layout of the water and/or sewer improvements to serve the subdivision or area and shall show adequate details for preliminary study, including proposed main size and grade, where required, proposed location of fittings and appurtenances (including fire hydrants) and location or approximate distance and route to any existing water and/or sewer improvements in general area. 
(3)  Three copies of a preliminary cost estimate for the total proposed improvements, including engineering. 
(4)  Three copies of a letter, signed by the developer, requesting preliminary approval and indicating his desire to enter into contract for furnishing said improvements. 
(b)  The water utilities department shall review the preliminary date submitted, confer with the developer and his engineer as required and recommend such changes as are required to meet federal, state and local authority standards. 
(c)  The developer shall deposit with the water utilities department any funds required by contractual arrangements. Said funds shall be deposited in a construction account. 
(d)  The developer's engineer shall prepare detailed construction plans and specifications for each segment of the proposed improvements and submit three sets of same for review by the water utilities department prior to construction. No construction shall begin prior to the water utilities department's approval, in writing, of construction plans and specifications. 
(e)  Upon approval of construction plans and specifications, the developer's engineer shall provide all fieldwork supervision and inspection necessary to insure that construction complies with approved plans and specifications. The water utilities department shall have the right to perform its own inspection as required to ensure that proper construction techniques are being followed without relieving the developer's engineer of any responsibility. 
(f)  Proper sterilization techniques shall be followed in construction of water lines and, upon completion of construction, a water utilities representative shall be present during the opening of any valves to fill newly constructed lines from any existing mains and a representative of the water utilities department must be present to supervise the filling, flushing, and testing of all newly constructed water mains. Upon completion of flushing and testing, a representative of the water utilities department shall collect samples from the newly constructed lines for bacteriological tests. The valves connecting the newly constructed lines to the existing lines shall remain closed, except for supervised filling, flushing, and testing, until such time as the improvements, as constructed, have been certified by the water utilities department as being acceptable for operation and public use. 
(g)  Immediately following completion of construction and testing of the improvements, the developer's engineer shall prepare and submit one set of certified reproducible "as-built" detail plans of the completed project together with two copies of certified final cost estimates, including engineering, for the project and a letter from the developer requesting final approval and acceptance of the improvements for maintenance and operation by the water utilities department. A representative of the water utilities department shall accompany the developer, engineer and contractor during final inspection of the improvements. 
(h)  The developer and his engineer will be notified of final acceptance of the improvements by the water utilities department by letter as soon as practicable following receipt of all required, acceptable date. At this time, the newly constructed improvements shall start the one-year maintenance period whereby the developer and the contractor shall indemnify the town against any repairs which may become necessary to any part of the work performed in the construction of the extensions arising from defective workmanship or materials used therein, for a period of one year from the date of final acceptance of work. An acceptable maintenance bond shall be provided to the water utilities department to guarantee that all required repairs or work will be properly and expeditiously corrected after notification by the water utilities that corrective measures are required. 
(Ord. No. 177, § 4, 5-24-1983) 
Sec. 102-80. - Contractor to be furnished by developer. 
(a)  The property owner or developer of a tract of land being developed and served by water and/or sanitary sewer service shall hire a private contractor to install the complete water or sewer facilities including mains, approach mains, valves, manholes, hydrants, etc., all in accordance with the plans approved by and under supervision of the water utilities department. Payment for the work to be done by the town shall be made prior to the starting of any construction. 
(b)  The developer shall provide the water utilities department a copy of the contract between the developer and his contractor for the construction of the improvements for his development or shall, at the water utilities department's option, receive sealed competitive bids for such work in order to determine the fair value of the system. 
(c)  The developer's engineer shall submit two copies of all change orders or contract changes to the water utilities department for approval before any changes or modifications are to be performed by the contractor. 
(Ord. No. 177, § 5, 5-24-1983) 
Secs. 102-81-102-103. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 102-104. - Cost of oversized mains. 
(a)  When the master utility plan of the town requires the extension of a main of a size that is larger than that determined by the water utilities department as being adequate to completely serve the property or subdivision desiring service, the town may pay the cost in excess of that required to construct the standard or adequate size mains, when funds are available. 
(b)  When funds are not available, the owner or developer shall install, at his own expense, the required oversized mains and shall be refunded by the water utilities department, that additional expense for the construction of such mains. This refund shall be made in ten equal annual payments, without interest, with the first payment to be due on September 1, of the town's fiscal year next following approval and acceptance of the construction by the water utilities department. 
(c)  Oversized mains are usually defined as being larger than eight inches in diameter unless a larger size is required to serve the property or subdivision in question. Adequate size of such water and sewer mains shall be as determined by the water utilities department. 
(Ord. No. 177, § 6, 5-24-1983) 
Sec. 102-105. - Facilities to be property of town. 
    At the end of the two-year maintenance period after completion of the water and/or sewer facilities by private contractor and acceptance by the water utilities department, or upon completion by the water utilities department, the facilities so constructed shall become and remain the property of the town and shall be maintained as a part of its water and sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 177, § 7, 5-24-1983) 
Sec. 102-106. - Location for service connection. 
    The water utilities department shall approve the location of all water or sewer service connections and said service shall be provided to property only from dedicated streets, alleys or utility easements. 
(Ord. No. 177, § 8, 5-24-1983) 
Sec. 102-107. - Approach main or boundary main contract refunds. 
(a)  When the cost of an approach main or boundary main is greater than the pro rata charge due on the applicant's or developer's property, then that cost above the pro rata charge shall remain refundable until either 100 percent of the lots served by the approach main have paid their pro rata charge or until the expiration of the refund contract, whichever occurs first. 
(b)  Pro rata contracts as provided for herein shall be executed by the applicant or developer and the town manager. The terms of the contract shall be ten years and the water utilities shall not be liable for refunds of pro rata charges collected after the term of the contract. No interest shall be paid by the water utilities department for any money on which refunds are due. 
(c)  Refunds of pro rata charges collected for connections to approach or boundary mains shall be made within 30 days after August 1 and February 1 of each year for all refunds collected during the preceding six months. Refunds shall be payable when the pro rata charge payments have been collected for property on which the refund is based. 
(d)  When an applicant or developer is entitled to a refund as a result of the pro rata charge due on adjacent property which he also owns, the refund may be credited to the pro rata refund contract without any payment or refunds being made, provided proper records and documentation are maintained to indicate such transactions. 
(e)  When temporary lines or facilities are constructed to expedite the development of a particular area (such as across easement within the subdivision on which no frontage can be connected, or when facilities are constructed which otherwise are not required in the master utility plan of development for the water utilities system), the developer shall bear the total cost without refund. 
(Ord. No. 177, § 9, 5-24-1983) 
Sec. 102-108. - Pro rata funds; deposits, charges and refunds. 
(a)  There shall be a pro rata water fund and a pro rata sewer fund maintained as a part of the water utilities. 
(b)  All monies received for water pro rata payments shall be deposited in the water pro rata fund and all monies received for sewer pro rata payments shall be deposited in the sewer pro rata fund. 
(c)  Payment of the pro rata or total cost of the extensions, as provided herein, shall authorize the director of the water utilities department to extend sewer service to property on which work done and all charges for work done by the water utilities department to extend water service to property on which the water pro rata has been paid shall be charged to the water pro rata fund and all charges for work done by the water utilities department to extend sewer service to property on which the sewer pro rata has been paid shall be charged to the sewer pro rata fund. All refunds due under the provisions herein provided shall be made from the applicable water or sewer pro rata fund. 
(d)  At the town's option, the water utilities department may budget $10,000.00 per year for the pro rata water fund and/or $10,000.00 per year for the pro rata sewer fund until such time that each or both of the funds can become self-sustaining. 
(Ord. No. 177, § 10, 5-24-1983) 
Sec. 102-109. - Both water and sewer service to be provided; connections with water mains to be made by the water utilities department. 
    Connection to the water or sewer main shall not be permitted unless both services are provided, except in case where either town water mains or sewer mains are not readily accessible. All connections with existing town water mains shall be made by the water utilities department. 
(Ord. No. 177, § 11, 5-24-1983) 
Sec. 102-110. - Extension into densely populated areas by town at own expense; payment of pro rata charges by property owners. 
    Where the town governing body finds that in densely populated areas and in specific locations, due to the absence of water and/or wastewater service, the public welfare would best be served by making water and/or wastewater main extensions at its own cost, and after due investigation and consideration in order to avoid and eliminate extremely unhealthful conditions which are contributing factors to epidemics, and where money is available for such purposes, it is the express policy of the town governing body, when expressed by its resolution, to extend water and/or wastewater mains into these densely populated areas, without a main extension charge payment being required from the property owners; provided however, that when mains are extended following such resolution, each property owner shall be required to pay the applicable charges established by this article or the board of directors when such property is connected to the water and/or wastewater main. 
(Ord. No. 177, § 12, 5-24-1983) 
Sec. 102-111. - Provisions for deferred payments. 
(a)  This section shall not apply except in cases of extreme hardship as determined by the water utilities department. 
(b)  When the owner of a lot or other undivided parcel of land, the area of which does not exceed one acre, and such owner has not secured an extension under this provision within the preceding 12-month period, has duly requested in writing and on forms provided by the water utilities department, to make water or sewer extensions abutting the trace of land described in the application, and said tract of land is connected with town water or sewer service or is to be connected with such service upon the completion of the requested extension; the water utilities director is authorized to determine the applicable pro rata charge payment to be made for such extension, and to provide the extension under the following conditions: 
(1)  When the owner applicant of said parcel of land has paid to the town a minimum initial payment of 15 percent of the total pro rata charge; and 
(2)  When the owner of said parcel of land shall have executed a contract with the water utilities department creating a valid lien against the parcel of land described in the application, to secure payment of the deferred part of the pro rata charge within 36 months, with minimum monthly payment of $10.00 each, the annual unpaid balance to bear nine percent interest, and further providing for accelerated maturity with customary provisions applicable to default in payments and further providing that the water utilities is authorized to discontinue water service to the described parcel of land and any premises thereon located, if for any reason the water service bill or any deferred pro rata charge payment is not paid when the town manager may deem expedient and in the public interest. The town manager is further authorized to prescribe and approve the form or application herein provided for, and the form of contract required and such other instruments and requirements as may be deemed necessary or expedient in making the provisions of this section adequately effective. 
(Ord. No. 177, § 13, 5-24-1983) 
Sec. 102-112. - Theft of water. 
    A person commits an offense of theft of water by any of the following actions: 
(1)  A person may not knowingly tamper, connect to, or alter any component of the town's water system including valves, meters, meter boxes, lids, hydrants, lines, pump stations, ground storage tanks, and elevated storage tanks. This shall include direct or indirect efforts to initiate or restore water service without the approval of the town. 
(2)  If, without the written consent of the town manager or his designee, the person knowingly causes, suffers or allows the initiation or restoration of water service to the property after termination of service. For purposes of this section, it shall be assumed that the owner, occupant, or person in control of the property caused, suffered, or allowed the unlawful initiation or restoration of service. 
(3)  A person may not knowingly make or cause a false report to be made to the town of a reading of a water meter installed for metered billing. 
(4)  A person commits a separate offense each day that the person performs an act prohibited by this section or fails to perform an act required by this section. 
(5)  An offense under this article, including the first offense, will result in forfeiture of any and all deposits, removal of meters, and discontinuance of water service by the town. A $500.00 fee will be required before the town will restore service. 
(6)  An offense under this article is a Class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to $2,000.00 and discontinuance of water service by the town. 
(Ord. No. 727, §§ 2-4, 9-13-2005) 
Secs. 102-113-102-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER UTILITIES DEPARTMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1415, adopted Sept. 5, 2017, repealed the former art. III, §§ 102-136-102-170, and enacted a new art. III as set out herein. The former art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 820, §§ 1-35, adopted Feb. 20, 2007; Ord. No. 1081, § 1, adopted Oct. 18, 2011. 

Sec. 102-136. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section: 
    Applicant means a person or entity that has applied for an account with the Town of Little Elm, Texas Customer Service Department. 
    Customer means a person or entity that has an account with the Town of Little Elm, Texas, Water Utility Department for the supply of water, wastewater, water reuse or other service and/or has made application, whether written or oral, to the customer service department for water, wastewater, water reuse or other service, and such service has been provided or made available by the town at the location specified in the oral or written application for service. 
    Customer service department shall mean the department responsible for establishing customer service accounts, monthly billing for services, and handling of customer complaints and requests for adjustments. 
    Special fund shall mean a governmental fund type used to account for the proceeds of specific revenue sources (other than for major capital projects) that are restricted to expenditures for specified purposes, or a group of assets and liabilities accounted for in an operating fund whose use is subject to constraints that are imposed by law, creditors, or merely sound financial policy. 
    Water utilities shall mean the supply by the town of potable water, water reuse, wastewater contribution, and/or other related service. 
    Water utility department shall mean the department responsible for the provision of water, wastewater, water reuse and/or other related water services. 
    Water utility services shall mean water, sewer, water reuse and/or all other related water utility services provided by the town. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 1(exh. A), 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 102-137. - Creation of water utility and customer service departments. 
(a)  A water utility department is hereby created to be responsible for the water utility services of the town. The head of the water utility department shall be the public works director. 
(b)  A customer service department is hereby created to be responsible for all billing and collection of fees related to water utility services and any other services that may be assigned. The head of the customer service department shall be the chief financial officer. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 1(exh. A), 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 102-138. - Rates, minimum charges, failure to pay. 
(a)  Utility rates. The rates, criteria and related charges, established from time to time by separate ordinance, shall be collected for water utility services furnished by the town, through the customer service department. 
(b)  Minimum bill charge. A minimum monthly fee for all services received in accordance with the rates established by the town through a separate ordinance will be charged and will not be prorated. Any customer who is currently receiving or may hereafter request and receive water utility service at any premises through one or more meters shall be charged no less than the monthly minimum rate, as adopted by separate ordinance, for each service connected to the premises. Such charges shall continue in force and effect and be collected as long as the customer receives any water utility service at the premises, provided, that such customer may request the removal of one or more such meters. If any customer requests the removal of any meter used primarily for seasonal purposes including but not limited to lawn sprinkling, watering, or pool usage, and subsequently requests that such service be restored within a 12-month period, the customer shall pay a reconnection charge. 
(c)  Failure to pay. Failure to pay the charges for water utility services shall authorize the town to discontinue all utility services to the premises and such services shall be subject to the terms and provisions pertaining to delinquency and failure to pay for water utility services. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 1(exh. A), 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 102-139. - Joint users; moving to different locations. 
(a)  Joint users. Where water is supplied to more than one family or occupant through a single service account, the town will not undertake to apportion the charges for such use of water among the owners, occupants or families; but the bill for such use of water will be charged against the owner or occupant in whose name the account stands. Unpaid bills will be cause for refusing service to the same account holder until the amount past due is paid. 
(b)  Customer relocation. Any customer who is liable to the town for past due water utility services at one or more locations, and, is thereafter located using water at another service address, shall not be eligible to receive water utility services at the new service address until such past due amounts have been paid. In the event a customer receives water utility services and there exists any amounts due for service furnished at any previous locations, any such amounts shall be transferred to the customer's account at the new service address and the water utility services shall be discontinued at the new service address until all past due amounts are paid. 
(c)  Customer responsible for all usage. Should any person move into any premises supplied with water from the town and use water utility services, without making an application and paying any applicable costs or fees in the manner provided herein, then such person(s) shall become responsible for all water used and/or sewer services utilized from the date of the last recorded reading and the failure to pay same shall be cause for disconnecting such service until the amount due is paid. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 1(exh. A), 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 102-140. - Determination of size and type of meter service. 
    The public works director, or designee, shall determine the size, type and number of meters and services to be installed and/or used for any water utility services to any building or division of space in a building or property subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 1(exh. A), 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 102-141. - Bills; delinquency; payment extensions; service calls; due process. 
(a)  Payment generally. All charges for water utility service shall be paid on a monthly basis. The due date will be printed on the face of the water bill. Payments must be received prior to 11:59 p.m. on the printed due date to avoid a penalty. Penalties are assessed the next business day following the printed due date. 
(b)  Delinquent accounts and penalty. Accounts are delinquent if payment is not received by the due date and a delinquent account will be levied a ten percent penalty on the entire amount due. If full payment is not received within ten days after the due date, water utility services will be scheduled for disconnection and a termination fee for failure to pay will be assessed. Once service has been scheduled for termination for non-payment, the termination fee is non-refundable. 
(c)  Failure to receive bill. All bills shall be considered rendered when sent to the customer by the customer service department. Failure to receive any such bill by a customer shall not relieve such customer of the duty and necessity of paying for water utility services furnished under the terms of this article. 
(d)  Extension. It shall be the duty of the chief financial officer or designee, upon the failure or refusal of any person to promptly pay within ten days from the date of delinquency, any charge or charges levied and assessed under the terms of this article, to discontinue water utility services and refuse further utility service to such person until such charges are paid or satisfactory payment arrangements have been made; provided, however, upon request by the customer, the chief financial officer or designee may extend the time for payment for an additional period before discontinuing water utility services. No customer shall be allowed more than one extension for payment annually. No extension request shall be made after the termination process is initiated. 
(e)  Service call charges. The customer shall be responsible for the payment of any charge related to separate service calls for connection and/or disconnection of service. The charges to be assessed for service calls related to the turning-on or termination of water utility services shall be established from time-to-time by separate ordinance. 
(f)  Customer entitled to due process. Before a customer's water utility services shall be terminated for failure to pay, the customer shall be entitled to adequate notice and due process procedures. Due process shall include, but not be limited to, (1) written notice delivered to the customer in a timely manner that shall state the reasons for such discontinuance of service and the date for which service shall be discontinued; and (2) an opportunity for an informal hearing before service is so terminated by the town. The opportunity for hearing shall be an informal consultation with the town manager, or designee; who has the full authority to resolve the dispute and cancel the disconnection of service if it is determined there is a fair and justifiable reason for doing so. The burden for requesting a hearing shall be on the customer. At no time shall the town, or its representatives, be permitted to arbitrarily withhold or discontinue essential water utility services without a valid reason. 
(g)  Deferred payment plan-Availability. The town may, in its sole discretion, provide a deferred payment plan to any customer who demonstrates an extreme hardship to pay the bill in full at this point-in-time. The deferred payment plan provides the opportunity for the customer to pay off the outstanding balance over the period of three months, if the following conditions are applied: 
(1)  The customer requests the deferred payment plan and provides an explanation for the need for deferred payment. 
(2)  The customer signs a written deferred payment plan specifying the amount and payment schedule for the deferred payments. 
(3)  Only one deferred payment plan will be allowed for a customer for any 24-month period from the date a prior deferred payment plan was paid in full. 
(4)  There will be no amendments to the deferred payment plan. 
(5)  The customer must remain current on all subsequent water utility bills. 
(6)  Upon approval by the town of the deferred payment plan, the customer must pay up to 50 percent of the amount currently due and outstanding. The town will agree to waive the penalties on the outstanding balance due during the term of the deferred payment plan. 
(7)  The customer must pay the balance of the utility bills subject to the deferred payment plan prior to the first utility bill due date after approval of the deferred payment plan by the town, except that the town may, upon request from the customer and under unusual or special circumstances only, extend the final deferred payment plan payment date for a period not to exceed three months. 
(8)  The town will charge an application processing fee to each deferred payment plan implemented in accordance with the adopted fee schedule. These fees must be paid in cash at the time of the deferred payment plan request. 
(h)  Deferred payment plan-Restrictions. A deferred payment plan shall not be available to any customer if any one of the following conditions exists: 
(1)  The customer has previously participated in a deferred payment plan with the town within the past 24 months. (The calculation of the 24 months begin on the date any prior deferred payment plan was paid in full); or 
(2)  The utility bills for which the customer has requested the deferred payment plan are a result of meter tampering, theft or diversion of services, or willful damage to town property; or 
(3)  The customer paid with a non-sufficient fund ("NSF") check or a check was returned to the town as a result of a closed account; or 
(4)  The customer fails to sign the deferred payment plan contract; or 
(5)  The customer fails to pay the required application processing fee prior to the implementation of the contract; or 
(6)  The chief financial officer has the discretion to waive any of these restrictions on a case by case basis if waiver is determined to be in the best interest of the town; 
(i)  Deferred payment plan-Disconnection. The town may immediately disconnect service to any customer who fails to comply with the terms and conditions of a deferred payment plan. 
(j)  Average monthly payment plan (AMPP). Any residential utility customer of the town may request to be billed for water, sewer and/or sanitation services based upon an average billing amount. AMPP is not available to commercial customers. 
(1)  Mutual agreement. AMPP billing is optional to the customer but subject to the town's approval in each case. AMPP billing allows the customer to have each monthly bill based upon a 12-month usage average for water utility service. AMPP billing may not be used to defer payment of a customer's delinquent water bill. AMPP billings may be advantageous to customers who experience wide variations in their monthly water utility billings. 
(2)  Customer's obligation. Notwithstanding anything in this section 102-141 to the contrary, a customer entering into an AMPP agreement with the town shall be obligated to pay for the total amount of water utility service charges that would be applicable to the customer in absence of any AMPP billing plan or billing agreement. The AMPP does not relieve a customer of any obligation to pay based upon actual billing units (e.g., gallons metered to the customer). 
(3)  Eligibility. In order to be eligible for average monthly payment plan (AMPP), the customer must meet the following requirements: 
a.  In the most recent 12 months, the customer must have occupied the service address location, been continuously connected to the town's water system, and had a satisfactory payment history during such period; 
b.  All bills, including the current bill for water utility service, must have been paid so that no amounts are due on the account; 
c.  The customer, must sign and deliver to the town the AMPP, in form and substance acceptable to the town; 
d.  All payments made under the AMPP, must be made by automatic bank draft; 
e.  A customer will not be eligible to enroll if the customer's account history reflects any NSF checks, late payments (or penalties) or termination of service within the preceding 12-month period. 
(4)  Termination of average monthly payment plan. AMPP will continue until terminated. AMPP may be terminated at any time by either the customer or the town. If AMPP is terminated, any balance owed to the town will become due and payable immediately. A credit balance due to the customer will be applied to future billings. At the time the AMPP is terminated, the customer will be placed on a regular method of billing and will not be permitted to re-enroll for at least 18 months. 
If a customer fails to pay when due the amount of any AMPP billing, or at any time no longer remains eligible per the terms above, the town may at its option terminate AMPP billing and any balance owed to the town will become due and payable. 
(5)  AMPP-Monthly billing calculation. A customer's monthly payments under an AMPP billing plan will be based on a formula for determining the average monthly payment. The AMPP bill amount will change monthly as the rolling 12-month average of actual billing changes. A minimum of 12 months of billing history for the customer at the service location that is the subject of the AMPP billing plan is required. 
The town reserves the right to periodically review the AMPP billing payment amount and adjust such amount as needed due to changes in rates, weather, usage, etc. The town shall provide the customer reasonable notice of any changes in the AMPP billing payment amount. 
(k)  Town's rights. The town shall have the right to provide information to any commercial credit agency or organization with respect to any customer's disconnection of service for failure to pay any portion of customer's bill or bills. The town shall have the right to provide credit information to credit bureaus, credit reporting services, and other utilities. The credit information may include, but shall not be limited to a customer's payment history and status of unpaid bills for the town's utility services. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 1(exh. A), 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 102-142. - Meters to be read monthly; estimated water usage when meters cannot be read. 
(a)  Meter reads. All meters, as nearly as possible, shall be read once a month and bills rendered by the customer service department accordingly. 
(b)  Estimated consumption. An estimate of the quantity of water delivered to the premises shall be made under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  Obstruction of meter. The meter reader is unable to procure a reading of the meter because access to the meter is obstructed in any manner, or entrance to the premises is made hazardous by an animal or otherwise. 
(2)  Failure to locate. The meter cannot be located by the meter reader. 
(3)  Malfunction. The meter does not properly function or is otherwise defective. 
(4)  Adverse conditions. Adverse weather or acts of God prevent the reading of the meter. 
(5)  Delayed read. A meter reading is not available to the customer service department at the time of preparing the monthly bill for the customer for any other reason. 
(c)  Estimate on past consumption. An estimate shall be based on past consumption experience at the premises adjusted for seasonal consumption or in the event of no past experience then upon consumption of the same class under similar conditions. 
(d)  Customer responsible for bill. The customer shall pay the amount of the bill rendered; except, in the event an estimated bill is excessive and found to be in error by the customer service department or the actual meter reading has been obtained. 
(e)  Credits and adjustments. Billing credits or adjustments shall be made to the customer's account upon the final determination of consumption based on an actual meter reading or as otherwise determined in accordance with another subsection above if actual meter readings are not available. 
(f)  Interruption of service. If a customer requests discontinuance of service at an address with uninterrupted service for a period of time so short that the only bill for service rendered would be the final bill, such billing will be computed as though service had been furnished for a full month. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 1(exh. A), 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 102-143. - Application for water utility service required; proof of tenancy. 
    (a) Application required. Any owner or occupant of property desiring water utility service shall contact the customer service department to establish service. An owner or applicant shall not use any water utility service, nor shall such service be rendered until an account is established and any necessary fees are paid to and received by the customer service department. Applicant agrees that upon completion of the application process and payment of application fee, the applicant will be responsible to the water utility department for all charges for services provided and further agrees that applicant will abide by all provisions of this article and other ordinances of the town relating to such service. No connection to the water utility system shall be permitted until an application is approved by the customer service department. 
(b)  Discontinuance of service. If the application, together with the required application fee and deposit, is not received by the customer service department within the time established by the chief financial officer from the date the application for service was made by telephone, or in person, service covered by the application shall be discontinued until application and deposit are made in person by the applicant. A charge, as established by separate ordinance, shall be assessed for any service call to terminate the customer's water utility service. 
(c)  Proof of tenancy. An applicant or customer shall, upon request of the customer service department, furnish proper identification, together with all information regarding the service address, including ownership, tenancy, or relationship of applicant or customer to other present or former customers of the water utility department at the service address. In the event such information is not furnished, service to the applicant and/or the service address shall be denied or discontinued. A charge, as established by separate ordinance, shall be assessed for a service call to terminate the customer's water utility service for failure to submit required information. 
(d)  False statement. No person or business shall make a false or misleading statement in an application to the town for water utility services and upon a finding of a misrepresentation in an application; the town shall discontinue water services in addition to any other remedies. 
(e)  Transfer services from residence to residence. The customer's new account will be charged an application processing fee at the rate established by ordinance for each account transfer. The deposit on the old account will be transferred to the new account. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 1(exh. A), 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 102-144. - Residence or place of business for which application accepted deemed bona fide address of customer; penalty. 
(a)  Bona fide address of customer. Where an application is accepted for water utility service, for business or residential purposes, it shall be considered the bona fide residence or business of the customer and should water utility services be discontinued for nonpayment of bills or for other infractions of this article, no new application will be accepted from the owner, agent or any other person to continue service at such place under any other name, so long as such place is occupied by the original customer as the bona fide residence or place of business of same, until all bills and penalties, damage to waterworks equipment and other service charges have been paid in full or some form of agreement has been reached. 
(b)  Tenant responsibility of applicant. Should water utility services be furnished by an applicant for water utility service to a tenant, it shall be considered additional service to the original applicant for water utility service and the provisions hereof apply in the same manner. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 1(exh. A), 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 102-145. - Utility deposit required; increase in deposit; accounting for deposits; bankruptcies. 
(a)  Customer deposit required. A deposit for water utility services shall be made with the customer service department of the town at the time of establishing an account for water utility services, the minimum amount of which shall be established by separate ordinance for each customer class. 
(b)  Request for additional deposit. If a customer's water utility service is discontinued for non-payment, pursuant to the provisions of this article, three or more times in any consecutive 12-month period, the chief financial officer, or designee, shall require the customer to provide additional security in the amount of twice the normal deposit. 
(c)  Accounting for deposits. Any and all sums of money collected, or hereafter collected as a cash deposit securing the town against losses that may be sustained when a customer discontinues water utility service shall be deposited in a special fund, or accounted for as restricted, to be used for the payment or adjustment of final amounts due the town for water utility service when an account is being closed; provided, however, that such funds or deposits may be invested by the town or used as working capital for the making of permanent improvements in the water utility department, but such funds shall never be reduced to a point where the current adjustments or closing of accounts cannot be met. The chief financial officer or designee, shall keep an accurate record of depositors and amounts deposited; they shall make or cause to be made a monthly statement of deposits received, refunds made, and the monthly balance of cash on hand and on deposit to the credit of the special fund for deposits. 
(d)  Effect of bankruptcy. If any customer becomes insolvent or bankrupt, or makes an assignment for the benefit of creditors, the town shall apply the customer's deposit to offset any outstanding bill. In the event a customer has a past due balance or is not current on a bill, upon receipt of official notice of bankruptcy, the customer's account shall be closed and any deposit applied to the outstanding balance, all amounts remaining on the account shall be held in abeyance until the bankruptcy is dissolved. If the customer's account is closed due to bankruptcy, the customer may apply for a new water utility service account while said bankruptcy is pending; however, the customer service department shall only initiate a new service account for the customer upon payment of a new deposit. 
(e)  Transfer of deposit. Any deposit made under the provisions of this section for water utility service at the service address shown on the original application, may be transferred by the chief financial officer or designee, to any other service address within the corporate town limits at the written or oral request of the customer. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 1(exh. A), 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 102-146. - Water used in construction charged to property owner; non-payment of charges. 
(a)  Construction utility charges. Where water utility service is used in the construction or repair of property, such water utility service shall be charged against the owner of the property. Where such water utility service has not been turned on by the water utility department for use on the premises, such water utility service shall not be turned on until all appropriate charges are paid. Where water utility service is already turned on, and where such charges are not paid, it shall be turned off in the same manner as it may be turned off for any other delinquency in payment. 
(b)  Additional use after service discontinued. Where water utility service has been discontinued by the water utility department and it is subsequently found that additional water utility service has been used, and where an application has not been made, the service shall be charged against the previous account holder and/or owner of the property and service shall not be turned on for a new applicant until payment is made or agreed to for the water utility service used. Where it is determined that the property was occupied without an application, the water used may be charged to the new occupant. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 1(exh. A), 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 102-147. - Permission of consumer to be secured before using water; notice to department; use before filing of application for service. 
    Where water utility service is furnished to any premises through a meter, it shall hereafter be unlawful for any person engaged in any work of public improvement, or work of any character, or for any other reason, to take water from any hydrant or water connection without first having secured the consent of, and made arrangements with, the person to whom the water is being furnished on such premises by the town, and in each instance that water is so used, the person using the same shall immediately give written notice thereof to the town stating therein the premises from which water utility service was secured and the approximate amount used. It shall be unlawful for any person to use water from any service connection until application for such service shall have been filed as hereinabove provided. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 1(exh. A), 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 102-148. - Necessity for notice to discontinue service. 
    All rates and charges for service to a customer's premises shall accrue and be charged against the customer's account until such time as written or oral notice, given by the customer or duly authorized agent, to discontinue all service to the customer's premises, is received by the customer service department; except that where service is supplied through more than one meter to a customer at the same premises, the customer may, upon written notice to the customer service department, permanently discontinue the service through one of the meters and thereafter be billed on the basis of the remaining services and meters. Upon receipt of written notice of such permanent discontinuance, the water utility department will remove the applicable meter and service. Such combining of service shall comply with the other provisions of this article. Any service so discontinued will be restored only at the expense of the customer. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 1(exh. A), 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 102-149. - Owners of property to give notice of vacancy. 
    An account holder and/or owner of property to which water utility service is furnished by the water utility department shall give notice on the next business day when the property becomes vacant or when vacant property becomes occupied by a new owner or tenant. Any water utility services provided shall remain the responsibility of the account holder until such time as a new account is established at the address. Failure to pay for water utility services may result in termination of service. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 1(exh. A), 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 102-150. - Unlawful use of water; prima facie evidence. 
(a)  No person shall. 
(1)  Disrupt service. Prevent water from passing through a meter which is used by the water utility department to supply water to a customer; 
(2)  Meter tampering. Prevent a meter used by the water utility department from registering the quantity of water supplied to a customer, or interfere with the proper and accurate registration upon a meter used by the water utility department of the amount of water supplied to a customer; 
(3)  Line tampering. Divert water, by the use of any device, from a pipe or pipes of the water utility department; 
(4)  Refuse to return meter. Refuse to deliver any meter or other appliance of the water utility department, in the person's possession, custody, or control, to the water utility department upon request of the public works director, or designee. 
(5)  Illegal tap. Tap or connect with the water utility department, or turn on the water from such waterworks, without first having obtained permission to do so from the water utility department, or interfere with any water meter, service, main, standpipe or any other water utility property. 
(6)  Restoration of service. No person shall restore residential water service to a meter that has been terminated by the town for failure to pay. An offense under this article shall be prosecuted in accordance with the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure and/or the Texas Penal Code, both as amended. 
(b)  Prima facie evidence of unlawful use. The existence of a device, pipe, or meter being used for any of the unlawful purposes stated in subsection (a) of this section, shall constitute prima facie evidence of knowledge of the unlawful use thereof, on the part of the person owning or having control of the room, building, place, or premises where such device, pipe, or meter has been used and on the part of the person who benefits by the failure of the water to be properly metered. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 1(exh. A), 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 102-151. - Water utility service connections. 
(a)  Installation of service connection. The water utility department shall install and maintain all water utility service connections in the streets and alleys or easements within the town, and shall charge for the installation and maintenance of all such service connections a sum sufficient to cover the average cost thereof, such sum to be determined and collected by the customer service department at rates established by separate ordinance. 
(b)  Tap fee. The tap fees as established by separate ordinance shall be in addition to pro rata cost charges or any other charges provided by ordinance. 
(c)  Deposit for larger service lines. The water utility department will furnish an estimate of the cost to all applicants for service connections larger than two inches in diameter and all such applicants will make a deposit of the estimated amount before the water utility department will issue a permit for the installation of such connection. The final cost will be adjusted upon completion of the work. Should the final cost of the work exceed the amount deposited, the water utility department will furnish the party or parties making such deposit a statement showing the amount of such excess, and such statement will constitute the notice that the excess amount is due. The public works director at the director's option may refuse or discontinue water service to the property until full payment has been made for the work performed. 
(d)  Refund of deposit. In the event, upon completion of the work for which deposit has been made, final cost is less than the amount of estimate or deposit, a refund of the amount of overpayment will be immediately made to the party or parties from whom the deposit was received. 
(e)  Incidental costs. The estimate of costs of all service connections larger than two inches in diameter shall include all costs incident to making the installation of the service connection required, including the necessary repairs to pavement of any kind or character involved in making the service connection. The water utility department shall make the necessary pavement repairs, the cost of same to be included in the cost figures as stated above. 
(f)  Responsibility for service line. The customer shall maintain, at the customer's own expense, and at the original sizes, all services from the meter box to the service location structure, i.e. the residence or business, excluding the meter connections within the meter box. 
(g)  Owner/developer responsible for grading. It is further provided that in no event shall the town be required, where payment of the estimated cost is made, to make any surveys, street grading or staking off on the ground of the applicant or applicant's subdivision for the purpose of making installation, but all such work shall be done by the developer at the developer's own cost and expense and shall be done within the parameters of the town ordinances to the satisfaction of the public works director. 
(h)  Responsibility to meet platting requirements. It shall be unlawful to service or connect any lot, tract or plat of land, or any part thereof, or for the use of the owner or purchaser of the land, or any part thereof, with a water connection unless and until such plan, plot or re-plat of such lot or tract of land shall conform to the platting requirements of the town and shall have been approved by the town council. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 1(exh. A), 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 102-152. - Private water mains or systems. 
(a)  Service lines. All water pipes laid in streets, alleys or public thoroughfares within the town shall be dedicated to the town and upon acceptance become the property of the town. All water systems laid within the town, and connected to the water utility department shall be constructed under the supervision of and in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the public works director, or designee. 
(b)  Acceptance of water mains and service lines. The water utility department may decline to accept any application for water utility service inside the town, if upon examination, the water mains, service pipes, valves, fire hydrants or other equipment are of such quality or size, or are installed in such manner, that they do not comply with the water utility department's standards and specifications. 
(c)  Master meters. Where water is furnished by the water utility department through a master meter to serve private water systems, all water meters set and connected therewith to serve individual customers, whether or not they are to be read and billed by the owner of such water system, shall be installed by licensed plumbers upon permits issued by the building inspection department in accordance with the rules and regulations governing any other service in the water utility system. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 1(exh. A), 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 102-153. - Control of meters and water utility equipment generally. 
    All meters, curb stops, valves, fixtures, meter boxes and appurtenances thereto, connected or used by the water utility department, including those furnished at the expense of the customers or property owners, shall remain under the direct control of the water utility department. No person, unless authorized by the water utility department, shall connect, disconnect, alter, move, or tamper with any such equipment. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 1(exh. A), 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 102-154. - Obstruction of access to systems generally. 
    No person shall place upon or about any fire hydrant, valve, manhole, curb stop, meter, or meter box, connected with any water pipe of the water utility department, whether located on public or private property, any object, debris, or structure, which will prevent free access to the same. Employees of the town shall have free and unobstructed access at all times to meters and other property of the water utility department wherever located. No person shall deny any town employee access to any of said property or create a hazardous condition in or around such property, or place an animal at or near said property which will interfere with free access thereto. No person shall interfere with the performance of any lawful duty of any town employee by obstructing said employee in the discharge of the employee's duties, either physically or by gestures, threats, or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 1(exh. A), 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 102-155. - Destroying or defacing equipment. 
    It shall be a violation of this article for any person to unlawfully, willfully or maliciously injure, deface or destroy any reservoir, machinery, pipes, hydrants, meters, meter boxes, lids or other fixtures, properties or supplies belonging to the water utility department, or to use or take from the water utility department any water supplies or property except in accordance with the rules and regulations stated herein. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 1(exh. A), 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 102-156. - Grounding electrical system to water system prohibited. 
(a)  Metallic connections prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to make or cause or permit to be made any metallic connections, either directly or indirectly, with the water mains, laterals, supply or service pipes, of the water utility department, or any private pipes, water mains or laterals which are connected to, or with any such water mains, laterals, supply or service pipes of the water utility department of the town, whereby any electrical current shall be communicated to or transmitted along or through such water mains, laterals, supply or service pipes of the water utility department. 
(b)  Transmission of electric current prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to communicate any current of electricity to, or transmit the same, along or through, or cause or permit any current of electricity to be communicated to or transmitted along or through any water main, lateral, pipes or wires or any metal of any sort that is a conductor of electricity that shall hereafter be metallically connected, bonded or joined to or with any water mains, laterals, supply or service pipes of the water utility department in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 1(exh. A), 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 102-157. - Repairing meters; testing meters. 
(a)  Repair of meters. All water meters furnished by the water utility department shall remain at all times the property of the town, and shall be maintained and repaired by the town. When replacements, repairs, or adjustments of any meter are rendered necessary by the act, negligence or carelessness of the owner or occupant of any premises, any expense incurred by the water utility department shall be charged against and collected from the owner or occupant of the premises, and if not paid, water utility services shall be discontinued. 
(b)  Testing of meters. When any customer is of the opinion that the meter through which water is supplied is incorrect for any reason, the customer may request to have the meter examined and tested. It is provided further that the public works director of the water utility department may require such customer to pay a fee, as established by separate ordinance, for the removal and testing of the meter. Whenever a meter is found to be out of order and not registering correctly, the customer shall be charged with an average daily consumption as shown by the meter registering correctly, but not to exceed three months back. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 1(exh. A), 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 102-158. - Use of water from fire hydrants. 
(a)  Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants are provided for the primary purpose to extinguish fires and are to be used and opened only by the water utility department or fire department, or such person as may be given written authority by the water utility department. 
(b)  Town issued meters. Only fire hydrant meters issued by the town are permitted for use within town limits. If an unauthorized fire hydrant meters is located in the jurisdiction of the town, it shall be confiscated. In order for the confiscated meter to be released to the owner, an account must be established for future fire hydrant usage, a deposit made to the town, and the payment to the town for the estimated water used during the noncompliance period. An offense under this article shall be prosecuted in accordance with the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure and/or the Texas Penal Code, both as amended. 
(c)  Use of fire hydrant. To assure the safety and protection of fire hydrants, any person authorized to open fire hydrants shall use only an approved spanner wrench and shall replace the caps on the outlets when the same are not in use; failure to do so shall be sufficient cause to prohibit further use of the fire hydrants and to refuse to grant subsequent permits for the use of fire hydrants. 
(d)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to connect to, tamper with or use any water from any fire hydrant without a written permit from the water utility department. 
(e)  Contractor deposit. The water utility department will require a deposit from contractors for use of water from fire hydrants, such deposit to be of such amount as may be fixed by the water utility department. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 1(exh. A), 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 102-159. - Work to be done by plumbers; duties; unauthorized changes or connections. 
(a)  Plumber required. It shall be unlawful for anyone other than a licensed plumber to connect any water service on the property or outlet side of the meter box. Whenever such plumber shall use town water in testing pipes or repairing fixtures, the plumber shall, before leaving the premises, return the curb stop to the original position when first opening the meter box, and it shall be the duty of such plumber to notify the water utility department immediately of every instance in which the plumber finds or has reason to believe that anyone has tampered with any meter box, meter or other water utility equipment. 
(b)  Unauthorized connections. Where any unauthorized connections are found to have been made, fixtures added and no permit taken for same, water shall be disconnected from such premises until corrections have been made and all permit fees have been paid. 
(c)  Trenches, ditches, excavations. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any trench, ditch or excavation on any public right-of-way, such as any sidewalk, street, alley, parkway or any other public way, left open for inspection, unless the same is properly barricaded and lighted, and when the work has been inspected and approved by the town, such person shall backfill and securely tamp any such trench, ditch or excavation so that the public right-of-way shall be safe for both pedestrian and vehicular travel. Failure to comply with this provision shall render such individual liable for any damage or injury to person or property resulting there from. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 1(exh. A), 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 102-160. - Installation of stop valve. 
    Customers shall install an approved "stop valve" inside the property line, at a location accessible in case of emergency or for normal maintenance, and shall not use the curb stop at meter in lieu thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 1(exh. A), 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 102-161. - Shutting-off and turning-on of water. 
(a)  The water utility department may, at any time, order the water termination to any premises connected to the town mains for repairs, extensions or other necessary purposes. The water utility department will use reasonable efforts to notify customers in advance unless an emergency exists. 
(b)  The water utility department will not turn a customer's water on unless there is an occupant present at the residence. The water utility department will make its best efforts to contact the customer in advance of the time scheduled to turn the water on. In extreme cases, customers listed on the established account are authorized to sign a Town of Little Elm - Utility Release of Liability Waiver Form and with proper identification, authorizing the town to restore water service in the absence of the account holder being present. A signed waiver is valid for a single occurrence. 
(c)  No person unless authorized by the water utility department or customer service department shall connect, disconnect, alter, move or tamper with the meter or meter box. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 1(exh. A), 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 102-163. - Inspections; right of access for town employees; identification badges and credentials of employees. 
(a)  Right of access. Any officer, inspector, foreman or authorized employee of the water utility department shall, upon presentation of an identification badge or other credentials will have free access at all reasonable hours to the exterior of any premises or any public premises supplied with water utility services for the purpose of making an inspection thereof or for reading meters. 
(b)  Failure to comply. In case any such authorized employee shall be hindered or prevented in making such examination, the water utility department may cause the water to be turned off from such premises without notice to such owner or occupant of such premises. In addition, an authorized employee of the town shall make inspections of all service pipes, connections, utilities or fixtures installed for the purpose of receiving water utility services, and in event same shall not be approved, the water utility department shall refuse or discontinue water utility service to such premises. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 1(exh. A), 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 102-164. - Notification of water utility department of intention to construct sidewalk; access covers and meter boxes not to be covered. 
(a)  Notice required. Before any person shall construct any sidewalk or concrete driveway on any street in the town, such person shall give the water utility department notice in writing at least ten days before such construction is started, stating where such sidewalk or driveway is to be constructed, and when work thereupon will begin, in order that the water utility department may have ample opportunity to rearrange the water utility service pipes and to set meter boxes and other water utility service connections and accessories where necessary. 
(b)  Covering of access boxes and meter box prohibited. It shall be unlawful for anyone constructing a sidewalk in the town to construct the same over and above any manhole cover, clean-out, valve box or meter box of the water utility department; all such manholes covers, clean-out, valve boxes or meter boxes shall be left free and open and accessible from the top of such sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 1(exh. A), 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 102-165. - Inspection and verification of meter reading; adjustment of customer's utility account. 
(a)  Inspection of meter. In any case where there appears to be a discrepancy in the amount of a water bill, or in the reading of a meter, a town employee will be sent to verify and inspect the reading of the meter. 
(b)  Charge for inspection. The water utility department will inspect the meter at no charge twice per year upon customer request. Additional inspections requested by a customer shall be paid by the customer; such fee to be established by separate ordinance. 
(c)  Water charge adjustments. The chief financial officer or designee may approve an adjustment to a residential customer's water usage charge. Adjustments are subject to the following conditions: 
    Adjustments to the water usage charge will be based on "historical usage" of the customer, which shall reflect seasonal or other historical patterns. If the customer does not have at least four previous bills to establish historical usage, then the adjustment will be based on available data. 
    The customer is responsible for all water that flows through the meter. As an inducement for timely repair, the customer may be offered a credit for a portion of the charges that result from the leak. This process is extended as a courtesy to customers and is not an entitlement. 
(1)  Adjustments will only be made to residential customer accounts - not for commercial use. 
(2)  The residential customer must request an adjustment in writing within 30 days from the date the water bill (to which the adjustment will be made) was issued. The customer must meet the criteria presented below and complete a water leak adjustment request form (provided by town staff or available on the town web site) and provide evidence to the town that the leak was repaired. 
a.  Receipt of item(s) purchased for the repair or licensed plumber invoice. 
b.  Written request from residential customer requesting adjustment, listing the time period the leak occurred and the date repairs were completed. 
    Criteria for adjustment: 
(1)  Any customer who received a water bill for any given month that is computed on the basis of a quantity greater than 10,001 gallons of the average monthly quantity (hereinafter defined) applicable to such customer, may request an adjustment of the bill in the manner provided in this article; provided that for any given residential customer, only one (1) such monthly bill out of any series of 24 consecutive monthly bills may be adjusted. 
(2)  The town will review on a case-by-case basis, all water leak adjustment request forms. Accounts approved for adjustment are not to exceed a maximum rate of 50 percent of the excess water usage charge based on the usage (consumption) history and at current rates and charges in force excluding the fixed minimum water or sewer charge. Account adjustments will only be analyzed for water usage up to a maximum term of two billing cycles. A determination made by the town in accordance with the provisions of this article shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 1(exh. A), 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 102-166. - Liability for damage. 
    The town shall not be responsible or held liable for any damage to customer's property including, but not limited to, damage as a result of open pipes or fixtures, water breaks, or for any damage resulting from the water supply being cut-off, interrupted or turned on or being insufficient, or for any damage resulting from any condition of the water or any soluble or insoluble substance that may mix with, or be in the water as delivered to the customer. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 1(exh. A), 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 102-167. - Water rates to remain in force; special contracts. 
    The water utility rates adopted by separate ordinance shall be controlling and remain in effect until amended by a subsequent ordinance, but the town council may grant special contracts for the supply of water utility services, if deemed necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 1(exh. A), 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 102-168. - Disconnection for violation of related provisions of ordinance, permitting water to run from the premises. 
(a)  Disconnection of service. The public works director shall be authorized to disconnect the water utility service from the premises of any person found violating any of the terms and provisions of this article with reference to the installation or use of water utility services. 
(b)  Service discontinued for running water. Upon the complaint of any person that water is running from any premises as a result of broken, damaged, open or disconnected lines or fixtures, the public works director may, upon investigation, cut-off service to the premises from which said water utility service is originating, and service shall not be restored until the owner or person responsible for said premises has corrected the condition causing said water flow. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 1(exh. A), 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 102-169. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
    All ordinances or parts of ordinances in force when the provisions of this article become effective, which are inconsistent or in conflict with the terms or provisions contained in this article, are hereby repealed to the extent of any such conflict. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 1(exh. A), 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 102-170. - Penalty for violation. 
    Failure to comply with the foregoing terms and provisions of this article, may result in one or more of the following: 
(1)  Deposit forfeiture and discontinuance of service. Forfeiture of any and all deposits, removal of meters, and discontinuance of water service by the town. A $500.00 deposit may be required before the town will restore service; or 
(2)  Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions or terms of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of $2,000.00 for each offense, and each and every day such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. The penal provisions imposed under this section shall not preclude the town from filing suit to enjoin the violation, and the town retains all legal rights and remedies available to it. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 1(exh. A), 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 102-171. - Administrative oversight. 
    The town manager or designee, shall be responsible for the reasonable, equitable, and nondiscriminatory enforcement of the policies and ordinances related to [article III]. The town recognizes that extenuating circumstances occur, therefore, the town manager or designee, may waive all or a portion of any policy as long as the waiver does not adversely affect the town or other customers or applicants. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 1(exh. A), 9-5-2017) 
Secs. 102-172-102-212. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DISCHARGE OF INDUSTRIAL WASTES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Local government authority to control waste discharges and require pretreatment, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 26.176. 

Sec. 102-213. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approving authority means the mayor or his duly authorized representative. 
    B.O.D. (Biochemical Oxygen Demand) means the quantity of oxygen by weight, expressed in mg/l, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five days at a temperature of 20 degrees Centigrade. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal (also called house lateral and house connection). 
    C.O.D. (Chemical Oxygen Demand) means measure of the oxygen consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in the water or wastewater expressed in mg/l as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test, but not differentiating between stable and unstable organic matter and thus not necessarily correlating with biochemical oxygen demand. 
    Control manhole means a manhole giving access to a building sewer at some point before the building sewer discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
    Control point means a point of access to a course of discharge before the discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
    Garbage means animal and vegetable wastes and residue from preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food; and from the handling, processing, storage and sale of food products and produce. 
    Industrial waste means waste resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade, or business from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of the waste with water or normal wastewater, or distinct from normal wastewater. 
    Industrial waste charge means the charge made on those persons who discharge industrial wastes into the town's sewerage system. 
    Major industry means an industry discharging an average daily flow equal to ten percent of the average daily flow at the wastewater treatment plant or discharging at a rate that if continued for 24 hours would equal ten percent of the average daily flow at the wastewater treatment plant. 
    Milligrams per liter (mg/l) means the same as parts per million and is a weight-to-volume ratio; the milligram-per-liter value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    Normal domestic wastewater means wastewater excluding industrial wastewater discharged by a person into sanitary sewers and in which the average concentration of total suspended solids is not more than 250 mg/l and BOD is not more than 200 mg/l. 
    Overload means the imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment facility in excess of its engineered design capacity. 
    Person includes corporation, organization, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership association, and any other legal entity. 
    pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. 
    Public sewer means pipe or conduit carrying wastewater or unpolluted drainage in which owners of abutting properties shall have the use, subject to control by the Town of Little Elm. 
    Sanitary sewer means a public sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which stormwater, surface water, groundwater, and other unpolluted wastes are not intentionally passed. 
    Slug means any discharge of water, wastewater, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24 hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
    Standard methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" as prepared, approved, and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
    Storm sewer means a public sewer which carries stormwater and surface water and drainage and into which domestic wastewater or industrial wastes are not intentionally passed. 
    Stormwater means rainfall or any other forms of precipitation. 
    Superintendent means the water and wastewater superintendent of the Town of Little Elm, or his duly authorized deputy, agent, or representative. 
    Suspended solids means solids measured in mg/l that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and which are largely removable by a laboratory filtration device. 
    To discharge includes to deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep, or otherwise release or dispose of, or to allow, permit, or suffer any of these acts or omissions. 
    Town means the Town of Little Elm, Texas, or any authorized person acting in its behalf. 
    Trap means a device designed to skim, settle, or otherwise remove grease, oil, sand, flammable wastes or other harmful substances. 
    Unpolluted wastewater means water containing: 
(1)  No free or emulsified grease or oil; 
(2)  No acids or alkalis; 
(3)  No phenols or other substances producing taste or odor in receiving water; 
(4)  No toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state, or solution; 
(5)  No noxious or otherwise obnoxious or odorous gases; 
(6)  Not more than an insignificant amount in mg/l each of suspended solids and BOD, as determined by the Texas Water Quality Board; and 
(7)  Color not exceeding 50 units as measured by the Platinum-Cobalt method of determination as specified in Standard Methods. 
    Waste means rejected, unutilized or superfluous substances in liquid, gaseous, or solid from resulting from domestic, agricultural, or industrial activities. 
    Wastewater means a combination of the water-carried waste from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present. 
    Wastewater facilities includes all facilities for collection, pumping, treating, and disposing of wastewater and industrial wastes. 
    Wastewater service charge means the charge on all users of the public sewer system whose wastes do not exceed in strength the concentration values established as representative of normal wastewater. 
    Wastewater treatment plant means any town-owned facilities, devices, and structures used for receiving, processing, and treating wastewater, industrial waste, and sludges from the sanitary sewers. 
    Watercourse means a natural or manmade channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 1, 2-17-1977) 
Sec. 102-214. - Prohibited discharges. 
(a)  No person may discharge to public sewers any waste which by itself or by interaction with other wastes may: 
(1)  Injure or interfere with wastewater treatment processes or facilities; 
(2)  Constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or 
(3)  Create a hazard in receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant effluent. 
(b)  All discharges shall conform to requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 2, 2-17-1977) 
Sec. 102-215. - Chemical discharges. 
(a)  No discharge to public sewers may contain: 
(1)  Cyanide greater than 1.0 mg/l; 
(2)  Fluoride other than that contained in the public water supply; 
(3)  Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; or 
(4)  Substances causing an excessive chemical oxygen demand (C.O.D.). 
(b)  No waste or wastewater discharged to public waters may contain: 
(1)  Strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not; 
(2)  Fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not in excess of 100 mg/l containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0 and 65 degrees Celsius); 
(3)  Objectionable or toxic substances, exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits established by the approving authority for such materials; or 
(4)  Obnoxious, toxic, or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in quantities sufficient to violate the provisions of subsection (1) of this section. 
(c)  No waste, wastewater, or other substances may be discharged into public sewers which has a pH lower than 6.5 or higher than 8.5, or any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel at the wastewater facilities. 
(d)  All waste, wastewater, or other substance containing phenols, hydrogen sulfide, or other taste-and-odor producing substances, shall conform to concentration limits established by the approving authority. After treatment of the composite wastewater, concentration limits may not exceed the requirements established by state, federal, or other agencies with jurisdiction over discharges to receiving waters. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 3, 2-17-1977) 
Sec. 102-216. - Heavy metals and toxic materials. 
(a)  No discharges may contain concentrations of heavy metals greater than amounts specified in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The maximum allowable concentrations of heavy metals stated in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l), determined on the basis of individual sampling in accordance with "Standard Methods" are: 
(1)  Arsenic, 0.050 mg/l; 
(2)  Barium, 5.000 mg/l; 
(3)  Boron, 1.000 mg/l; 
(4)  Cadmium, 0.020 mg/l; 
(5)  Chromium (Total), 5.000 mg/l; 
(6)  Copper, 1.000 mg/l; 
(7)  Lead, 0.100 mg/l; 
(8)  Manganese, 1.000 mg/l; 
(9)  Mercury, 0.005 mg/l; 
(10)  Nickel, 1.000 mg/l; 
(11)  Selenium, 0.020 mg/l; 
(12)  Silver, 0.100 mg/l; 
(13)  Zinc, 5.000 mg/l. 
(c)  No other heavy metals or toxic materials may be discharged into public sewers without a permit from the approving authority specifying conditions of pretreatment, concentrations, volumes, and other applicable provisions. 
(d)  Prohibited heavy metals and toxic materials include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Antimony; 
(2)  Beryllium; 
(3)  Bismuth; 
(4)  Cobalt; 
(5)  Molybdenum; 
(6)  Uranyl ion; 
(7)  Rhenium; 
(8)  Strontium; 
(9)  Tellurium; 
(10)  Herbicides; 
(11)  Fungicides; and 
(12)  Pesticides. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 4, 2-17-1977) 
Sec. 102-217. - Garbage. 
(a)  No person may discharge garbage into public sewers unless it is shredded to a degree that all particles can be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers. Particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension are prohibited. 
(b)  The approving authority is entitled to review and approve the installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 5, 2-17-1977) 
Sec. 102-218. - Stormwater and other unpolluted drainage. 
(a)  No person may discharge to public sanitary sewers: 
(1)  Unpolluted stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface drainage; 
(2)  Unpolluted cooling water; 
(3)  Unpolluted industrial process waters; or 
(4)  Other unpolluted drainage. 
(b)  New connections from inflow sources into the sanitary sewer system are prohibited. New sewers and connections to the sanitary sewer system of acceptable wastewater must be properly designed and constructed as authorized by the approving authority. 
(c)  In compliance with the Texas Water Quality Act and other statutes, the approving authority may designate storm sewers and other watercourses into which unpolluted drainage described in subsection (a) of this section may be discharged. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 6, 2-17-1977) 
Sec. 102-219. - Temperature. 
    No person may discharge liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius), or any substance which causes the temperature of the total wastewater treatment plant influent to increase at a rate of ten degrees Fahrenheit or more per hour, or a combined total increase of plant influent temperature to 110 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 7, 2-17-1977) 
Sec. 102-220. - Radioactive wastes. 
(a)  No person may discharge radioactive wastes or isotopes into public sewers without the permission of the approving authority. 
(b)  The approving authority may establish, in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations, regulations for discharge of radioactive wastes into public sewers. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 8, 2-17-1977) 
Sec. 102-221. - Impairment of facilities. 
(a)  No person may discharge into public sewers any substance capable of causing: 
(1)  Obstruction to the flow in sewers; 
(2)  Interference with the operation of treatment processes or facilities; or 
(3)  Excessive loading of treatment facilities. 
(b)  Discharges prohibited by subsection (a) of this section include, but are not limited to materials which exert or cause concentrations of: 
(1)  Inert suspended solids greater than 250 mg/l, including but not limited to: 
a.  Fuller's earth; 
b.  Lime slurries; and 
c.  Lime residues; 
(2)  Dissolved solids greater than 500 mg/l, not including: 
a.  Sodium chloride; and 
b.  Sodium sulfate; 
(3)  Excessive discoloration including but not limited to: 
a.  Dye wastes; and 
b.  Vegetable tanning solutions; or 
(4)  B.O.D., C.O.D., or chlorine demand in excess of normal plant capacity. 
(c)  No person may discharge into public sewers any substance that may: 
(1)  Deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a manner as to clog the sewers; 
(2)  Overload skimming and grease handling equipment; 
(3)  Pass to the receiving waters without being effectively treated by normal wastewater treatment processes due to the nonamendability of the substance to bacterial action; or 
(4)  Deleteriously affect the treatment process due to excessive quantities. 
(d)  No person may discharge any substance into public sewers which: 
(1)  Is not amenable to treatment or reduction by the processes and facilities employed; or 
(2)  Is amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(e)  The approving authority shall regulate the flow and concentration of slugs when they may: 
(1)  Impair the treatment process; 
(2)  Cause damage to collection facilities; 
(3)  Incur treatment costs exceeding those for normal wastewater; or 
(4)  Render the waste unfit for stream disposal or industrial use. 
(f)  No person may discharge into public sewers solid or viscous substances which may violate subsection (a) of this section if present in sufficient quantity or size including but not limited to: 
(1)  Ashes; 
(2)  Cinders; 
(3)  Sand; 
(4)  Mud; 
(5)  Straw; 
(6)  Shavings; 
(7)  Metal; 
(8)  Glass; 
(9)  Rags; 
(10)  Feathers; 
(11)  Tar; 
(12)  Plastics; 
(13)  Wood; 
(14)  Unground garbage; 
(15)  Whole blood; 
(16)  Paunch manure; 
(17)  Hair and fleshings; 
(18)  Entrails; 
(19)  Paper products, either whole or ground by garbage grinders; 
(20)  Slops; 
(21)  Chemical residues; 
(22)  Paint residues; or 
(23)  Bulk solids. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 9, 2-17-1977) 
Sec. 102-222. - Compliance with existing authority. 
(a)  Unless exception is granted by the approving authority, the public sanitary sewer system shall be used by all persons discharging: 
(1)  Wastewater; 
(2)  Industrial waste; 
(3)  Polluted liquids. 
(b)  Unless authorized by the Texas Water Quality Board, no person may deposit or discharge any waste included in subsection (a) of this section on public or private property into or adjacent to any: 
(1)  Natural outlet; 
(2)  Watercourse; 
(3)  Storm sewer; 
(4)  Other area within the jurisdiction of the town. 
(c)  The approving authority shall verify prior to discharge that wastes authorized to be discharged will receive suitable treatment within the provisions of laws, regulations, ordinances, rules and orders of federal, state and local governments. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 10, 2-17-1977) 
Sec. 102-223. - Requirements of approving authority. 
(a)  If discharges or proposed discharges to public sewers may: 
(1)  Deleteriously affect wastewater facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters; 
(2)  Create a hazard to life or health; or 
(3)  Create a public nuisance; the approving authority shall require: 
a.  Pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
b.  Control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and 
c.  Payment to cover the cost of handling and treatment of the wastes. 
(b)  The approving authority is entitled to determine whether a discharge or proposed discharge is included under subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  The approving authority shall reject wastes when: 
(1)  It determines that a discharge or proposed discharge is included under subsection (a) of this section; and 
(2)  The discharger does not meet the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 11, 2-17-1977) 
Sec. 102-224. - Review and approval by approving authority. 
(a)  If pretreatment or control is required, the approving authority shall review and approve design and installation of equipment and processes. 
(b)  The design and installation of equipment and processes must conform to all applicable statutes, codes, ordinances, and other laws. 
(c)  Any person responsible for discharges requiring pretreatment, flow-equalizing, or other facilities shall provide and maintain the facilities in effective operating condition at his own expense. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 12, 2-17-1977) 
Sec. 102-225. - Requirements for traps. 
(a)  Discharges requiring a trap include: 
(1)  Grease or waste containing grease in excessive amounts; 
(2)  Oil; 
(3)  Sand; 
(4)  Flammable wastes; and 
(5)  Other harmful ingredients. 
(b)  Any person responsible for discharges requiring a trap shall at his own expense and as required by the approving authority: 
(1)  Provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity approved by the approving authority; 
(2)  Locate the trap in a manner that provides ready and easy accessibility for cleaning and inspection; and 
(3)  Maintain the trap in effective operating condition. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 13, 2-17-1977) 
Sec. 102-226. - Requirements for building sewers. 
    Any person responsible for discharges through a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall, at his own expense and as required by the approving authority: 
(1)  Install an accessible and safely located control manhole; 
(2)  Install meters and other appurtenances to facilitate observation sampling and measurement of the waste; and 
(3)  Maintain the equipment and facilities. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 14, 2-17-1977) 
Sec. 102-227. - Sampling and testing. 
(a)  Sampling shall be conducted according to customarily accepted methods, reflecting the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and determining the existence of hazards to health, life, limb, and property. (Note: The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite sample from all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample should be taken. Normally, but not always, B.O.D. and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls. Where applicable, 16-hour, eight-hour or some other period may be required. Periodic grab samples are used to determine pH.) 
(b)  Examination and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes required by this article shall be: 
(1)  Conducted in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods;" and 
(2)  Determined from suitable samples taken at the control manhole provided or other control point authorized by the approving authority. 
(c)  B.O.D. and suspended solids shall be determined from composite sampling, except to detect unauthorized discharges. 
(d)  The town may select an independent firm or laboratory to determine flow, B.O.D., and suspended solids. 
(e)  The town is entitled to select the time of sampling at its sole discretion so long as at least annual samples are taken. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 15, 2-17-1977) 
Sec. 102-228. - Payment and agreement required. 
(a)  Persons making discharges of industrial waste shall pay a charge to cover the cost of collection and treatment as provided in section 102-229. 
(b)  When discharges of industrial waste are approved by the approving authority, the town or its authorized representative shall enter into an agreement or arrangement providing: 
(1)  Terms of acceptance by the town; and 
(2)  Payment by the person making the discharge. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 16, 2-17-1977) 
Sec. 102-229. - Industrial waste treatment charge. 
(a)  Major industries will be charged a fee for the treatment of their wastes based on the following formula: 
F = V($0.30) + a(BOD-200) + b(SS-200) + C($200) 
F = Fee charged in dollars. 
V = Volume of wastewater treated in 1,000 of gallons 
a = average unit cost of treatment, chargeable to B.O.D., $/mg/l current charge is $0.011. 
c = Number of occurrences of pH limit violations. Each 15-minute duration of portion thereof represents a separate violation. 
(b)  Other industries will be reviewed on an individual basis for compliance with all sections of this article and where, in the judgment of the approving authority, an industrial waste charge is appropriate, one will be assessed based on the volume, strength and character of the waste. 
EXAMPLE: 
Industry X discharges 500,000 gallons per day, seven days per week, with a strength of 500 mg/l BOD and 1500 mg/l SS. The pH is a constant 7, but for 20 minutes on one day, the pH dropped to 6. 
V = = 500 
F = (500)(.30) + 0.11(500-200) + 0.011(1500-250) + 2(200) 
F = 150 + 33 + 13.75 + 400 
F + $596.75/Day 
NOTE: If no pH violation had occurred, the charge would be only $196.75 or $71,813.00/yr. 
(c)  The town presently has no industrial users. When industrial users are anticipated, the town will submit an industrial recovery cost in accordance with the program regulations for approval by the regional environmental protection agency administrator. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 17, 2-17-1977) 
Sec. 102-230. - Conditions for permits. 
(a)  The town may grant a permit to continue discharge provided that the person: 
(1)  Submits an application within 90 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived on forms supplied by the approving authority; 
(2)  Secure approval by the approving authority of plans and specifications for pretreatment facilities when required; and 
(3)  Has complied with all requirements for agreements or arrangements including, but not limited to, provisions for: 
a.  Payment of charges; 
b.  Installation and operation of pretreatment facilities; and 
c.  Sampling and analysis to determine quantity and strength; and 
(4)  Provides a sampling point subject to the provisions of this article and approval of the approving authority. 
(b)  A person applying for a new discharge shall: 
(1)  Meet all conditions of subsection (a) of this section; and 
(2)  Secure a permit prior to discharging any waste. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 18, 2-17-1977) 
Sec. 102-231. - Power to enter property. 
(a)  The public works director and other duly authorized employees of the town bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter any public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this article. 
(b)  Anyone acting under this authority shall observe the establishment's rules and regulations concerning safety, internal security, and fire protection. 
(c)  Except when caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions, the town shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by town employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the sampling operation. 
(d)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the town bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter all private properties through which the town holds a negotiated easement for the purposes of: 
(1)  Inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, or repair; 
(2)  Maintenance of any portion of the sewerage system lying within the easements; and 
(3)  Conducting any other authorized activity. 
All activities shall be conducted in full accordance with the terms of the negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(e)  No person acting under authority of this provision may inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the public sewers. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 19, 2-17-1977) 
Sec. 102-232. - Authority to disconnect service. 
(a)  The town may terminate water and wastewater disposal service and disconnect an industrial customer from the system when: 
(1)  Acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment process are released to the sewer causing rapid deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater; 
(2)  A governmental agency informs the town that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge to a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is delivering wastewater to the town's system that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by the town as normal domestic treatment; or 
(3)  The industrial customer: 
a.  Discharges industrial waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the approving authority; 
b.  Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater treatment system; 
c.  Fails to pay monthly bills for water and sanitary sewer services when due; or 
d.  Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes to public sewers. 
(b)  If service is discontinued pursuant to subsection (a)(2) of this section, the town shall: 
(1)  Disconnect the customer; 
(2)  Supply the customer with the governmental agency's report and provide the customer with all pertinent information; and 
(3)  Continue disconnection until such time as the industrial customer provides additional pretreatment or other facilities designed to remove the objectionable characteristics from his industrial wastes. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 20, 2-17-1977) 
Sec. 102-233. - Notice. 
    The town shall serve persons discharging in violation of this article with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory compliance. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 21, 2-17-1977) 
Sec. 102-234. - Continuing prohibited discharges. 
    No person may continue discharging in violation of this article beyond the time limit provided in the notice. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 22, 2-17-1977) 
Sec. 102-235. - Penalty. 
(a)  A person who continues prohibited discharges is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable by a fine of not more than $200.00 for each act of violation and for each day of violation. 
(b)  In addition to proceeding under authority of subsection (a) of this section, the town is entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes or other ordinances against a person continuing prohibited discharges. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 23, 2-17-1977) 
Sec. 102-236. - Failure to pay. 
    In addition to sanctions provided for by this article, the town is entitled to exercise sanctions provided for by the other ordinances of the town for failure to pay the bill for water and sanitary sewer service when due. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 24, 2-17-1977) 
Secs. 102-237-102-265. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ON-SITE SEWERAGE DISPOSAL[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 851, § 3A, adopted Aug. 21, 2007, repealed and replaced art. V, §§ 102-266-102-276, in its entirety. Formerly, said article pertained to similar subject matter as enacted by Ord. No. 796, § 3A, adopted Oct. 3, 2006. 

Sec. 102-266. - Adoption of state law. 
    The town clearly understands that there are technical criteria, legal requirements, and administrative procedures and duties associated with regulating on-site sewage facilities, does adopt and shall fully enforce Chapter 366 of the Texas Health and Safety Code and Chapters 7 and 37 of the Texas Water Code (TWC), and associated rules referenced in section 102-267. The said laws and the Rules adopted herein are and shall be enforceable by the town within the corporate limits of the town. 
(Ord. No. 851, § 3A, 8-21-2007) 
Sec. 102-267. - On-site sewage facility rules adopted. 
    The Rules Title 30 Texas Administrative Code (TAC) § 285.1-285.91 and TAC 30, as amended or supplemented from time to time (together, the "rules"), attached hereto as Appendix I and incorporated herein and thus made a part of this ordinance, promulgated by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (the "commission") for on-site sewage systems, are hereby adopted in their entirety and are hereby made a part hereof for all purposes. All officials and employees of the town having duties under said rules are authorized to perform such duties as are required of them under said rules. 
(Ord. No. 851, § 3A, 8-21-2007) 
Sec. 102-267.5. - More stringent requirements. 
    Any on-site sewage disposal system using aerobic treatment shall have an annual maintenance contract on that system. 
    All contracted maintenance of an on-site sewage disposal system using aerobic treatment shall be conducted by a certified maintenance of an on-site sewage disposal system using aerobic treatment unless the property owner/homeowner is a certified maintenance provider for that aerobic treatment unit. 
    The authorized agent may periodically inspect the on-site sewage disposal system using aerobic treatment for a single-family residence that is maintained directly by the owner of the system regardless of when the authorized agent conducted the last inspection. 
(Ord. No. 851, § 3A, 8-21-2007) 
Sec. 102-268. - On-site sewage facility rules. 
    Any person, including, without limitation, any corporation, partnership or other business entity, or individual, discharging or causing the discharge of sewage into an on-site sewage facility within the town shall comply with the rules. Any permit issued for an on-site sewage facility within the jurisdictional area of the Town of Little Elm, Texas must comply with the rules. 
(Ord. No. 851, § 3A, 8-21-2007) 
Sec. 102-269. - Development of organized disposal systems. 
    In order to implement the stated policy of the Texas Legislature and the commission to encourage the development and use of organized disposal systems to serve the waste disposal needs of the citizens of the state and to prevent pollution, protect the public health, and maintain and enhance the quality of water in the state, the following requirements shall be complied with: 
(1)  No person may cause or allow the installation of an on-site sewage facility when any part of the facility is to be 300 feet in horizontal distance (measured on the closest practicable access route) of an existing organized system, unless one of the following requirements has been met: 
a.  The person has received a written denial of service from the owner or governing body of the organized disposal system; 
b.  The person has received a written determination from the designated representative that it is not feasible for the person to connect to the organized disposal system; or 
(2)  No person may cause or allow the installation of an on-site sewage facility on any property or lot less than one acre in size. 
(3)  Whenever an organized disposal system is developed within 300 feet in horizontal distance (measured on the closest practicable route) from any portion of a private sewage facility, that shall be connected to the organized system unless one of the requirements set forth in subsections (1) or (2) of this section has been met. 
(Ord. No. 851, § 3A, 8-21-2007) 
Sec. 102-270. - Duties and powers. 
    The On-Site Sewage Facility Inspector of the Town of Little Elm, Texas, must be certified by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality before assuming the duties and responsibilities. The town council of the town is the representative designated by the commission for the enforcement of this article. The town council shall appoint a person upon recommendation of the director of planning and development to act on its behalf in the capacity of the designated representative. The designated represented has the authority and powers set forth below: 
(1)  To resolve any question regarding any interpretation of these rules, or the design criteria. 
(2)  To enforce the terms of this article and to make appropriate recommendations to proper town officials when instances of noncompliance with this article has been determined. 
(3)  To make statutorily mandated inspections of proposed, new and existing on-site sewage facilities. 
(4)  To collect fees set by the town council as necessary to recover the reasonable costs incurred in meeting the requirements of this article. 
(5)  To make semi-annual reports to the authorized agent on all actions, including legal actions, taken concerning this article. 
(6)  To investigate nuisance complaints within 21 days of receipt. All validated complaints shall be resolved or substantial progress made toward resolution by the responsible individual within 30 days. 
(7)  To perform all other duties necessary to meet the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 851, § 3A, 8-21-2007) 
Sec. 102-271. - Collection of fees. 
    All fees collected for permits and/or inspections shall be made payable to the town. 
(Ord. No. 851, § 3A, 8-21-2007) 
Sec. 102-272. - License to operate. 
    Each new on-site sewage facility shall be inspected and approved by the designated representative prior to the final covering of the facility. 
(1)  The applicant or registered installer shall notify the designated representative that an inspection is desired at least five working days prior to the need for inspection. 
(2)  The applicant or registered installer shall provide whatever reasonable assistance the designated representative requests in order to make the inspection. 
(3)  The applicant or registered installer must be present at the time of the inspection for that facility. 
(Ord. No. 851, § 3A, 8-21-2007) 
Sec. 102-273. - Appeals. 
    Persons aggrieved by an action or decision of the designated representative may appeal such action or decision to the town council. 
(Ord. No. 851, § 3A, 8-21-2007) 
Sec. 102-274. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The designated representative may routinely inspect on-site sewage facilities to assure continued compliance with this article. 
(b)  The designated representative shall inspect any on-site system that is believed to be causing pollution, a threat to the public health, nuisance conditions, or illegally installed or altered. If upon inspection it is found that any of these conditions exists, the owner of the on-site sewage facility will be notified in writing of the violation, and what must be done to achieve compliance, and set a reasonable amount of time to comply. The on-site sewage facility shall be reinspected at the expiration of the allotted time. 
(1)  If the facility is found to be compliant, a license therefore may be issued or the existing license may be modified. 
(2)  If the facility is found to be noncompliant, appropriate enforcement shall be taken. 
(Ord. No. 851, § 3A, 8-21-2007) 
Sec. 102-275. - Penalties. 
    The town hereby adopts and incorporates all applicable penalty provisions related to on-site sewage facilities, which includes, but is not limited to, those found in Chapters 341 and 366 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, Chapters 7, 26, and 37 of the Texas Water Code and 30 TAC Chapters 30 and 285. Each day of a continuing violation is a separate offense and is punishable as such. 
(Ord. No. 851, § 3A, 8-21-2007) 
Sec. 102-276. - Emergency repair. 
    An emergency repair to an on-site sewage facility without a permit is not an offense under these rules if the following procedures are carried out: 
(1)  The repair is made for the purpose of abatement of an immediate, dangerous and serious health hazard; 
(2)  That said repair does meet minimum state design criteria; 
(3)  That said repair does not constitute an alteration of the on-site system; 
(4)  That written notification of such repair, including a detailed description of the method and materials used in said repair, is made to the authorized agent within 72 hours of the date of the repair; and 
(5)  That said repair must be inspected for compliance with the state's design criteria. 
(Ord. No. 851, § 3A, 8-21-2007) 
Secs. 102-277-102-312. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - WATER CONSERVATION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1498, §§ 2, 3(Exh. A), adopted Apr. 16, 2019, repealed the former art. VI, §§ 102-313-102-315, and enacted a new art. VI as set out herein. The former art. VI pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. Additonally, appendices A-J referenced in this article are on file and may be viewed at the town office. 

Sec. 102-313. - Introduction and objectives. 
    Water supply has always been a key issue in the development of Texas. In recent years, the increasing population and economic development of North Central Texas have led to growing demands for water supplies. At the same time, local and less expensive sources of water supply are largely already developed. Additional supplies to meet future demands will be expensive and difficult to secure. Severe drought conditions in recent years have highlighted the importance of efficient use of our existing supplies to make them last as long as possible. This will delay the need for new supplies, minimize the environmental impacts associated with developing new supplies, and delay the high cost of additional water supply development. 
    Recognizing the need for efficient use of existing water supplies, the TCEQ has developed guidelines and requirements governing the development of water conservation and drought contingency plans for municipal uses by public water suppliers 2 The TCEQ guidelines and requirements for wholesale suppliers are included in appendix B. The North Texas Municipal Water District ("NTMWD or District") has developed this water conservation plan to be consistent with TCEQ guidelines and requirements. The best management practices established by the water conservation implementation task force 3 were also considered in the development of the water conservationmeasures. 
    This water conservation plan includes measures that are intended to result in ongoing, longterm water savings. This plan replaces the previous plans ordinances 721, 722, 837, 838, 1052, and 1229. 
    The objectives of this water conservation plan are as follows: 
(1)  To reduce water consumption from the levels that would prevail without conservation efforts. 
(2)  To reduce the loss and waste of water. 
(3)  To improve efficiency in the use of water. 
(4)  Encourage efficient outdoor water use. 
(5)  To maximize the level of recycling and reuse in the water supply. 
(6)  To extend the life of current water supplies by reducing the rate of growth indemand. 
(Ord. No. 1498, § 3(Exh. A), 4-16-2019) 
Sec. 102-314. - Definitions and abbreviations. 
    Athletic field means a public sports competition field, the essential feature of which is turf grass, used primarily for organized sports practice, competition or exhibition events for schools; professional sports and league play sanctioned by the utility providing retail watersupply. 
    Cool season grasses are varieties of turf grass that grow best in cool climates primarily in northern and central regions of the U.S. Cool season grasses include perennial and annual rye grass, Kentucky blue grass and fescues. 
    Customers include those entities to whom NTMWD provides wholesale water that are not members of NTMWD. 
    Drip irrigation is a type of micro-irrigation system that operates at low pressure and delivers water in slow, small drips to individual plants or groups of plants through a network of plastic conduits and emitters; also called trickle irrigation. 
    Evapotranspiration (ET) represents the amount of water lost from plant material to evaporation and transpiration. The amount of ET can be estimated based on the temperature, wind, and relative humidity. 
    ET/smart controllers are irrigation controllers that adjust their schedule and run times based on weather (ET) data. These controllers are designed to replace the amount of water lost to evapotranspiration. 
    Irrigation system means a permanently installed, custom-made, site-specific system of delivering water generally for landscape irrigation via a system of pipes or other conduits installed below ground. 
    Landscape means any plant material on a property, including any tree, shrub, vine, herb, flower, succulent, ground cover, grass or turf species that is growing or has been planted out of doors. 
    Member cities include the cities of Allen, Farmersville, Forney, Frisco, Garland, McKinney, Mesquite, Plano, Princeton, Richardson, Rockwall, Royse City, and Wylie, Texas, which are members of NTMWD. 
    Municipal use means the use of potable water provided by a public water supplier as well as the use of treated wastewater effluent for residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, institutional, and wholesale uses. 
    Regulated irrigation property means any (customer class, i.e. commercial) property that uses (over a certain amount) of water or more for irrigation purposes in a single calendar year or is greater than (certain size). 
    Residential gallons per capita per day (residential GPCD) means the total gallons sold for residential use by a public water supplier divided by the residential population served and then divided by the number of days in the year. 
    Retail customers include those customers to whom the utility provides retail water from a water meter. 
    Total gallons per capita per day (total GPCD) means the total amount of water diverted and/or pumped for potable use divided by the total permanent population divided by the days of the year. Diversion volumes of reuse as defined in TAC 288.1 shall be credited against total diversion volumes for the purposes of calculating GPCD for targets and goals. 
    Water conservation plan means the member city or customer water conservation plan approved and adopted by the utility. 
Abbreviations 
Abbreviation Full Nomenclature BMP Best Management Practices NTMWD or District North Texas Municipal Water District TOLE or Town Town of Little Elm TCEQ Texas Commission on Environmental Quality TWDB Texas Water Development Board WCAC Water Conservation Advisory Council WCP Water Conservation Plan  
(Ord. No. 1498, § 3(Exh. A), 4-16-2019) 
Sec. 102-315. - Regulatory basis for water conservation plan. 
(a)  TCEQ rules governing conservation plans. The TCEQ rules governing development of water conservation plans for municipal uses by public water suppliers are contained in Title 30, Chapter 288, Subchapter A, Section 288.2 of the Texas Administrative Code, which is included in Appendix B. For the purpose of these rules, a water conservation plan is defined as "[a] strategy or combination of strategies for reducing the volume of water withdrawn from a water supply source, for reducing the loss or waste of water, for maintaining or improving the efficiency in the use of water, for increasing the recycling and reuse of water, and for preventing the pollution of water." 2 The water conservation plan elements required by the TCEQ water conservation rules that are covered in this water conservation plan are listed below. 
(1)  Minimum conservation plan requirements. The minimum requirements in the Texas Administrative Code for Water Conservation Plans for Municipal Uses by Public Water Suppliers are covered in this water conservation plan as follows: 
a.  288.2(a)(1)(A) - Utility profile - section 4 and appendix C. 
b.  288.2(a)(1)(B) - Record management system - section 102-318(a)(5). 
c.  288.2(a)(1)(C) - Specific, quantified goals - section 102-317. 
d.  288.2(a)(1)(D) - Accurate metering - section 102-318(a)(1). 
e.  288.2(a)(1)(E) - Universal metering - section 102-318(a)(2). 
f.  288.2(a)(1)(F) - Determination and control of water loss - section 102-318(a)(3) and section 102-318(a)(4). 
g.  288.2(a)(1)(G) - Public education and information program - section 102-318(b). 
h.  288.2(a)(1)(H) - Non-promotional water rate structure - section 102-318(f). 
i.  288.2(a)(1)(I) - Reservoir system operation plan - section 102-318(c). 
j.  288.2(a)(1)(J) - Means of implementation and enforcement - section 102-320. 
k.  288.2(a)(1)(K) - Coordination with regional water planning group - section 6.4 and appendix F. 
l.  288.2(c) - Review and update of plan - section 102-321. 
(2)  Conservation additional requirements (population over 5,000). 
a.  The Texas Administrative Code includes additional requirements for water conservation plans for drinking water supplies serving a population over 5,000. 
b.  288.2(a)(2)(A) - Leak detection, repair, and water loss accounting - section 102-318(a)(4). 
c.  288.2(a)(2)(B) - Requirement for water conservation plans by wholesale customers - section 102-318(e). 
(3)  Additional conservation strategies. The TCEQ requires that a water conservation implementation report be completed and submitted on an annual basis. The template for this report is included in Appendix J. 
In addition to the TCEQ required elements of a water conservation plan, NTMWD also requires the following water conservation strategies to be included in the Member City and Customer water conservation plans: 
a.  288.2(a)(3)(A) - Conservation oriented water rates - section 102-318(f). 
b.  288.2(a)(3)(F) - Considerations for landscape water management regulations - section 7.4 and appendix E. 
TCEQ rules also include options of, conservation measures that may be adopted by public water suppliers but are not required. NTMWD recommends that the following strategies be included in Member City and Customer water conservation plans: 
c.  288.2(a)(3)(B) - Ordinances, plumbing codes or rules on water-conserving fixtures - section 102-318(a). 
d.  288.2(a)(3)(C) - Replacement or retrofit of water-conserving plumbing fixtures - section 102-318(e). 
e.  288.2(a)(3)(D) - Reuse and recycling of wastewater - section 102-319(b). 
f.  288.2(a)(3)(F) - Considerations for landscape water management regulations - section 102-319(c) and section 102-319(d). 
g.  288.2(a)(3)(G) - Monitoring method - section 102-319(f). 
h.  288.2(a)(3)(H) - Additional conservation practices - section 102-319(e). 
(b)  Guidance and methodology for reporting on water conservation and water use. In addition to TCEQ rules regarding water conservation, this plan also incorporates elements of the Guidance and Methodology for Reporting on Water Conservation and Water Use developed by TWDB and TCEQ 5 , in consultation with the WCAC (the "Guidance"). The Guidance was developed in response to a charge by the 82nd Texas Legislature to develop water use and calculation methodology and guidance for preparation of water use reports and water conservation plans in accordance with TCEQ rules. 
(Ord. No. 1498, § 3(Exh. A), 4-16-2019) 
Sec. 102-316. - Water utility profile. 
    Appendix C to this model water conservation plan is the Town of Little Elm water utility profile based on the format recommended by the TCEQ. In adopting this Model Water Conservation Plan, Town of Little Elm will include a water utility profile. A final water utility profile will be provided to NTMWD as well as to TCEQ. 
(Ord. No. 1498, § 3(Exh. A), 4-16-2019) 
Sec. 102-317. - Specification of water conservation goals. 
    TCEQ rules require the adoption of specific water conservation goals for a water conservation plan. As part of plan adoption, the Town of Little Elm must develop five-year and ten-year goals for water savings, including goals for per capita municipal use and for water loss programs. The goals for this water conservation plan include the following: 
(1)  Maintain the total and residential per capita water use below the specified amount in gallons per capita per day in a dry year, as shown in the completed table 5-1. NTMWD will publish the amount of reuse to be is calculating the credit for reuse. 
(2)  Maintain the water loss percentage in the system below 12 percent annually in 2018 and subsequent years, as discussed in section 102-318(3). (The 12 percent goal for water loss is recommended but is not required. Systems with long distances between customers, such as rural systems, may adopt a higher percent nonrevenue water goal.) 
(3)  Implement and maintain a program of universal metering and meter replacement and repair, as discussed in section 102-318(2). 
(4)  Increase efficient water usage through a water conservation ordinance, order or resolution as discussed in section 102-319(d) and appendix E. (This ordinance is required by NTMWD.) 
(5)  Decrease waste in lawn irrigation by implementation and enforcement of landscape water management regulations, as discussed in section 102-319(e). (These landscape water management regulations are recommended but are not required.) 
(6)  Raise public awareness of water conservation and encourage responsible public behavior by a public education and information program, as discussed in section 102-318(2). 
(7)  Develop a system specific strategy to conserve water during peak demands, thereby reducing the peak use. 
Table 5-1 Five-year and Ten-year per Capita Water Use Goals (GPCD) 
Description Current
Average
(GPCD) 5-Year
Goal (GPCD) 10-Year
Goal
(GPCD) Current 5-year average total per capita use with credit for reuse 94.2 130 125 Current 5-year average residential per capita use 63.5 130 125 Water loss (GPCD)1 - 130 125 Water loss (percentage)2 7% 12% 12% Expected reduction due to low-flow plumbing fixtures 0 0 0 Projected reduction due to elements in this plan 0 2.24 5.6 Water conservation goals (with credit for reuse) 94.2 130 125  
1. Water loss GPCD = (Total Water Loss ÷ Permanent Population) ÷365 
2. Water Loss Percentage = (Total Water Loss ÷ Total Gallons in System) x 100; or (Water Loss GPCD ÷ Total GPCD) x 100 
(Ord. No. 1498, § 3(Exh. A), 4-16-2019) 
Sec. 102-318. - Water conservation strategies. 
(a)  Metering, water use records, control of water loss, and leak detection and repair. One of the key elements of water conservation is tracking water use and controlling losses through illegal diversions and leaks. It is important to carefully meter water use, detect and repair leaks in the distribution system and provide regular monitoring of real losses. 
(1)  Accurate metering of treated water deliveries from NTMWD. Water deliveries to Little Elm from NTMWD are metered by NTMWD using meters with accuracy of ±2 percent. These meters are calibrated on an annual basis by NTMWD to maintain the required accuracy. 
(2)  Metering of customer and public uses and meter testing, repair, and replacement. The Town of Little Elm currently meters the water to all customers, including public and governmental users. The Town of Little Elm already meters retail and wholesale water users. 
The Town of Little Elm test and replace their customer meters on a regular basis. All customer meters should be replaced on a minimum of a 15-year cycle. 
(3)  Determination and control of water loss. Total water loss is the difference between the water delivered to Little Elm from NTMWD (and other supplies, if applicable) and the metered water sales to customers plus water authorized for use but not sold. (Authorized for use but not sold would include use for firefighting, releases for flushing of lines, uses associated with new construction, etc.) Total water loss includes two categories: 
a.  Apparent losses-Includes inaccuracies in customer meters (customer meters tend to run more slowly as they age and under-report actual use); Losses due to 
b.  Illegal connections and theft-Included in Appendix H); accounts that are being used but have not yet been added to the billing system. 
c.  Real losses-Includes physical losses from the system or mains, reported breaks and leaks, storage overflow and unreported losses. 
Measures to control water loss are part of the routine operations of Little Elm. Maintenance crews and personnel should look for and report evidence of leaks in the water distribution system. A leak detection and repair program is described in section 102-318(4) below. Meter readers should watch for and report signs of illegal connections so that they can be quickly addressed. 
Total water loss should be calculated in accordance with the provisions of appendix J. With the measures described in this plan, Little Elm goal is to maintain a water loss percentage below 12 percent in 2018 each year. If total water loss exceeds this goal, Little Elm will implement a more intensive audit to determine the source(s) of loss and to reduce the water loss. The annual conservation report described below is the primary tool that should be used to monitor water loss. 
(4)  Leak detection and repair. As described above, water utility crews and personnel should look for and report evidence of leaks in the water distribution system. Areas of the water distribution system in which numerous leaks and line breaks occur should be targeted for replacement as funds are available. 
(5)  Record management system. As required by TAC Title 30, Chapter 288, Section 288.2(a)(1)(B), a record management system should allow for the separation of water sales and uses into residential, commercial, public/institutional, and industrial categories. This information should be included in an annual water conservation report, as described in section 102-319(f) below. Those entities whose record management systems do not currently comply with this requirement should move to implement such a system within the next five years. 
(b)  Continuing public education and information campaign. The continuing public education and information campaign on water conservation includes the following elements: 
(1)  Utilize the "Water IQ: Know Your Water" and other public education materials produced by NTMWD. 
(2)  Utilize the "Water4Otter" campaign for students. 
(3)  Insert water conservation information with water bills. Inserts will include material developed by Town of Little Elm staff and material obtained from the TWDB, TCEQ, and other sources. 
(4)  Encourage local media coverage of water conservation issues and the importance of water conservation. 
(5)  Notify local organizations, schools, and civic groups that Little Elm staff and staff of NTMWD are available to make presentations on the importance of water conservation and ways to save water. 
(6)  Promote the Texas Smartscape web site ( www.txsmartscape.com ) and provide water conservation brochures and other water conservation materials available to the public at Town Hall and other public places. 
(7)  Make information on water conservation available on the town's website and include links to the "Water IQ: Know Your Water" website, Texas Smartscape website and to information on water conservation on the TWDB and TCEQ web sites and other resources. 
(8)  NTMWD is an EPA Water Sense Partner and participates in the EPA Water Sense sponsored "Fix a Leak Week." Little Elm will look into to becoming EPA Water Sense Partners. 
(9)  Utilize the Water My Yard website and encourage customers to sign-up to receive weekly watering advice. Little Elm will also look into providing the Town residents with watering guidelines based on the town's weather station data. 
(c)  NTMWD reservoir system operation plan. Town of Little Elm purchases treated water from NTMWD and do not have surface water supplies for which to implement a reservoir system operations plan. NTMWD operates multiple sources of water supply as a system. The operation of the reservoir system is intended to optimize the use of the district's sources (within the constraints of existing water rights) while minimizing energy use cost for pumping, maintaining water quality, minimizing potential impacts on recreational users of the reservoirs and fish and wildlife. 
(d)  Coordination with regional water planning group and NTMWD. Appendix F includes a letter sent to the chairs of the water planning group accompanied by this model water conservation plan. Little Elm will send a copy of the adopted ordinance(s) or regulation(s) and the adopted water utility profile will be sent to the chair of the appropriate water planning group and to NTMWD. 
(e)  Requirement for water conservation plans by wholesale customers. Every contract for the wholesale sale of water from the Town of Little Elm that are entered into, renewed, or extended after the adoption of this water conservation plan will include a requirement that the wholesale customer and any wholesale customers of that wholesale customer develop and implement a water conservation plan meeting the requirements of Title 30, Chapter 288, of the Texas Administrative Code. This requirement extends to each successive wholesale customer in the resale of the water. 
(f)  Increasing block water rate structure. The Town of Little Elm has adopted an increasing block rate water structure that is intended to encourage water conservation and to discourage excessive use and waste. Little Elm will continue to analyze and adjust its increasing block rate structure during its next rate study or within five years. 
    An example water rate structure is as follows: 
(1)  Residential water rates: 
a.  From and after the effective date hereof, the monthly minimum base charges for water up to 2,000 gallons for water utility services for all residential customers of the Town of Little Elm, Texas shall be as set forth below until amended by ordinance of town council: 
Water Base Rate in Gallons by meter size Rate (Effective 10-01-16) Rate (Effective 10-01-17) Rate (Effective 10-01-18) Rate (Effective 10-01-19) Up to 2,000 Gallons (5/8" Meter) $ 21.83 $ 22.70 $ 23.61 $ 24.08 Up to 2,000 Gallons (I" Meter) 35.67 37.09 38.58 39.35 Up to 2,000 Gallons (1.5" Meter) 65.34 67.95 70.67 72.08 Up to 2,000 Gallons (2" Meter) 109.12 113.49 118.02 120.39 Up to 2,000 Gallons (3" Meter) 218.30 227.03 236.11 240.83 Up to 2,000 Gallons (4" Meter) 713.69 742.24 771.93 787.37 Up to 2,000 Gallons (6" Meter) 1429.27 1486.44 1545.90 1576.82  
b.  All residential customers will pay monthly volumetric usage charges with respect to each 1,000 gallons of metered water after the first 2,000 gallons as follows: 
Volumetric Rate per each 1,000 Gallons Usage above Base Rate (all meter sizes) Rate (Effective 10-01-16) Rate (Effective 10-01-17) Rate (Effective 10-01-18) Rate (Effective 10-01-19) 2,000 - 10,000 (gals) $ 5.79 $ 6.02 $ 6.27 $ 6.39 10,001 -20,000 (gals) 6.09 6.32 6.57 6.69 20,001 & Above (gals) 6.39 6.62 6.87 6.99  
(2)  Commercial water rates: Businesses, schools , apartments, manufactured home park, and other multi- family units: 
a.  From and after the effective date hereof, the monthly minimum base charges for water up to 2,000 gallons for water utility services for all businesses and schools shall be as set forth below: 
Water Base Rate in Gallons by meter size Rate (Effective 10-01-16) Rate (Effective 10-01-17) Rate (Effective 10-01-18) Rate (Effective 10-01-19) Up to 2,000 Gallons (5/8" Meter) $ 21.83 $ 22.70 $ 23.61 $ 24.08 Up to 2,000 Gallons (I" Meter) 35.67 37.09 38.58 39.35 Up to 2,000 Gallons (1.5" Meter) 65.34 67.95 70.67 72.08 Up to 2,000 Gallons (2" Meter) 109.12 113.49 118.02 120.39 Up to 2,000 Gallons (3" Meter) 218.30 227.03 236.11 240.83 Up to 2,000 Gallons (4" Meter) 713.69 742.24 771.93 787.37 Up to 2,000 Gallons (6" Meter) 1429.27 1486.44 1545.90 1576.82 Up to 2,000 Gallons (8" Meter) 1746.31 1798.69 1870.63 1908.04  
b.  All businesses and school customers will pay a monthly volumetric usage charge in addition to the base rate with respect to each 1,000 gallons of metered water after the first 2,000 gallons as follows: 
Volumetric Rate per each 1,000 Gallons Usage above Base Rate (all meter sizes) Rate (Effective 10-01-16) Rate (Effective 10-01-17) Rate (Effective 10-01-18) Rate (Effective 10-01-19) 2,000 gallons and greater $ 6.41 $ 6.66 $ 6.93 $ 7.07  
c.  All apartments and manufactured home park customers will pay a monthly volumetric usage charge in addition to the base rate with respect to each 1,000 gallons of metered water after the first 2,000 gallons as follows: 
Volumetric Rate per each 1,000 Gallons Usage above Base Rate (all meter sizes) Rate (Effective 10-01-16) Rate (Effective 10-01-17) Rate (Effective 10-01-18) Rate (Effective 10-01-19) 2,000 gallons and greater $ 7.39 $ 7.69 $ 8.00 $ 8.16  
(Ord. No. 1498, § 3(Exh. A), 4-16-2019) 
Sec. 102-319. - Enhanced water conservation strategies. 
(a)  Ordinances, plumbing codes, or rules on water-conserving fixtures. The state has required water-conserving fixtures in new construction and renovations since 1992. The state standards call for flows of no more than 2.5 gallons per minute (gpm) for faucets, 2.5 gpm for showerheads. As of January 1, 2014, the state requires maximum average flow rates of 1.28 gallons per flush (gpf) for toilets and 0.5 gpf for urinals. Similar standards are now required under federal law. These state and federal standards assure that all new construction and renovations will use water-conserving fixtures. Rebate programs to encourage replacement of older fixtures with water conservation programs are discussed in section 102-319(e). 
(b)  Reuse and recycling of wastewater. Most member cities and customers do not own and operate their own wastewater treatment plants. Their wastewater is treated by NTMWD. NTMWD currently has the largest wastewater reuse program in the state. NTMWD has water rights allowing reuse of up to 71,882 acre-feet per year of treated wastewater discharges from the Wilson Creek Wastewater Treatment Plant for municipal purposes. In addition, NTMWD has also developed the East Fork Reuse Project which can divert up to 157,393 acre-feet per year based on treated wastewater discharges by NTMWD. With the addition of the Main Stem Pump station the district will be able to increase flows through the East Fork Reuse Project up to an additional 56,100 acre-feet per year. When fully developed, these three reuse projects will provide up to 42 percent of the NTMWD's currently permitted water supplies. NTMWD also provides treated effluent from its wastewater treatment plants available for direct reuse for landscape irrigation and industrial use. 
    The Town of Little Elm owns and operates their own wastewater treatment plants and currently is utilizing reuse of treated effluent for wash-down processes, belt press operations and for irrigation purposes at the plant site. Little Elm continues to seek other alternatives for reuse of recycled wastewater effluent. 
(c)  Interactive weather stations/"Water My Yard" program. NTMWD has developed the Water My Yard program to install weather stations throughout its service area in order to provide consumers with a weekly e-mail and information through the "Water My Yard" website to assist consumers in determining an adequate amount of supplemental water to maintain healthy grass in a specific location. This service represents the largest network of weather stations providing ET-based irrigation recommendations in the State of Texas, and provides the public advanced information regarding outdoor irrigation needs, thereby reducing water use. Through a series of selections on the type of irrigation system a consumer has, a weekly email is provided that will determine how long (in minutes) an irrigation system needs to run based on the past seven days of weather. This recommendation provides the actual amount of supplemental water that is required for a healthy lawn based on research of the Texas A&M Agrilife Extension Service and proven technologies. This innovative program has been available to those within the NTMWD service area since May 2013. The city/utility will encourage customers to subscribe to weekly watering updates through Water My Yard or other similar program in an effort to reduce outdoor water consumption. 
(d)  Compulsory landscape and water management measures. The following landscape water management measures are required by the Town of Little Elm. These measures represent minimum measures to be implemented and enforced in order to irrigate the landscape appropriately and are to remain in effect on a permanent basis unless water resource management stages are declared. This water management measure will be known as the "Conservation Stage". 
(1)  Landscape water management measures. 
a.  Limit landscape watering with sprinklers or irrigation systems at each service address to no more than two days per week (April 1-October 31), with education that less than twice per week is usually adequate. (Little Elm has identified assigning designated watering days as a BMP.) Additional watering of landscape may be provided by hand-held hose with shutoff nozzle, use of dedicated irrigation drip zones. An exception is allowed for landscape associated with new construction that may be watered as necessary for 30 days from the installation of new landscape features. 
b.  Limit landscape watering with sprinklers or irrigation systems at each service address to no more than one day per week beginning November 1 and ending March 31 of each year, with education that less than once per week is usually adequate. 
c.  Estimated savings from the year-round watering restrictions, mentioned above, since the NTMWD terminated drought stages in 2015 is approximately 2.5 to 3.5 percent on an average annualized basis. 
d.  Prohibit lawn irrigation watering from 10:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
e.  Prohibit the use or irrigation systems that water impervious surfaces. (Wind-driven water drift will be taken into consideration.) 
f.  Prohibit outdoor watering during precipitation or freeze events. 
g.  Prohibit use of poorly maintained sprinkler systems that waste water. 
h.  Prohibit excess water runoff or other obvious waste. 
i.  Require rain and freeze sensors and/or ET or smart controllers on all new irrigation systems. Rain and freeze sensors and/or ET or smart controllers must be maintained to function properly. 
j.  Prohibit overseeding, sodding, sprigging, broadcasting or plugging with cool season grasses or watering cool season grasses, except for golf courses and athletic fields. 
k.  Require that irrigation systems be inspected at the same time as initial backflow preventer inspection. 
l.  Requirement that all new irrigation systems be in compliance with state design and installation regulations (Texas Administrative Code Title 30, Chapter 344). 
m.  Require the owner of a regulated irrigation property to obtain an evaluation of any permanently installed irrigation system on a periodic basis. The irrigation evaluation shall be conducted by a licensed irrigator in the State of Texas and be submitted to the Town of Little Public Works Department. 
(2)  Additional water management measures: 
a.  Prohibit the use of potable water to fill or refill residential, amenity, and any other natural or manmade ponds. A pond is considered to be a still body of water with a surface area of 500 square feet or more. 
b.  Non-commercial car washing can be done only when using a water hose with a shut- off nozzle. 
c.  Hotels and motels shall offer a linen reuse water conservation option tocustomers. 
d.  Restaurants, bars, and other commercial food or beverage establishments may not provide drinking water to customers unless a specific request is made by the customer for drinking water. 
The Town of Little Elm is responsible for developing regulations, ordinances, policies, or procedures for enforcement of water conservation guidelines. 
Appendix E is a summary of considerations for landscape water management regulations adopted as part of the development of this water conservation plan. These regulations are intended to minimize waste in landscape irrigation. Appendix E includes the required landscape water measures laid out in this section. 
(e)  Additional water conservation measures. The Town of Little Elm will consider including the following additional water conservation measures in their plans. The Town is responsible for developing regulations, ordinances, policies, or procedures for enforcement of water conservation guidelines. 
(1)  Landscape water management regulations. 
a.  Requirement that all existing irrigation systems be retrofitted with rain and freeze sensors and/or ET or Smart controllers capable of multiple programming. Rain and freeze sensors and/or ET or Smart controllers must be maintained to function properly. 
b.  Requirement that all new athletic fields be irrigated by a separate irrigation system from surrounding areas. 
c.  Implementation of other measures to encourage off-peak water use. 
(2)  Landscape ordinance. 
a.  Landscape ordinance is intended to promote water-efficient landscape design. 
b.  Native, drought tolerant or adaptive plants should be encouraged. 
c.  Drip irrigation systems should be promoted. 
d.  ET/Smart controllers that only allow sprinkler systems to irrigate when necessary should be promoted. 
(3)  Water audits. Water audits are useful in finding ways in which water can be used more efficiently at a specific location. Town of Little Elm offers water audits to customers. 
(4)  Rebates. In addition to the conservation measures described above, the Town of Little Elm may also recommend the following water conservation incentive programs for consideration as funds are avaiable: 
a.  Commercial clothes washer rebates for the purchase and installation of high efficiency card- or coin-operated commercial clotheswashers; 
b.  Low-flow toilet replacement and rebate programs; 
c.  Rebates for rain/freeze sensors and/or ET or smart controllers; 
d.  Low-flow showerhead and sink aerators replacement programs or rebates; 
e.  Residential water efficient clothes washer rebates; 
f.  Pressure reducing valve installation programs or rebates; 
g.  Rain barrel rebates; 
h.  Pool covers; 
i.  On-demand hot water heater rebates; and/or 
j.  Other water conservation incentive program 
(f)  Monitoring of effectiveness and efficiency-NTMWD annual water conservation report. Appendix D will be used in the development of an annual water conservation report by the Town of Little Elm. This form should be completed by March 31 of the following year and used to monitor the effectiveness and efficiency of the water conservation program and to plan conservation-related activities for the next year. The form records the water use by category, per capita municipal use, and total water loss for the current year and compares them to historical values. As part of the development of appendix D, Little Elm will complete the tracking tool by March 31 of the following year and submit them to NTWMD. The annual water conservation report should be sent to NTMWD, which will monitor NTMWD member cities' and customers' water conservation trends. 
(g)  Water conservation implementation report. Appendix J includes the TCEQ-required water conservation implementation report. The report is due to the TCEQ by May 1 of every year. This report lists the various water conservation strategies that have been implemented, including the date the strategy was implemented. The report also calls for the five-year and ten-year per capita water use goals from the previous water conservation plan. The reporting entity must answer whether or not these goals have been met and if not, why not. The amount of water saved is also requested. 
(Ord. No. 1498, § 3(Exh. A), 4-16-2019) 
Sec. 102-320. - Implementation and enforcement of the water conservation plan. 
    Appendix G contains a copy of the proposed ordinance to be adopted by the town council regarding the combined water conservation/water resource and emergency management plans. The ordinance designates responsible officials to implement and enforce the water conservation plan. Appendix E, the considerations for landscape water management regulations, also includes information about enforcement. Appendix H includes a copy of an ordinance, order, or resolution that may be adopted related to illegal connections and water theft. 
(Ord. No. 1498, § 3(Exh. A), 4-16-2019) 
Sec. 102-321. - Review and update of water conservation plan. 
    TCEQ requires that the water conservation plans be updated every five years. The plan will be updated as required and as appropriate based on new or updated information. 
(Ord. No. 1498, § 3(Exh. A), 4-16-2019) 
Secs. 102-322-102-330. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - WATER RESOURCE AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLAN[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1498, §§ 2, 3(Exh. A), adopted Apr. 16, 2019, repealed the former art. VII, §§ 102-331-102-333, and enacted a new art. VII as set out herein. The former art. VII pertained to drought contingency. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. Additonally, appendices A-J referenced in this article are on file and may be viewed at the town office. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 102-331. - Introduction and objectives. 
    This document has been prepared as a water resource and emergency management plan (WREMP). This WREMP addresses all of the current TCEQ requirements for a drought contingency plan [1] This WREMP will replace the previous plans ordinances 721, 722, 837, 838, 1052, and 1229. 
    The measures included in the WREMP are intended to provide short-term water savings during drought or emergency conditions. Water savings associated with ongoing, long-term strategies are discussed in the document entitled water conservation plan for Town of Little Elm 
    The purpose of this WREMP is as follows: 
(1)  To conserve the available water supply in times of drought, water supply shortage, and emergency. 
(2)  To maintain supplies for domestic water use, sanitation, and fire protection. 
(3)  To protect and preserve public health, welfare, and safety. 
(4)  To minimize the adverse impacts of water supply shortages. 
(5)  To minimize the adverse impacts of emergency water supply conditions. 
    NTMWD supplies treated potable water to the Town of Little Elm. This WREMP was developed by NTMWD in consultation with its member cities and customers. In order to adopt this WREMP, the Town of Little Elm will need to adopt ordinance(s) or regulation(s) implementing the WREMP, including the establishment of fines and enforcement procedures. The WREMP calls for Little Elm to adopt similar criteria and procedures for declaring a water emergency and implementing drought and emergency response stages as used by NTMWD. Little Elm may also adopt more stringent water resource management stages than NTMWD if conditions so warrant. 
    In the absence of drought response measures, water demands tend to increase during a drought due to increased outdoor irrigation. The severity of a drought depends on the degree of depletion of supplies and on the relationship of demand to available supplies. NTMWD considers a drought to end when all of NTMWD's supply reservoirs refill to conservation storage pool levels. 
(Ord. No. 1498, § 3(Exh. A), 4-16-2019) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
 Superscripted numbers match references listed in appendix A. 

Sec. 102-332. - Definitions and abbreviations. 
    Aquatic life means a vertebrate organism dependent upon an aquatic environment to sustain its life. 
    Athletic field means a public sports competition field, the essential feature of which is turf grass, used primarily for organized sports practice, competition or exhibition events for schools; professional sports and league play sanctioned by the utility providing retail watersupply. 
    Commercial facility means business or industrial buildings and the associated landscaping, but does not include the fairways, greens, or tees of a golf course. 
    Commercial vehicle wash facility means a permanently-located business that washes vehicles or other mobile equipment with water or water-based products, including but not limited to self-service car washes, full service car washes, roll-over/in-bay style car washes, and facilities managing vehicle fleets or vehicle inventory. 
    Customers means a person, company or other entity connected to the town's water system and contracting with the Town of Little Elm to receive potable water service 
    Designated outdoor water use day means a day prescribed by rule on which a person is permitted to irrigate outdoors. 
    Drip irrigation is a type of micro-irrigation system that operates at low pressure and delivers water in slow, small drips to individual plants or groups of plants through a network of plastic conduits and emitters; also called trickle irrigation. 
    Drought , for the purposes of this report, means an extended period of time when an area receives insufficient amounts of rainfall to replenish the water supply, causing water supply sources (in this case reservoirs) to be depleted. 
    Evapotranspiration (ET) represents the amount of water lost from plant material to evaporation and transpiration. The amount of ET can be estimated based on the temperature, wind, and relative humidity. 
    Executive director means the executive director of the NTMWD and includes a person the executive director has designated to administer or perform any task, duty, function, role, or action related to this plan or on behalf of the executive director. 
    Foundation watering means an application of water to the soils directly abutting (within two feet) the foundation of a building, structure. 
    Interactive water features means water sprays, dancing water jets, waterfalls, dumping buckets, shooting water cannons, inflatable pools, temporary splash toys or pools, slip-n-slides, or splash pads that are maintained for recreation. 
    Irrigation system means a permanently installed, custom-made, site-specific system of delivering water generally for landscape irrigation via a system of pipes or other conduits installed below ground. 
    Landscape means any plant material on a property, including any tree, shrub, vine, herb, flower, succulent, ground cover, grass or turf species, that is growing or has been planted out ofdoors. 
    Member cities include the cities of Allen, Farmersville, Forney, Frisco, Garland, McKinney, Mesquite, Plano, Princeton, Richardson, Rockwall, Royse City, and Wylie, Texas, which are members of NTMWD. 
    New landscape means (a) vegetation installed at the time of the construction of a residential or commercial facility; (b) installed as part of a governmental entity's capital improvement project; or (c) installed to stabilize an area disturbed byconstruction. 
    Ornamental fountain means an artificially created structure (up to a certain diameter) from which a jet, stream, or flow of treated water emanates and is not typically utilized for the preservation of aquatic life. 
    Plan refers to the Town of Little Elm WREMP Plan, individually and/or collectively 
    Retail customers include those customers to whom the Town of Little Elm provides retail water from a water meter. 
    Soaker hose means a perforated or permeable garden-type hose or pipe that is laid above ground that provides irrigation at a slow and constant rate. 
    Sprinkler means an above-ground water distribution device that may be attached to a garden hose. 
    Supplier means Town of Little Elm that purchases wholesale water from NTMWD and provides water to retail and/or wholesale customers. 
    Swimming pool means any structure, basin, chamber, or tank including hot tubs, containing an artificial body of water for swimming, diving, or recreational bathing, and having a depth of two feet or more at any point. 
    Town refers to the Town of Little Elm. 
    Town manager refers to the town manager of the Town of Little Elm or any other Town of Little Elm public official designated by the town manager to act on behalf of the town manager. 
    Water resource management plan means a strategy or combination of strategies for temporary supply management and demand management responses to temporary and potentially recurring water supply shortages and other water supply emergencies required by Texas Administrative Code Title 30, Chapter 288, Subchapter B. This is sometimes called a drought contingency plan. 
    Wholesale customers refers to Denton County Fresh Water District 8-C and Terra Southwest (emergency who receive potable water from the Town of Little Elm. 
Abbreviations 
Abbreviation Full Nomenclature ED NTMWD Executive Director NTMWD or District North Texas Municipal Water District TOLE Town of Little Elm TCEQ Texas Commission on Environmental Quality TWDB Texas Water Development Board WREMP Water Resource and Emergency Management Plan  
(Ord. No. 1498, § 3(Exh. A), 4-16-2019) 
Sec. 102-333. - Texas Commission on Environmental Quality Rules. 
    The TCEQ rules governing development of drought contingency plans for public water suppliers are contained in Title 30, Chapter 288, Section 288.20 of the Texas Administrative Code, a current copy of which is included in appendix B. For the purpose of these rules, a drought contingency plan is defined as "a strategy or combination of strategies for temporary supply and demand management responses to temporary and potentially recurring water supply shortages and other water supply emergencies." 1 
    Minimum requirements TCEQ's minimum requirements for drought contingency plans are addressed in the following subsections of this report: 
(1)  288.20(a)(1)(A) - Provisions to inform the public and provide opportunity for public input - section 102-334. 
(2)  288.20(a)(1)(B) - Program for continuing public education and information - section 102-335. 
(3)  288.20(a)(1)(C) - Coordination with the regional water planning group - section 102-340. 
(4)  288.20(a)(1)(D) - Description of information to be monitored and criteria for the initiation and termination of water resource management stages - section 102-336. 
(5)  288.20(a)(1)(E) - Water resource management stages - section 102-336 
(6)  288.20(a)(1)(F) - Specific, quantified targets for water use reductions during water shortages - section 102-336. 
(7)  288.20(a)(1)(G) - Water supply and demand management measures for each stage - section 102-336. 
(8)  288.20(a)(1)(H) - Procedures for initiation and termination of water resource management stages - section 102-336. 
(9)  288.20(a)(1)(I) - Procedures for granting variances - section 102-337. 
(10)  288.20(a)(1)(J) - Procedures for enforcement of mandatory restrictions - section 102-339. 
(11)  288.20(a)(3) - Consultation with wholesale water supplier - section 102-331 and section 102-336. 
(12)  288.20(b) - TCEQ Notification of implementation of mandatory measures - section 102-336 
(13)  288.20(c) - Review and update of WREMP - section 102-341. 
(Ord. No. 1498, § 3(Exh. A), 4-16-2019) 
DIVISION 2. - WATER RESOURCE AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLAN 

Sec. 102-334. - Provisions to inform the public and opportunity for public input. 
    Town of Little Elm will provide opportunity for public input in the development of this WREMP by the following means: 
(1)  Providing written notice of the proposed WREMP and the opportunity to comment on the WREMP by newspaper, posted notice, or notice on Little Elm web site. 
(2)  Making the draft WREMP available on the town web's site. 
(3)  Providing the draft WREMP to anyone that requests a copy. 
(4)  Town of Little Elm may hold a public meeting providing advance public notice of such meeting. 
(Ord. No. 1498, § 3(Exh. A), 4-16-2019) 
Sec. 102-335. - Program for continuing public education and information. 
    Town of Little Elm will inform and educate the public about the water resource and emergency management plan by the following means: 
(1)  Preparing a bulletin describing the plan and making it available at The Public Works Service Center located at 1600 Mark Tree Lane and other appropriate locations. 
(2)  Making the plan available to the public through the town's web site. 
(3)  Including information about the water resource and emergency management plan on the town's web site. 
(4)  Notifying local organizations, schools, and civic groups that utility staff are available to make presentations on the water resource and emergency management plan (usually in conjunction with presentations on water conservation programs). 
(5)  At any time that the water resource and emergency management plan is activated or changes, Town of Little Elm will notify local media of the issues, the water resource management stage (if applicable), and the specific actions required of the public. The information will also be publicized on the town's web site. Billing inserts will also be used as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 1498, § 3(Exh. A), 4-16-2019) 
Sec. 102-336. - Criteria for initiation and termination of water resource and emergency management stages and targets for water use reductions. 
(a)  Initiation of a water resource management stage. 
(1)  The town manager or official designee may order the implementation of a water resource management stage when one or more of the trigger conditions for that stage is met. 
a.  Water resource and emergency management plan stages imposed by NTMWD action must be initiated by member cities and customers. 
b.  For other trigger conditions internal to the Town of Little Elm, the town manager or official designee may decide not to order the implementation of a water resource management stage or water emergency even though one or more of the trigger criteria for the stage are met. Factors which could influence such a decision include, but are not limited to, the time of the year, weather conditions, the anticipation of replenished water supplies, or the anticipation that additional facilities will become available to meet needs. The reason for this decision should be documented. 
(2)  The following actions will be taken when a water resource management stage is initiated: 
a.  The public will be notified through local media and the town's web site as described in section 102-335. 
b.  Wholesale customers and NTMWD will be notified by telephone with a follow-up letter or email that provides details of the reasons for initiation of the water resource management stage. 
c.  If any mandatory provisions of the water resource and emergency management plan are activated, TOLE will notify the TCEQ executive director and the NTMWD executive director within five business days. 
(b)  Termination of a water resource management stage. WREMP stages initiated by NTMWD may be terminated after NTMWD has terminated the stage. For WREMP stages initiated by the town manager, or official designee may order the termination of a water resource management stage when the conditions for termination are met or at their discretion. 
    The following actions will be taken when a water resource management stage is terminated: 
(1)  The public will be notified through local media and the town's web site as described in section 102-335. 
(2)  Wholesale customers and NTMWD will be notified by e-mail with a follow-upletter or email. 
(3)  If any mandatory provisions of the water resource and emergency management plan that have been activated are terminated, TOLE will notify the TCEQ Executive Director and the NTMWD executive director within five business days. 
    The city manager or official designee may decide not to order the termination of a water resource management stage even though the conditions for termination of the stage are met. Factors which could influence such a decision include, but are not limited to, the time of the year, weather conditions, or the anticipation of potential changed conditions that warrant the continuation of the water resource management stage. The reason for this decision should be documented. 
(Ord. No. 1498, § 3(Exh. A), 4-16-2019) 
Sec. 102-337. - Water resource and emergency management plan stages and corresponding measures. 
(a)  Stage one. 
(1)  Initiation and termination conditions for stage one. 
a.  The NTMWD has initiated stage one, which may be initiated due to one or more of the following: 
1.  The NTMWD executive director, with the concurrence of the NTMWD board of directors, finds that conditions warrant the declaration of stage one. 
2.  Water demand is projected to approach the limit of NTMWD's permittedsupply. 
3.  The storage level in Lavon Lake as published by the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB), three is less than 70 percent of the total conservation pool capacity during any of the months of April through October or less than 60 percent of the total conservation pool capacity during any of the months of November through March. 
4.  The Sabine River Authority (SRA) has indicated that its upper basin water supplies used by NTMWD (Lake Tawakoni and/or Lake Fork) are in a stage one drought. 
5.  NTMWD has concern that Lake Texoma, Jim Chapman Lake, the East Fork Water Reuse Project, the Main Stem Pump Station, or some other NTMWD water source may be limited in availability within the next six months. 
6.  Water demand exceeds 95 percent of the amount that can be delivered by NTMWD to customers for three consecutive days. 
7.  Water demand for all or part of the delivery system approaches delivery capacity because delivery capacity is inadequate. 
8.  Supply source is interrupted or unavailable due to contamination, invasive species, equipment failure, or other cause. 
9.  Water supply system is unable to deliver water due to the failure or damage of major water system components. 
10.  Part of the system has a shortage in supply or damage to equipment. NTMWD may implement measures for only that portion of the NTMWD system impacted. 
b.  TOLE has initiated stage one due to one or more of the following reasons: 
1.  Town of Little Elm water demand exceeds 95 percent of the amount that can be delivered to customers for three consecutive days. 
2.  Town of Little Elm water demand for all or part of the delivery system equals delivery capacity because delivery capacity is inadequate. 
3.  Supply source becomes contaminated. 
4.  Town of Little Elm water system is unable to deliver water due to the failure or damage of major water system components. 
5.  Town of Little Elm individual plan may be implemented if other criteria dictate. 
c.  The NTMWD has terminated stage one, which may be terminated due to one or more of the following: 
1.  The executive director, with the concurrence of the NTMWD board of directors, finds that conditions warrant the termination of stage one. 
2.  The storage level in Lavon Lake, as published by the TWDB, three is greater than 75 percent of the total conservation pool capacity during any of the months of April through October or greater than 65 percent of the total conservation pool capacity during any of the months of November through March. 
3.  Other circumstances that caused NTMWD initiation of stage one no longerprevail. 
The circumstances that caused the TOLE initiation of stage one no longer prevail. 
(2)  Goal for use reduction and actions available under stage one. The goal for water use reduction under stage one is a two percent reduction in the amount of water produced by NTMWD from the previous corresponding annual payment period prior to institution of drought restrictions. If circumstances warrant, or if required by NTMWD, the town manager or official designee can set a goal for greater or lesser water use reduction under stage one. The town manager or official designee may order the implementation of any or all of the actions listed below, as deemed necessary, to achieve a two-percent reduction. Measures described as "requires notification to TCEQ" are those that impose mandatory requirements on customers. The town must notify TCEQ and NTMWD within five business days if such mandatory measures are implemented. 
a.  Continue actions established by the water conservation plan. 
b.  Notify any wholesale customers of actions being taken and request that they implement similar procedures. 
c.  Initiate engineering studies to evaluate alternative water sources and/or alternative delivery mechanisms should conditions worsen. 
d.  Further accelerate public education efforts on ways to reduce water use. 
e.  Halt non-essential city government water use. Examples include street cleaning, vehicle washing, operation of ornamental fountains, etc. 
f.  Encourage the public to wait until the current drought or emergency situation has passed before establishing new landscape. 
g.  Encourage all users to reduce thefrequency of draining and refilling swimming pools. 
h.  Requires notification to TCEQ-Increase enforcement of the following landscape watering restrictions established by the water conservation plan: (1) limit landscape watering with sprinklers or irrigation systems at each service address to no more than two days per week, on designated days, between April 1 and October 31; and (2) limit landscape watering with sprinklers or irrigation systems at each service address to once every week, on designated days, between November 1 and March 31. Exceptions are as follows: 
1.  An exception is allowed for new landscape associated with new construction that may be watered as necessary for 30 days from the date of installation of new landscape features. 
2.  An exception for additional watering of landscape may be provided by hand-held hose with shutoff nozzle, and/or use of dedicated irrigation drip zones provided no runoff occurs. 
3.  Foundation (within two feet), new landscape watering, watering of new plantings (first year) of shrubs, and watering of trees (within a ten foot radius of its trunk) may occur by a hand-held hose, a soaker hose, or a dedicated zone using a drip irrigation system provided no runoff occurs. 
4.  Locations using alternative sources of water supply only for irrigation may irrigate without day of the week restrictions provided proper signage is employed. However, irrigation using alternative sources of supply is subject all other restrictions applicable to this stage. If the alternative supply source is a well, proper proof of well registration with the North Texas Groundwater Conservation District or Red River Ground Water Conservation District is required. Other sources of water supply may not include imported treated water. 
5.  Requires notification to TCEQ-Initiate a rate surcharge for all water use over a certain level. 
6.  Requires notification to TCEQ-Parks, golf courses and athletic fields using potable water for landscape watering are required to meet the same reduction goals and measures outlined in this stage. Exception for golf course greens and tee boxes that may be hand-watered as needed. 
(b)  Stage two. 
(1)  Initiation and termination conditions for stage two. 
a.  NTMWD has initiated stage two, which may be initiated due to one or more of the following: 
1.  The NTMWD executive director, with the concurrence of the NTMWD board of directors, finds that conditions warrant the declaration of stage two. 
2.  Water demand is projected to approach the limit of NTMWD's permittedsupply. 
3.  The storage level in Lavon Lake, as published by the TWDB, three is less than 55 percent of the total conservation pool capacity during any of the months of April through October or less than 45 percent of the total conservation pool capacity during any of the months of November through March. 
4.  SRA has indicated that its upper basin water supplies used by NTMWD (Lake Tawakoni and/or Lake Fork) are in a stage two drought. 
5.  NTMWD has concern that Lake Texoma, Jim Chapman Lake, the East Fork Water Reuse Project, the Main Stem Pump Station, or some other NTMWD water source may be limited in availability within the next three (3) months. 
6.  Water demand exceeds 98 percent of the amount that can be delivered to customers for three consecutive days. 
7.  Water demand for all or part of the delivery system equals delivery capacity, because delivery capacity is inadequate. 
8.  Supply source is interrupted or unavailable due to contamination, invasive species, equipment failure, or other cause. 
9.  Water supply system is unable to deliver water due to the failure or damage of major water system components. 
10.  Part of the system has a shortage in supply or damage to equipment. NTMWD may implement measures for only that portion of the system impacted. 
b.  TOLE has initiated stage two due to one or more of the following reasons: 
1.  Town of Little Elm water demand exceeds 98 percent of the amount that can be delivered to customers for three consecutive days. 
2.  Town of Little Elm water demand for all or part of the delivery system exceeds delivery capacity because delivery capacity is inadequate. 
3.  Supply source becomes contaminated. 
4.  Supply source is interrupted or unavailable due to invasive species. 
5.  Town of Little Elm water supply system is unable to deliver water due to the failure or damage of major water system components. 
6.  Town of Little Elm individual plan may be implemented if other criteria dictate. 
c.  NTMWD has terminated stage two, which may be terminated due to one or more of the following: 
1.  The NTMWD Executive Director, with the concurrence of the NTMWD Board of directors, finds that conditions warrant the termination of stage two. 
2.  The storage level in Lavon Lake, as published by the TWDB, three is greater than 70 percent of the total conservation pool capacity during any of the months of April through October or greater than 60 percent of the total conservation pool capacity during any of the months of November through March. 
3.  Other circumstances that caused the NTMWD's initiation of stage two no longerprevail. 
The circumstances that caused the TOLE initiation of stage two no longer prevail. 
(2)  Goals for use reduction and actions available under stage two. The goal for water use reduction under stage two is a reduction of ten percent in the amount of water obtained from NTMWD from the previous corresponding annual payment period prior to the institution of drought restrictions. If circumstances warrant, or if required by NTMWD, the town manager, or official designee can set a goal for greater or lesser water use reduction. The town manager or official designee may order the implementation of any or all of the actions listed below, as deemed necessary to achieve a ten percent reduction. Measures described as "requires notification to TCEQ" are those that impose mandatory requirements on customers. The town must notify TCEQ and NTMWD within five business days if such mandatory measures are implemented. 
a.  Continue or initiate any actions available under the water conservation plan and stage one. 
b.  Notify any wholesale customers of actions being taken and request that they implement similar procedures. 
c.  Implement viable alternative water supply strategies. 
d.  Encourage all users to reduce the frequency of draining and refilling swimmingpools. 
e.  Requires notification to TCEQ-Limit landscape watering with sprinklers or irrigation systems at each service address to once per week on designated days between April 1 and October 31. Limit landscape watering with sprinklers or irrigation systems at each service address to once every other week on designated days between November 1 and March 31. Exceptions are as follows: 
1.  New Landscape may be watered as necessary for 30 days from the date of the installation of new landscape features. 
2.  Foundation watering (within two feet), new landscape watering, watering of new plantings (first year) of shrubs, and watering of trees (within a ten foot radius of its trunk) may occur for up to two hours on any day by a hand-held hose, a dedicated zone using a drip irrigation system and/or soaker hose, provided no runoff occurs. 
3.  Athletic Fields may be watered twice per week. 
4.  Locations using alternative sources of water supply only for irrigation may irrigate without day-of-the-week restrictions, provided proper signage is employed to notify the public of alternative water source(s) being used. However, irrigation using alternative sources of supply is subject all other restrictions applicable to this stage. If the alternative supply source is a well, proper proof of well registration with the North Texas Groundwater Conservation District or Red River Groundwater Conservation District is required. Alternative sources of water supply may not include imported treated water. 
5.  An exemption is allowed for drip irrigation systems from the designated outdoor water use day limited to no more than one day per week. Drip irrigation systems are however subject to all other restrictions applicable under this stage. 
6.  Hand watering with shutoff nozzle, drip lines, and soaker hoses are allowed before 10:00 a.m. and after 6:00 p.m., provided no runoff occurs. 
f.  Requires notification to TCEQ-Prohibit hydro seeding, hydro mulching, andsprigging. 
g.  Requires notification to TCEQ-Initiate a rate surcharge as requested by NTMWD. 
h.  Requires notification to TCEQ-Initiate a rate surcharge for all water use over a certain level. 
i.  Requires notification to TCEQ-If NTMWD has imposed a reduction in water available to member cities and customers, impose the same percent reduction on any wholesale customers. 
j.  Requires notification to TCEQ-Parks and golf courses using potable water for landscape watering are required to meet the same reduction goals and measures outlined in this stage. Exception for golf course greens and tee boxes which may be hand watered asneeded. 
(c)  Stage three. 
(1)  Initiation and termination conditions for stage three. 
a.  NTMWD has initiated stage three, which may be initiated due to one or more of the following: 
1.  The NTMWD executive director, with the concurrence of the NTMWD board of directors, finds that conditions warrant the declaration of stage three. 
2.  Water demand is projected to approach or exceed the limit of the permitted supply. 
3.  The storage level in Lavon Lake, as published by the TWDB, three is less than 30 percent of the total conservation pool capacity during any of the months of April through October or less than 20 percent of the total conservation pool capacity during any of the months of November through March. 
4.  SRA has indicated that its upper basin water supplies used by NTMWD (Lake Tawakoni and/or Lake Fork) are in a stage three drought. 
5.  The water supply from Lake Texoma, Jim Chapman Lake, the East Fork Water Reuse Project, Main Stem Pump Station, or some other NTMWD water source has become limited in availability. 
6.  Water demand exceeds the amount that can be delivered to Customers. 
7.  Water demand for all or part of the delivery system exceeds delivery capacity because delivery capacity is inadequate. 
8.  Supply source is interrupted or unavailable due to contamination, invasive species, equipment failure or other cause. 
9.  Water supply system is unable to deliver water due to the failure or damage of major water system components. 
10.  Part of the system has a shortage in supply or damage to equipment. NTMWD may implement measures for only that portion of the system impacted. 
b.  TOLE has initiated stage three due to one or more of the following reasons: 
1.  Town of Little Elm water demand exceeds the amount that can be delivered tocustomers. 
2.  Town of Little Elm water demand for all or part of the delivery system seriously exceeds delivery capacity because the delivery capacity is inadequate. 
3.  Supply source becomes contaminated. 
4.  Town of Little Elm water supply system is unable to deliver water due to the failure or damage of major water system components. 
5.  Town of Little Elm individual plan may be implemented if other criteria dictate. 
c.  NTMWD has terminated Stage 3, which may be terminated due to one or more of the following: 
1.  The NTMWD executive director, with the concurrence of the NTMWD Board of Directors, finds that conditions warrant the termination of Stage 3. 
2.  The storage level in Lavon Lake, as published by the TWDB,3 in Lavon Lake is greater than 55 percent of the total conservation pool capacity during any of the months of April through October or greater than 45 percent of the total conservation pool capacity during any of the months of November through March. 
3.  Other circumstances that caused the NTMWD's initiation of Stage 3 no longerprevail. 
When other circumstances that caused the TOLE initiation of stage three no longer prevail. 
(2)  Goals for use reduction and actions available under stage three. The goal for water use reduction under stage three is a reduction of whatever amount is necessary in the amount of water obtained from NTMWD from the corresponding previous annual payment period prior to institution of drought restrictions. If circumstances warrant or if required by NTMWD, the town manager, or official designee can set a goal for greater or lesser water use reduction. 
The town manager or official designee may order the implementation of any or all of the actions listed below, as deemed necessary. Measures described as "requires notification to TCEQ" are those that impose mandatory requirements on member cities and customers. The town must notify TCEQ and NTMWD within five business days if such mandatory measures are implemented. 
a.  Continue or initiate any actions available under the water conservation plan and stages one and two. 
b.  Notify any wholesale customers of actions being taken and request them to implement similar procedures. 
c.  Implement viable alternative water supply strategies. 
d.  Requires notification to TCEQ-Initiate mandatory water use restrictions as follows: 
1.  Hosing and washing of paved areas, buildings, structures, windows or other surfaces is prohibited except by variance and performed by a professional service using high efficiency equipment. 
2.  Prohibit operation of ornamental fountains or ponds that use potable water except where supporting aquatic life or water quality. 
e.  Requires notification to TCEQ-Prohibit new sod, hydro-seeding, hydro-mulching, and sprigging. 
f.  Requires notification to TCEQ-Prohibit the use of potable water for the irrigation of new landscape. 
g.  Requires notification to TCEQ-Prohibit all commercial and residential landscape watering, except that foundation watering (within two feet) and watering of trees (within a ten foot radius of its trunk) may occur for two hours one day per week with a hand-held hose or with a dedicated zone using a drip irrigation system and/or soaker hose, provided no runoff occurs. Drip irrigation systems are not exempt from this requirement. 
h.  Requires notification to TCEQ-Prohibit washing of vehicles except at a commercial vehicle wash facility. 
i.  Requires notification to TCEQ-Landscape watering of parks, golf courses, and athletic fields with potable water is prohibited. Exception for golf course greens and tee boxes that may be hand watered as needed. Variances may be granted by the water provider under special circumstances. 
j.  Requires notification to TCEQ-Prohibit the filling, draining, and/or refilling of existing swimming pools, wading pools, Jacuzzi and hot tubs except to maintain structural integrity, proper operation and maintenance, or to alleviate a public safety risk. Existing pools may add water to replace losses from normal use and evaporation. Permitting of new swimming pools, wading pools, jacuzzi, and hot tubs is prohibited. 
k.  Requires notification to TCEQ-Prohibit the operation of interactive water features such as water sprays, dancing water jets, waterfalls, dumping buckets, shooting water cannons, inflatable pools, temporary splash toys or pools, slip-n-slides or splash pads that are maintained for recreation. 
l.  Requires notification to TCEQ-Require all commercial water users to reduce water use by a percentage established by the city manager, general manager, mayor, chief executive, or official designee. 
m.  Requires notification to TCEQ-If NTMWD has imposed a reduction in water available to member cities and customers, impose the same percent reduction on any wholesale customers. 
n.  Requires notification to TCEQ-Initiate a rate surcharge over normal rates for all water use or for water use over a certain level. 
(Ord. No. 1498, § 3(Exh. A), 4-16-2019) 
Sec. 102-338. - Procedures for granting variances to the plan. 
(a)  The town manager or official designee may grant temporary variances for existing water uses otherwise prohibited under this water resource and emergency management plan if one or more of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Failure to grant such a variance would cause an emergency condition adversely affecting health, sanitation, or fire safety for the public or the person or entity requesting the variance. 
(2)  Compliance with this plan cannot be accomplished due to technical or otherlimitations. 
(3)  Alternative methods that achieve the same level of reduction in water use can be implemented. 
(b)  Variances shall be granted or denied at the discretion of the town manager or official designee. All petitions for variances should be in writing and should include the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the petitioners. 
(2)  Purpose of water use. 
(3)  Specific provisions from which relief is requested. 
(4)  Detailed statement of the adverse effect of the provision from which relief isrequested. 
(5)  Description of the relief requested. 
(6)  Period of time for which the variance is sought. 
(7)  Alternative measures that will be taken to reduce water use and the level of water use reduction. 
(8)  Other pertinent information. 
(Ord. No. 1498, § 3(Exh. A), 4-16-2019) 
Sec. 102-339. - Procedures for enforcing mandatory water use restrictions. 
    Mandatory water use restrictions may be imposed in stage one, stage one and stage three. The penalties associated with the mandatory water use restrictions are referenced in appendix E, section E, pages E-3 - E-4 as part of this plan. 
1.  First violation-The town shall send a warning notice, as specified in subsection c of this section, fails to request or attend a hearing on the violation of the town's water conservation and drought contingency plan, and informing the customer of the customer's right to request a hearing on a violation of the water conservation and drought contingency plan. 
2.  Second violation-Upon receiving the second notice specified in subsection c of this section, the customer fails to request and/or attend a hearing on the violation of the water conservation and drought contingency plan shall be subject to immediate disconnection from the town's water system and be subject to an administrative reconnection fee of $100.00. Each additional violation following the issuance of the first warning notice will be subject to disconnection fee of $100.00. 
3.  After three violations have occurred, the Town of Little Elm may disconnect water service to a customer. 
4.  The Town of Little Elm maintains the right, at any violation level, to disconnect water service to a customer. 
5.  The Town of Little Elm will keep record of each violation and will remain on the customer's record for a period of two years. After that time the record will be removed. 
(Ord. No. 1498, § 3(Exh. A), 4-16-2019) 
Sec. 102-340. - Coordination with the regional water planning group and NTMWD. 
    Appendix C includes a copy of a letter sent to the chairs of the Region C Water Planning Group and the chairs of the North East Texas Water Planning Group in conjunction with this model water resource and emergency management plan. 
    The Town of Little Elm will send a draft of its ordinance(s) or other regulation(s) implementing this plan to NTMWD for NTMWD's review and comment. The supplier will also send the final ordinance(s) or other regulation(s) to NTMWD. 
(Ord. No. 1498, § 3(Exh. A), 4-16-2019) 
Sec. 102-341. - Review and update of water resource and emergency management plan. 
    As required by TCEQ rules, Town of Little Elm must review their respective water resource and emergency management plans every five years. The plan will be updated as appropriate based on new or updated information, such as the revision of the regional water plans. 
(Ord. No. 1498, § 3(Exh. A), 4-16-2019) 
Secs. 102-342-102-399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1405, § 2, adopted Aug. 1, 2017, repealed the former art. VII, §§ 102-400-102-405, 102-415-102-422, 102-430-102-435.5, and enacted a new art. VII as set out herein. The former art. VII pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1360, § 2, adopted Nov. 15, 2016. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERAL 

Sec. 102-400. - Purpose. 
(a)  The accumulation of garbage, trash, rubbish, brush and other refuse on the premises of private residences, businesses, public and private institutions, vacant lots, and in the streets, and alleys and on other property ("premises") within the town, constitutes a health hazard, fire hazard, safety hazard, public menace or nuisance and greatly increases the danger of the spread of infections, contagious and epidemic diseases. The regulations of this article are adopted for the purpose of preserving and protecting the public health, safety and general welfare by requiring property owners, tenants, occupants and leases to secure and maintain containers and receptacles of sufficient size and material for the deposit of garbage, trash, rubbish, and recyclable materials for collection and removal at regular intervals and to maintain their premises free of accumulations thereof. 
(b)  The town provides for solid waste and recycling services to residential customers including residents inhabiting multifamily dwellings and solid waste services to nonresidential customers through a franchise ordinance with a designated provider ("franchisee"). The town franchise ordinance grants exclusive rights to the franchisee to provide collection, hauling, and disposal of solid waste for residential and nonresidential customers, and collection and hauling of residential recyclable materials. This article establishes the responsibilities of residential and nonresidential customers regarding collection, transportation, and disposal of solid waste and recyclable materials. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any other person or entity other than the designated franchisee to provide municipal solid waste collection or disposal services to any person or entity for compensation within the town, or to make use of the public streets for solid waste or recycling collection purposes. 
(d)  The town has adopted a monthly fee in the fee schedule for the collection of household hazardous waste and electronic waste commonly referred to as HHW and E-waste, respectively. This fee is charged through residential and multifamily monthly utility charges and is based on a contract adjustment with the town's franchisee. The HHW and E-waste is to be collected during the town's semi-annual clean-up event referred to as the "Clean and Green Event" held during the spring and fall of each year. 
(Ord. No. 1405, § 2, 8-1-2017) 
Sec. 102-401. - Definitions. 
    Terms used in this article shall have the following meanings. 
    Bulky or bulk waste shall mean indoor/outdoor furniture, mattresses and box springs, carpet, swing sets, plastic swimming pools, large toys, bicycles, fish aquariums, large household appliances, white goods and similar items. No white goods shall contain any hazardous materials including, but not limited to, chlorofluorocarbon compounds (CFC). 
    Brush shall mean plants or grass clippings, leaves or tree trimmings, including bags and/or bundles of landscape waste. 
    Commercial means any structure or building other than a residential structure or multifamily dwellings, including business structures, hotels, motels, rooming houses, mobile home parks, or boarding houses. 
    Commercial container shall mean a truck-loaded or truck-emptied non-disposable container, commonly referred to as a dumpster or roll off, used for the collection of commercial solid waste. 
    Commercial solid waste shall mean all types of solid waste generated by store, offices, restaurants, institutions, warehouses, and manufacturing activities, excluding residential wastes and grease from commercial restaurants and other food service establishments. 
    Commercial tree trimmer means a person who or firm that engages in and solicits the trimming, and/or cutting of trees as a regular part of the business. 
    Construction debris means waste building materials resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, demolition or landscaping operations. 
    Construction materials shall mean demolition of waste including any and all solid waste resulting from any construction, remodel or demolition projects and the cleanup of such projects within the town limits; including but not limited to debris, broken concrete and rebar, paper, plastics, cartons, gypsum board, wood, excelsior, rubber masonry, sheetrock, drywall, roofing materials, and all other materials, including rock and earthen materials and other materials resulting from or incidental to the clean-up of such projects or that are directly or indirectly the byproducts of construction, remodel, or demolition work with respect to existing buildings or other structures under development. 
    Container shall mean a rubber wheeled container having a maximum capacity of 95 gallons, designed for semi-automated or automated solid waste collection systems. Construction shall be molded polyethylene; also herein referred to as a polycart. 
    Customer means an occupant or owner of a residential, commercial or industrial unit who generates solid waste. 
    Dead animals shall mean animals or portions thereof equal to or greater than ten pounds in weight that have expired from any cause except those slaughtered or killed for human use. 
    Electronic waste (E-waste) is a popular, informal name for electronic products nearing the end of their "useful life." Computers, televisions, VCRs, stereos, copiers, and fax machines are common electronic products. Many of these products can be reused, refurbished, or recycled. 
    Franchise agreement or franchise ordinance shall mean the legal instrument that defines the exclusive rights and responsibilities of the private waste company that collects, hauls, and disposes of solid waste materials within the town limits and collects and recycles recyclable materials. 
    Franchisee shall mean a private waste company that collects, hauls, and disposes of solid waste materials within the town limits and collects and recycles recyclable materials. 
    Garbage shall mean solid waste consisting of putrescible animals and vegetable waste materials resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage facilities, handling, and sale of produce and other food products. 
    Hazardous waste means any commercial or residential garbage, trash, rubbish, or other solid waste identified or listed as a hazardous waste by the administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the federal Solid Waste Disposal Act 42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq., as amended. 
    Household hazardous waste (HHW) means any waste, produced in the home, which contains hazardous substances, which may pose threat to the environment, wildlife, and human health. Products containing hazardous substances are often labeled with words such as: toxic, flammable, corrosive, reactive, danger, warning, caution, flammable, explosive, do not use near open flame, and other cautionary words. Hazardous products become hazardous waste once the consumer no longer has any use for them. 
    Infectious waste means commercial or residential garbage, trash, or rubbish, or other waste containing pathogens or biologically active material which because of its type, concentration, and quantity is capable of transmitting disease to persons exposed to the waste, including human and animal tissue, bandages and other material used in health care which became contaminated by pathogenic materials. 
    Menace shall mean anything that constitutes a threat to or endangers the public health. 
    Multifamily dwelling includes apartments, town homes and condominiums, but excludes mobile home parks. 
    Municipal solid waste shall mean solid waste resulting from or incidental to municipal, community, commercial, institutional, or recreational activities, and includes garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and other solid waste other than industrial solid waste. 
    Nonresidential customer shall mean all commercial establishments, schools, institutions, using steel or plastic containers, dumpsters, roll offs, or compactors to store solid waste until scheduled collection service occurs. 
    Nuisance shall mean solid waste that is stored, processed or disposed of in a manner that causes the pollution of surrounding land, the contamination of groundwater or surface water, the breeding of insects or rodents, or the creation of odors adverse to human health, safety or welfare. 
    Person shall mean any person, firm, corporation, business trust, partnership, association, organization or municipal entity, incorporated or non-incorporated, other than the town. 
    Polycart shall mean a rubber wheeled container having a maximum capacity of 95 gallons designed for semi-automated or automated solid waste collection systems. Construction shall be molded polyethylene. Ownership of the polycart shall remain with the franchisee. 
    Premises shall mean all public and private establishments, including individual residences, all multifamily dwellings, residential care facilities, hospitals, schools, businesses, other buildings and all vacant lots. 
    Recyclable materials or recyclables shall mean materials that have been designated by the town to be recovered or diverted from the non-hazardous solid waste stream for purposes of reuse, recycling, or reclamation a substantial portion of which is consistently used in the manufacture of products that may otherwise be produced using raw or virgin materials. Recyclable material is not solid waste. However, recyclable material may become solid waste at such time, if any, as it is abandoned or disposed of rather than recycled, whereupon it will be solid waste with respect only to the party actually abandoning or disposing of the material. 
    Refuse shall mean non-putrescible solid waste (excluding ashes) consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste materials. 
    Residential means a structure, house or building occupied as a dwelling only, and which contains no more than two dwelling units. 
    Residential construction and demolition waste shall mean construction, demolition, and/or remodeling waste generated as a result of the construction activity at a single-family, two-family, condominium, town home, multifamily, or apartment dwelling located in a town subdivision. 
    Residential customer shall mean a resident of a single- or two-family dwelling. 
    Residential garbage consists of all normal household waste, except plant clippings, leaves, tree trimmings, ashes, metal scraps and other cans, large accumulations of boxes, demolition and remodeling debris and other material that cannot be broken down to fit in regular garbage containers. 
    Residential solid waste means all matter included under the definitions of garbage, rubbish, and bulky items. 
    Residential unit means a single-family or duplex dwelling. A residential unit shall be deemed occupied when water and sewer service is supplied thereto by the town. 
    Rubbish means all waste wood, wood products, tree trimmings, grass cuttings, dead plants, weeds, leaves, dead trees or branches, thereof, chips, shavings, sawdust, printed matter, paper, pasteboard, rags, straw, used and discarded mattresses, used and discarded clothing, used and discarded shoes and boots, combustible waste pulp and other products such as are used for packaging, or wrapping, crockery and glass, ashes, cinders, floor sweepings, glass, mineral or metallic substances, and all other waste materials not included in the definition of "bulky items" "construction debris," "dead animals," "garbage," "hazardous waste," or "stable matter." 
    Solid waste shall mean garbage, refuse, rubbish, or other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semi-solid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, municipal, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations and from community and institutional activities. The term does not include: 
(1)  Solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage, or solid or dissolved material in irrigation return flows, or industrial discharges subject to regulation by permit issued under the V.T.C.A., Water Code, ch. 26; 
(2)  Soil, dirt, rock, sand, and other natural or manmade inert solid materials used to fill land if the object of the fill is to make the land suitable for the construction of surface improvements; or 
(3)  Waste materials that result from activities associated with the exploration, development or production of oil or gas or geothermal resources and other substance or material regulated by the Railroad Commission of Texas under V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code § 91.101, unless the waste, substance or material results from activities associated with gasoline plants, natural gas liquids processing plants, pressure maintenance plants, or re-pressurizing plants and is hazardous waste as defined by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency under the federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, as amended (42 USC 6901 et seq.). 
(4)  Unacceptable waste. Unacceptable waste shall mean any and all waste, including but not all limited to hazardous waste; Class 1 non-hazardous special waste, and untreated medical waste, the acceptance of which would cause the franchisee to violate any permit condition, legal or regulatory requirement, or damage franchisee's equipment or facilities, or present a substantial danger to the health or safety of the public or the franchisee's employees. Examples of unacceptable waste include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Hazardous waste from conditionally exempt small-quantity generators that may be exempt from full controls under V.T.C.A., Commission on Environmental Quality §§ 335.401-335.412 (relating to household materials which could be classified as hazardous waste); 
b.  Class I industrial nonhazardous waste not routinely collected with municipal solid waste; 
c.  Special waste from health-care-related facilities (refers to certain items of medical waste); 
d.  Municipal wastewater treatment plants sludges, other types of domestic sewage treatment plant sludges, and water-supply treatment plant sludges; 
e.  Septic tank pumpings; 
f.  Grease and grit trap wastes; 
g.  Waste from commercial or industrial wastewater treatment plants; air pollution control facilities, and tanks, drums, or containers used for shipping or storing any material that has been listed as a hazardous constituent in 40 CFR 261, appendix VIII, but has not been listed as a commercial chemical product in 40 CFR 261.33(e) or (f); 
h.  Slaughterhouse wastes; 
i.  Dead animals; 
j.  Drugs contaminated foods, or contaminated beverages, other than those contained in normal household waste; 
k.  Pesticide (insecticide, herbicide, fungicide, or rodenticide) containers; 
l.  Discarded materials containing asbestos; 
m.  Incinerators ash; 
n.  Soil contaminated by petroleum products, crude oils, or chemicals; 
o.  Used oil; 
p.  Light ballasts and/or small capacitors containing polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) compounds; 
q.  Waste from oil, gas, and geothermal activities subject to regulation by the Railroad Commission of Texas when those wastes are to be processed, treated, or disposed of at a solid waste management facility permitted under this article; 
r.  Waste generated outside the boundaries of Texas that contains; 
1.  Any industrial waste; 
2.  Any waste associated with oil, gas, and geothermal exploration, production, or developmental activities; or 
3.  Any items listed as a special waste in this paragraph; 
s.  Any waste stream other than household or commercial garbage, refuse or rubbish; 
t.  Lead acid storage batteries; and 
u.  Used-oil filters from internal combustion engines. 
    White goods shall mean appliances such as refrigerators, stoves, washers, dryers, and other large enameled appliances, which do not contain polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB) or chlorofluorocarbon compounds (CFC) and have been officially certified to that effect. 
    Yard waste shall mean leaves, yard trimmings, yard and garden debris, Christmas trees, and brush, including clean woody vegetative material not greater than four inches in diameter which results from landscaping maintenance and land clearing operations. The term does not include stumps, roots, or shrubs with intact root balls and specifically excludes all treated wood. 
(Ord. No. 1405, § 2, 8-1-2017) 
Sec. 102-402. - Service required. 
    All occupied residential, multifamily dwellings and nonresidential structures within the town shall be charged monthly for and shall receive solid waste collection and disposal services at intervals hereinafter established. 
(Ord. No. 1405, § 2, 8-1-2017) 
Sec. 102-403. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Storage or accumulations of solid waste or recyclable materials that is unsightly or a health or safety hazard is prohibited. No owner, lessee, or occupant of any residential or nonresidential unit shall permit the accumulation of any solid waste recyclable material on residential or nonresidential premises except in acceptable containers as defined herein. Proper storage of such materials between collection days is required to ensure prevention of littering and unsanitary conditions. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant, or person in control of any premises to allow solid waste or recyclable materials to be piled, placed, or accumulated on any sidewalk, street, or other right-of-way within the town limits. 
(c)  No person shall dump, throw or place any solid waste, ashes, grass cuttings, rock, or any other material of any kind in or on any public street, alley, storm sewer, drainage structure, drainage channel, or other public or private property in the town except for the designated collection location on the designated collection day. 
(d)  All hazardous waste, special waste (as defined in state or federal regulations), and medical waste materials must be disposed of in accordance with local, state, and federal regulations. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any burning material (burning match, charcoal, embers, etc.) into any container used for disposal of solid waste or recyclable materials. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of solid waste, recyclable material, or any other waste material by fire, burial, or similar methods within the town limits. 
(g)  Meddling with solid waste or recycling containers or in any way pilfering, scattering contents, or scavenging materials from such containers is prohibited by anyone other than the owner or resident of the premises where the container is located. 
(h)  No person shall place any solid waste or recyclable materials into any residential or nonresidential waste container without the effective consent of the owner, tenant, lessee, or occupant of the premises upon which said container is located. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful to place solid waste in, on, or near a solid waste container in a manner that does not allow the lid of the solid waste container to completely close with all the solid waste completely within the container. 
(j)  No person shall knowingly place any solid waste, bulky items or any other material in, on, or next to the solid waste container of another person or entity in the town. 
(k)  Residents are prohibited from setting out any solid waste that is generated from a nonresidential source to be collected as residential solid waste. 
(l)  No appliances set out for bulk waste collection shall contain any hazardous materials of any kind. Appliances or items that contain or have polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB) or chlorofluorocarbon compounds (CFC) or other liquid or gaseous compounds and which are set out for bulk waste collection must have the polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB) or chlorofluorocarbon compounds (CFC), or other liquid or gaseous compounds removed by a certified technician and be tagged by the certified technician as being free from poly chlorinated biphenyls (PCB) or chlorofluorocarbon compounds (CFC), or other liquid or gaseous compounds. 
(m)  No hazardous waste (as defined herein), medical waste, soil, dirt, rock, sand, or concrete shall be set out for residential collection. 
(n)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place non-recyclable materials in a recyclable container. 
(Ord. No. 1405, § 2, 8-1-2017) 
Sec. 102-404. - Removal of unauthorized containers. 
    All solid waste and recycling storage containers, not meeting the requirements of this article shall be removed and disposed of by the town or its franchisee, and the town shall not be liable for the removal and disposal of the same. 
(Ord. No. 1405, § 2, 8-1-2017) 
Sec. 102-405. - Weight limitations of containers. 
    The total weight of any polycart and contents shall not exceed 175 pounds. 
(Ord. No. 1405, § 2, 8-1-2017) 
Secs. 102-406-102-414. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER RESPONSIBILITIES 

Sec. 102-415. - Service established. 
    Residential customers shall establish service at the same time the customer's water account is established. The charges for solid waste, recycling services and household hazardous waste fee shall be included on the monthly utility bill of the residential customer. Residential customers are required to make full payment for solid waste, recycling and household hazardous waste services at the same time of payment for water and sewer services. No partial payments solid waste, recycling and household hazardous waste services will be allowed. 
    If residential water or sewer service is not available or provided, the residential customer shall contact the town's customer service division to arrange for solid waste, recycling and household hazardous waste services in order to establish service. 
(Ord. No. 1405, § 2, 8-1-2017) 
Sec. 102-416. - Charges for residential services. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "individual family unit" shall mean each side of a duplex, each living unit per subdivided lot. Each apartment in a structure that contains no more than two units and any unit or living space in which a single family resides. 
(b)  The charge for collecting solid waste from each individual family unit shall be in an amount established and as from time to time amended by ordinance and adopted by the town council; the ordinance and amendments thereto shall be kept on file with the town secretary and shall be available for public inspection during regular business hours. A penalty for an overdue bill may be charged. 
(c)  Mobility or visually impaired customers may receive special collection services. Containers shall be placed in locations designated by the town. The resident receiving this special service must apply for such accommodations and must be mobility or visually impaired where no member of the household is physically able to place the container(s) at the curb. Such special services shall require approval by the director of public works or designee. The monthly rate for these special collection services will be the same rate as is charged to those customers with no impairments. 
(Ord. No. 1405, § 2, 8-1-2017) 
Sec. 102-417. - Residential trash/recycling collection service. 
(a)  Polycarts shall be placed at or near the street pavement edge, a minimum of four feet from any mailbox, vehicle, obstacle, or other container. The director of public works or designee may make reasonable exceptions to the foregoing location requirements, as needed upon request of the customer and in cooperation with the town's franchisee, to meet unique circumstances. 
(b)  Except for bulky waste collection, only authorized refuse and recycling polycarts provided by the town will be serviced. No other containers, boxes, or bags placed at the collection site will be collected, on the scheduled collection day. 
(c)  Residential refuse and recyclable polycarts shall be placed at the curb or side of alley no earlier than 7:00 p.m. on the day prior to the scheduled collection day. To ensure collection; residential refuse and recyclables shall be placed at the curb no later than 7:00 a.m. on the day of collection. At all other times, residents are required to place polycarts behind the front building line of their home. 
(d)  Customers whose refuse or recyclables were not collected because; they were not placed at the proper location, they contained unacceptable materials, or they were not placed out for collection at the required time, shall not be collected until the next regularly scheduled collection service. 
(e)  Containers, polycarts, receptacles and any other unacceptable waste or recyclables, shall be removed from the curb or other designated collection point by the customer no later than 7:00 a.m. on the day following their scheduled collection day. 
(f)  All garbage and refuse materials shall be separately bagged or otherwise securely contain all contents prior to placement in the appropriate polycart and shall be capable of being handled without spillage. Refuse and garbage determined by the town to not be properly contained shall not be collected. 
(g)  Dead animals shall not be placed in containers or at collection points for residential services. Residents shall contact the town's animal control division for proper disposal of dead animals. 
(Ord. No. 1405, § 2, 8-1-2017) 
Sec. 102-418. - Residential bulk waste collection. 
(a)  Household furnishings, goods and appliances, including but not limited to stoves, refrigerators, washing or drying machines, water heaters, sofas, chairs, tables, mattresses, and box springs, may be disposed of on bulk trash collection day, in the same location as regular collection services. 
(b)  Residential bulk waste shall be placed curbside for service not earlier than 48 hours prior to 7:00 a.m. of the first day of their respective bulk waste service/collection period and not later than 7:00 a.m. of the first day of their respective service/collection period. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if they set bulk waste out more than 48 hours prior to 7:00 a.m. of the first day of service/collection period and after 7:00 a.m. of the first day of the service/collection period. 
(Ord. No. 1405, § 2, 8-1-2017) 
Sec. 102-419. - Yard waste, tree limbs and cuttings. 
(a)  Brush bundles are not to be greater than two by two by four feet, must be tied and bundled and shall not weigh more than 50 pounds. No unit or piece shall weigh more than 50 pounds. Yard waste consisting of small pieces, small cuttings, and small loose material shall be placed in bags. 
(b)  Yard waste, brush, tree limbs, and cuttings shall be placed at curbside no earlier than 6:00 p.m. on the day prior to the scheduled bulk trash collection day. 
(c)  Brush, limbs, leaves, and cuttings from trees and shrubs which have been trimmed or removed by a commercial tree trimmer shall be disposed of at the expense of the owner or the person controlling the premises. 
(Ord. No. 1405, § 2, 8-1-2017) 
Sec. 102-420. - Residential collection schedules. 
(a)  Collection schedules for residential solid waste and recycling services shall be determined by the town in cooperation with the franchisee. 
(b)  Complaints regarding missed collections shall be reported directly to the franchisee, as provided in the franchise ordinance, as soon as the missed collection is discovered. 
Sec. 102-421. - Residential containers. 
(a)  All materials shall be placed in acceptable containers as defined herein, and shall be placed in such containers in such a way as to prevent littering or spilling of materials onto public areas or neighboring sites. 
(b)  Placement of solid waste or recycling container shall be at the edge of the street or alley without interfering with or endangering the movement of vehicles or blocking vehicle or pedestrian line of sight. 
(c)  Recycling containers are strictly for the collection of acceptable recyclable materials as determined by the town in cooperation with the franchisee. All recyclable materials must be placed within the container. A person commits an offense if they place anything other than approved recycle materials in the recycling container. 
(d)  A person commits an offense if he damages any solid waste or recycling container. 
(e)  Residents shall not remove containers from the address to which the container is assigned. 
    A resident shall report a missing or damaged polycart to the town as soon as the resident becomes aware of such a loss. 
(Ord. No. 1405, § 2, 8-1-2017) 
Sec. 102-422. - Residential construction and demolition material. 
(a)  Construction and demolition material that results from construction, remodeling, repairing, or destruction of residential service shall not be subject to the franchise agreement if collected and transported via pickup truck, pickup truck and trailer(s), dump truck(s), dump truck and trailer(s), semi-tractor and trailer(s), or any combination of these. Any roll-off, front load, or other containerized unit to collect, hold, or transport construction and demolition waste at the construction site shall be those owned and operated by the franchisee. 
(b)  Residential construction and demolition materials prohibited from being set out for residential collection services, except that miscellaneous small construction related materials and fencing materials from a residential construction and demolition project may be set out as bulky waste. 
(c)  Dumpsters or roll-off containers used to dispose of construction debris/waste must be approved for use, along with the location or placement and duration, by the director of public works (DPW) or agent. No dumpster or container may be used longer than the construction permit issued by development services or than the approved duration by the DPW or agent. 
(Ord. No. 1405, § 2, 8-1-2017) 
Secs. 102-423-102-429. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - NON-RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER RESPONSIBILITIES 

Sec. 102-430. - General. 
(a)  All nonresidential customers shall contract with the town for solid waste collection services. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person other than the town's franchisee to collect or remove solid waste materials from a commercial container. 
(c)  Collection shall not be provided before 7:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. if the location for collection is within 500 feet of any residential dwelling or residential complex including apartments or townhomes containing more than two units. 
(d)  Nonresidential customers shall remit payments for solid waste and recyclables services directly to the town's franchisee. 
(e)  Nonresidential customers may receive recycling services from the town's franchisee upon request. 
(Ord. No. 1405, § 2, 8-1-2017) 
Sec. 102-431. - Nonresidential solid waste services required. 
    Every owner, occupant, tenant, or lessee of any business, commercial, industrial, school or institutional property, or other property not entitled to receive residential solid waste collection services shall arrange, by contract with the town, for commercial solid waste collection and disposal services from the town's franchisee. 
(Ord. No. 1405, § 2, 8-1-2017) 
Sec. 102-432. - Charges for nonresidential service. 
    The charge for collection and removal of municipal solid waste from premises use for business, industrial, or institutional purposes shall be based upon the size, type and number of containers in use at such establishments and the frequency with which such containers are scheduled to be serviced. Such charges shall be in an amount established and from time to time amended, by ordinance as adopted by the town council; the ordinance and amendments thereto shall be kept on file with the town secretary and shall be available for public inspection during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 1405, § 2, 8-1-2017) 
Sec. 102-433. - Containers furnished by town's franchisee for nonresidential facilities. 
(a)  The director of public works, in cooperation with the town's franchisee, will designate the placement of containers for use by commercial industrial, and institutional facilities in accordance with the waste storage needs the individual facility. All facilities for which containers are so provided by the town shall place all refuse and waste materials in such containers and shall not place waste in any containers except those designated by the director public works. It shall be unlawful for any person using such containers to leave the lid open after placing refuse material therein. 
(b)  Enclosures are required for dumpsters, in accordance with the town's zoning regulations for nonresidential facilities. 
(c)  Upon adoption of this chapter, enclosures are required for dumpsters located at all existing nonresidential facilities. Occupants, property management agencies, and owners are required to install a dumpster enclosure within six months of adoption of this chapter. These dumpster enclosures shall be constructed in accordance with the town's zoning regulations. If the nonresidential facility is a nonconforming structure in regard to the masonry structure requirements, and has less than 75 percent masonry content, the owner may apply for administrative approval for a dumpster enclosure that shall be constructed of a six-foot solid wooden fence with a metal gate. Building permits are required prior to construction for all dumpster enclosures. 
(d)  All enclosures are required to have a ten-foot-wide gate opening to accommodate commercial dumpster trucks. 
(e)  The enclosure requirement will apply to dumpsters provided by the franchisee for recycling purposes on a case by case basis based on the town's standard specifications. 
(Ord. No. 1405, § 2, 8-1-2017) 
Sec. 102-434. - Collection containers and schedules. 
(a)  Nonresidential customer shall contract with the town for solid waste collection services and acquire an appropriately sized commercial container at a frequency that prevents the accumulation of waste outside the container and prevents littering or spilling of materials onto public areas or neighboring sites. Collection of nonresidential solid waste shall not be made less than one time per week. 
(b)  Overfilled containers will not be emptied if a safety hazard exists. Customer will be responsible for removing the excess and collection will be rescheduled when the excess material has been removed. 
(c)  The customer is responsible for providing access to the solid waste container and keeping the area around and on top of the container clear of obstructions so that the container can be serviced as scheduled. If container is blocked and not cleared, service will not be provided. Customer will be responsible for the cost of extra collections required. 
(d)  The customer will be responsible for odor and insect control around containers. 
(e)  Commercial containers shall not be placed on any sidewalk, street, or other public right-of-way, and shall be placed solely on private property. It shall be unlawful for the owner occupant or person in control of any premises to allow solid waste or recyclable materials to be piled, placed, or accumulated on any sidewalk, street, or other public right-of-way within the town limits. Commercial containers shall be placed on the site in such a manner that the collection vehicle is able to service the container without obstructing public right-of-way. 
(f)  All commercial customers utilizing a compactor who lease the compactor must lease such compactors from franchisee. Commercial customers shall have the right to purchase compactors from third parties, but must utilize the franchisee for compactor disposal service. 
(g)  All solid waste front load and roll-off containers shall display the name and phone number of the franchisee. 
(h)  Commercial containers owned by the franchisee shall not be marked modified, or damaged by the customer in any way. 
(i)  Commercial construction, remodel, and demolition materials as defined herein must be collected in containers owned by the operator or by the franchisee, including any roll-off, front load, or other containerized unit. 
(Ord. No. 1405, § 2, 8-1-2017) 
Sec. 102-435. - Nonresidential fees. 
    The monthly fee for solid waste collection and disposal services shall be set from time to time by appropriate written resolution ordinance of the town council. Such fee shall include collection and disposal charges, monthly billing charges, franchise fees and applicable sales tax. The monthly fee for such services shall be charged along with water and sewer charges. A penalty for an overdue bill may be charged. 
(Ord. No. 1405, § 2, 8-1-2017) 
DIVISION 4. - MULTI-FAMILY CUSTOMER RESPONSIBILITIES 

Sec. 102-435.1. - General 
(a)  The town's franchised solid waste provider shall provide solid waste collection and recycling services for multifamily dwellings and shall directly bill the owner, or person in control of the premises for the charges for such services. 
(b)  In multifamily complexes, the owner or responsible party shall contract with the franchised waste services provider for waste receptacles or containers as required by the approved site plan and the regulations of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1405, § 2, 8-1-2017) 
Sec. 102-435.2. - Charges for multifamily service. 
(a)  The charge for collection and removal of municipal solid waste from premises used as multifamily dwelling purposes shall be based upon the size, type and number of containers in use at such establishments and the frequency with which such containers are scheduled to be serviced. Such charges shall be in an amount established and, from time to time amended, by ordinance as adopted by the town council; the ordinance and amendments thereto shall be kept on file with the town secretary and shall be available for public inspection during regular business hours. 
(b)  Multiple-dwelling units having water billed through a single meter will be billed a single solid waste charge along with the water charge, regardless of the occupancy of such multiple-dwelling units. 
(c)  Multiple-dwelling units classified as senior living complexes, fraternities, sororities, boardinghouses, and dormitories shall be billed as a commercial service. Any multiple-dwelling unit which requires more than the minimum service described in this article is subject to having the charges increased by the director of public works based upon the additional required service. 
(d)  Multifamily dwellings will be billed the residential fee for household hazardous waste based on occupancy levels and residents of the multifamily units can use the services accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 1405, § 2, 8-1-2017) 
Sec 102-435.3. - Containers furnished by the town's franchisee for multifamily dwellings. 
(a)  The director of public works, in cooperation with the town's franchisee, will designate the placement of containers for use by multifamily dwellings in accordance with the waste storage needs of the individual facility. All facilities for which containers are so provided by the town's franchisee shall place all refuse, waste and recyclable materials in such designated containers and shall not place waste in any containers except those designated by the director public works. It shall be unlawful for any person using such containers to leave the lid open after placing refuse or recyclable material therein. 
(b)  Enclosures are required for dumpsters, in accordance with the town's zoning regulations for multifamily dwellings. 
(c)  Enclosures are required for dumpsters located at all existing multifamily dwellings. Occupants, property management agencies, and owners are required to install a dumpster enclosure. These dumpster enclosures shall be constructed in accordance with the town's zoning regulations. If the multifamily dwelling is a nonconforming structure in regard to the masonry structure requirements, and has less than 75 percent masonry content, the owner may apply for administrative approval for a dumpster enclosure that shall be constructed of a six-foot solid wooden fence with a metal gate. Building permits are required prior to construction for all dumpster enclosures. 
(d)  All enclosures are required to have a ten-foot-wide gate opening to accommodate commercial dumpster trucks. 
(e)  The enclosure requirement will apply to dumpsters provided by the franchisee for recycling purposes on a case by case basis. 
(Ord. No. 1405, § 2, 8-1-2017) 
Sec. 102-435.4. - Collection containers and schedules. 
(a)  Multifamily dwellings shall contract with the town for solid waste collection services and acquire an appropriately sized commercial container at a frequency that prevents the accumulation of waste outside the container and prevents littering or spilling of materials onto public areas or neighboring sites. Collection of multifamily dwelling solid waste shall not be made less than one time per week and recyclables on a scheduled basis as determined by the town's franchisee. 
(b)  Overfilled containers will not be emptied if a safety hazard exits. Owners, or property management companies will be responsible for removing the excess and collection will be rescheduled when the excess material has been removed. 
(c)  The multifamily customer is responsible for providing access to the solid waste and recyclable containers and keeping the area around and on top of the container clear of obstructions so that the container can be serviced as scheduled. If container is blocked and not cleared, service will not be provided. Customer will be responsible for the cost of extra collections required. 
(d)  The multifamily customer will be responsible for odor and insect control around containers. 
(e)  Containers shall not be placed on any sidewalk, street, or other public right-of-way, and shall be placed solely on private property. It shall be unlawful for the owner occupant or person in control of any premises to allow solid waste or recyclable materials to be piled, placed, or accumulated on any sidewalk, street, or other public right-of-way within the town limits. Commercial containers shall be placed on the site in such a manner that the collection vehicle is able to service the container without obstructing public right-of-way. 
(f)  All multifamily customers utilizing a compactor who lease the compactor must lease such compactors from franchisee. Commercial customers shall have the right to purchase compactors from third parties, but must utilize the franchisee for compactor disposal service. 
(g)  All solid waste front load and roll-off containers shall display the name and phone number of the franchisee. 
(h)  Commercial containers owned by the franchisee shall not be marked modified, or damaged by the customer in any way. 
(i)  Commercial construction, remodel, and demolition materials as defined herein must be collected in containers owned by the operator or by the franchisee, including any roll-off, front load, or other containerized unit. 
(j)  Apartment recycling containers. A minimum of one recycling container will be provided for each apartment complex. Apartment complexes with more than 150 units will receive one recycling container per 150 units (example: 600 units = four recycling dumpsters). The recycling container(s) must be readily identifiable as "recycling only" and kept in neat and clean appearance. The recycling container(s) shall be accessible seven days per week, 24 hours per day by apartment residents. 
(k)  The recycling dumpster shall be serviced on a scheduled basis as determined by the town's franchisee. 
(l)  The recycling container shall be a metal receptacle, designed to discourage contamination, bearing contractor's logo, provided by and the property of contractor. The recycling dumpster shall have a minimum capacity of eight yards and be identifiable as "recycling only". It shall be the responsibility of contractor to supply, maintain and deliver the recycling container to apartment units. 
(m)  The town franchisee shall make collections with a minimum of noise and disturbance. Work shall be done in a sanitary manner. Any recyclable materials spilled by contractor shall be picked up immediately by contractor's employees. Contractor shall make available a minimum of one recycling dumpster, slotted to accept the following items: newspapers with slicks, magazines, junk mail, envelopes, cereal boxes, cardboard, chipboard and telephone books, mixed recyclables (plastics #1-7, except 6; aluminum cans, steel cans, glass bottles and containers). 
(Ord. No. 1405, § 2, 8-1-2017) 
Sec. 102-435.5. - Multifamily fees. 
    The monthly fee for solid waste and recyclables collection and disposal services shall be set from time to time by appropriate written resolution ordinance of the town council. Such fee shall include collection and disposal charges, monthly billing charges, franchise fees and applicable sales tax. The monthly fee for such services shall be charged along with water and sewer charges. A penalty for an overdue bill may be charged. The monthly fee for solid waste and recyclables collection and disposal services shall be set from time to time by appropriate written resolution ordinance of the town council. 
(Ord. No. 1405, § 2, 8-1-2017) 
ARTICLE IX. - LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION 

Sec. 102-436. - Definitions. 
    The following words and terms, when used in this article, have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Air gap. A complete physical separation between the free flowing discharge end of a potable water supply pipeline and an open or nonpressure receiving vessel. 
    Atmospheric vacuum breaker. An assembly containing an air inlet valve, a check seat, and an air inlet port. The flow of water into the body causes the air inlet valve to close the air inlet port. When the flow of water stops the air inlet valve falls and forms a check against back-siphonage. At the same time it opens the air inlet port allowing air to enter and satisfy the vacuum. Also known as an atmospheric vacuum breaker back-siphonage prevention assembly. 
    Backflow prevention. The mechanical prevention of reverse flow, or back siphonage, of nonpotable water from an irrigation system into the potable water source. 
    Backflow prevention assembly. Any assembly used to prevent backflow into a potable water system. The type of assembly used is based on the existing or potential degree of health hazard and backflow condition. 
    Completion of irrigation system installation. When the landscape irrigation system has been installed, all minimum standards met, all tests performed, and the irrigator is satisfied that the system is operating correctly. 
    Consulting. The act of providing advice, guidance, review or recommendations related to landscape irrigation systems. 
    Cross-connection. An actual or potential connection between a potable water source and an irrigation system that may contain contaminates or pollutants or any source of water that has been treated to a lesser degree in the treatment process. 
    Design. The act of determining the various elements of a landscape irrigation system that will include, but not be limited to, elements such as collecting site specific information, defining the scope of the project, defining plant watering needs, selecting and laying out emission devices, locating system components, conducting hydraulics calculations, identifying any local regulatory requirements, or scheduling irrigation work at a site. Completion of the various components will result in an irrigation plan. 
    Design pressure. The pressure that is required for an emission device to operate properly. Design pressure is calculated by adding the operating pressure necessary at an emission device to the total of all pressure losses accumulated from an emission device to the water source. 
    Double check valve. An assembly that is composed of two independently acting, approved check valves, including tightly closed resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located resilient seated test cocks. Also known as a double check valve backflow prevention assembly. 
    Emission device. Any device that is contained within an irrigation system and that is used to apply water. Common emission devices in an irrigation system include, but are not limited to, spray and rotary sprinkler heads, and drip irrigation emitters. 
    Employed. Engaged or hired to provide consulting services or perform any activity relating to the sale, design, installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, or service to irrigation systems. A person is employed if that person is in an employer-employee relationship as defined by Internal Revenue Code, 26 United States Code Service, § 3212(d) based on the behavioral control, financial control, and the type of relationship involved in performing employment related tasks. 
    Head-to-head spacing. The spacing of spray or rotary heads equal to the manufacturer's published radius of the head. 
    Health hazard. A cross-connection or potential cross-connection with an irrigation system that involves any substance that may, if introduced into the potable water supply, cause death or illness, spread disease, or have a high probability of causing such effects. 
    Hydraulics. The science of dynamic and static water; the mathematical computation of determining pressure losses and pressure requirements of an irrigation system. 
    Inspector. A licensed plumbing inspector, water district operator, other governmental entity, or irrigation inspector who inspects irrigation systems and performs other enforcement duties for a municipality or water district as an employee or as a contractor. 
    Installer. A person who actually connects an irrigation system to a private or public raw or potable water supply system or any water supply, who is licensed according to Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 30 (relating to occupational licenses and registrations). 
    Irrigation inspector. A person who inspects irrigation systems and performs other enforcement duties for a municipality or water district as an employee or as a contractor and is required to be licensed under Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 30 (relating to occupational licenses and registrations). 
    Irrigation plan. A scaled drawing of a landscape irrigation system which lists required information, the scope of the project, and represents the changes made in the installation of the irrigation system. 
    Irrigation services. Selling, designing, installing, maintaining, altering, repairing, servicing, permitting, providing consulting services regarding, or connecting an irrigation system to a water supply. 
    Irrigation system. An assembly of component parts that is permanently installed for the controlled distribution and conservation of water to irrigate any type of landscape vegetation in any location, and/or to reduce dust or control erosion. This term does not include a system that is used on or by an agricultural operation as defined by V.T.C.A., Agricultural Code, § 251.002. 
    Irrigation technician. A person who works under the supervision of a licensed irrigator to install, maintain, alter, repair, service or supervise installation of an irrigation system, including the connection of such system in or to a private or public, raw or potable water supply system or any water supply, and who is required to be licensed under Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 30 (relating to occupational licenses and registrations). 
    Irrigation zone. A subdivision of an irrigation system with a matched precipitation rate based on plant material type (such as turf, shrubs, or trees), microclimate factors (such as sun/shade ratio), topographic features (such as slope) and soil conditions (such as sand, loam, clay, or combination) or for hydrological control. 
    Irrigator. A person who sells, designs, offers consultations regarding, installs, maintains, alters, repairs, services or supervises the installation of an irrigation system, including the connection of such system to a private or public, raw or potable water supply system or any water supply, and who is required to be licensed under Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 30. 
    Irrigator-in-charge. The irrigator responsible for all irrigation work performed by an exempt business owner, including, but not limited to obtaining permits, developing design plans, supervising the work of other irrigators or irrigation technicians, and installing, selling, maintaining, altering, repairing, or servicing a landscape irrigation system. 
    Landscape irrigation. The science of applying the necessary amount of water to promote or sustain healthy growth of plant material or turf. 
    License. An occupational license that is issued by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality under Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 30 to an individual that authorizes the individual to engage in an activity that is covered by Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 30. 
    Mainline. A pipe within an irrigation system that delivers water from the water source to the individual zone valves. 
    Maintenance checklist. A document made available to the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative that contains information regarding the operation and maintenance of the irrigation system, including, but not limited to: Checking and repairing the irrigation system, setting the automatic controller, checking the rain or moisture sensor, cleaning filters, pruning grass and plants away from irrigation emitters, using and operating the irrigation system, the precipitation rates of each irrigation zone within the system, any water conservation measures currently in effect from the water purveyor, the name of the water purveyor, a suggested seasonal or monthly watering schedule based on current evapotranspiration data for the geographic region, and the minimum water requirements for the plant material in each zone based on the soil type and plant material where the system is installed. 
    Major maintenance, alteration, repair or service. Any activity that involves opening to the atmosphere the irrigation mainline at any point prior to the discharge side of any irrigation zone control valve. This includes, but is not limited to, repairing or connecting into a main supply pipe, replacing a zone control valve, or repairing a zone control valve in a manner that opens the system to the atmosphere. 
    Master valve. A remote control valve located after the backflow prevention device that controls the flow of water to the irrigation system mainline. 
    Matched precipitation rate. The condition in which all sprinkler heads within an irrigation zone apply water at the same rate. 
    New installation. An irrigation system installed at a location where one did not previously exist. 
    Nonhealth hazard. A cross-connection or potential cross-connection from a landscape irrigation system that involves any substance that generally would not be a health hazard but would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable if introduced into the potable water supply. 
    Nonpotable water. Water that is not suitable for human consumption. Nonpotable water sources include, but are not limited to, irrigation systems, lakes, ponds, streams, gray water that is discharged from washing machines, dishwashers or other appliances, water vapor condensate from cooling towers, reclaimed water, and harvested rainwater. 
    Pass-through contract. A written contract between a contractor or builder and a licensed irrigator or exempt business owner to perform part or all of the irrigation services relating to an irrigation system. 
    Potable water. Water that is suitable for human consumption. 
    Pressure vacuum breaker. An assembly containing an independently operating internally loaded check valve and an independently operating loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. Also known as a pressure vacuum breaker back-siphonage prevention assembly. 
    Reclaimed water. Domestic or municipal wastewater which has been treated to a quality suitable for beneficial use, such as landscape irrigation. 
    Records of landscape irrigation activities. The irrigation plans, contracts, warranty information, invoices, copies of permits, and other documents that relate to the installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of a landscape irrigation system. 
    Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. An assembly containing two independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically operating mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the two check valves and below the first check valve. 
    Static water pressure. The pressure of water when it is not moving. 
    Supervision. The on-the-job oversight and direction by a licensed irrigator who is fulfilling his or her professional responsibility to the client and/or employer in compliance with local or state requirements. Also a licensed installer working under the direction of a licensed irrigator or beginning January 1, 2009, an irrigation technician who is working under the direction of a licensed irrigator to install, maintain, alter, repair or service an irrigation system. 
    Water conservation. The design, installation, service, and operation of an irrigation system in a manner that prevents the waste of water, promotes the most efficient use of water, and applies the least amount of water that is required to maintain healthy individual plant material or turf, reduce dust, and control erosion. 
    Zone flow. A measurement, in gallons per minute or gallons per hour, of the actual flow of water through a zone valve, calculated by individually opening each zone valve and obtaining a valid reading after the pressure has stabilized. For design purposes, the zone flow is the total flow of all nozzles in the zone at a specific pressure. 
    Zone valve. An automatic valve that controls a single zone of a landscape irrigation system. 
(Ord. No. 1030, § 2, 12-21-2010) 
Sec. 102-437. - Valid license required. 
    Any person who connects an irrigation system to the water supply within the town or the town's extraterritorial jurisdiction, commonly referred to as the ETJ, must hold a valid license, as defined by Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 30 and required by V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 1903, or as defined by Chapter 365, Title 22 of the Texas Administrative Code and required by V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 1301. 
    Exemptions. A property owner is not required to be licensed in accordance with V.T.C.A., Occupations Code tit. 12, § 1903.002(c)(1) if he or she is performing irrigation work in a building or on a premises owned or occupied by the person as the person's home. A home or property owner who installs an irrigation system must meet the standards contained in Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 344 regarding spacing, water pressure, spraying water over impervious materials, rain or moisture shut-off devices or other technology, backflow prevention and isolation valves. The town may, at any point, adopt more stringent requirements for a home or property owner who installs an irrigation system. See V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1903.002 for other exemptions to the licensing requirement. 
(Ord. No. 1030, § 2, 12-21-2010) 
Sec. 102-438. - Permit required. 
    Any person installing an irrigation system within the territorial limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction of the town is required to obtain a permit from the town's building safety division of the community development department. Any plan approved for a permit must be in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
    Exemptions. 
(1)  An irrigation system that is that an on-site sewage disposal system, as defined by V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 355.002; or 
(2)  An irrigation system used on or by an agricultural operation as defined by V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code § 251.002. 
(Ord. No. 1030, § 2, 12-21-2010) 
Sec. 102-439. - Backflow prevention methods and devices. 
(a)  Any irrigation system that is connected to the potable water supply must be connected through a backflow prevention method approved by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). The backflow prevention device must be approved by the American Society of Sanitary Engineers; or the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, University of Southern California; or the Uniform Plumbing Code; or any other laboratory that has equivalent capabilities for both the laboratory and field evaluation of backflow prevention assemblies. The backflow prevention device must be installed in accordance with the laboratory approval standards or if the approval does not include specific installation information, the manufacturer's current published recommendations. 
(b)  If conditions that present a health hazard exist, one of the following methods must be used to prevent backflow: 
(1)  An air gap may be used if: 
a.  There is an unobstructed physical separation; and 
b.  The distance from the lowest point of the water supply outlet to the flood rim of the fixture or assembly into which the outlet discharges is at least one inch or twice the diameter of the water supply outlet, whichever is greater. 
(2)  Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies may be used if: 
a.  The device is installed at a minimum of 12 inches above ground in a location that will ensure that the assembly will not be submerged; and 
b.  Drainage is provided for any water that may be discharged through the assembly relief valve. 
(3)  Pressure vacuum breakers may be used if: 
a.  No back-pressure condition will occur; and 
b.  The device is installed at a minimum of 12 inches above any downstream piping and the highest downstream opening. Pop-up sprinklers are measured from the retracted position from the top of the sprinkler. 
(4)  Atmospheric vacuum breakers may be used if: 
a.  No back-pressure will be present; 
b.  There are no shutoff valves downstream from the atmospheric vacuum breaker; 
c.  The device is installed at a minimum of six inches above any downstream piping and the highest downstream opening. Pop-up sprinklers are measured from the retracted position from the top of the sprinkler; 
d.  There is no continuous pressure on the supply side of the atmospheric vacuum breaker for more than 12 hours in any 24-hour period; and 
e.  A separate atmospheric vacuum breaker is installed on the discharge side of each irrigation control valve, between the valve and all the emission devices that the valve controls. 
(c)  Backflow prevention devices used in applications designated as health hazards must be tested upon installation and annually thereafter. 
(d)  If there are no conditions that present a health hazard, double check valve backflow prevention assemblies may be used to prevent backflow if the device is tested upon installation and test cocks are used for testing only. 
(e)  If a double check valve is installed below ground: 
(1)  Test cocks must be plugged, except when the double check valve is being tested; 
(2)  Test cock plugs must be threaded, watertight, and made of nonferrous material; 
(3)  A y-type strainer is installed on the inlet side of the double check valve; 
(4)  There must be a clearance between any fill material and the bottom of the double check valve to allow space for testing and repair; and 
(5)  There must be space on the side of the double check valve to test and repair the double check valve. 
(f)  If an existing irrigation system without a backflow-prevention assembly requires major maintenance, alteration, repair, or service, the system must be connected to the potable water supply through an approved, properly installed backflow prevention method before any major maintenance, alteration, repair, or service is performed. 
(g)  If an irrigation system is connected to a potable water supply through a double check valve, pressure vacuum breaker, or reduced pressure principle backflow assembly and includes an automatic master valve on the system, the automatic master valve must be installed on the discharge side of the backflow prevention assembly. 
(h)  The irrigator shall ensure the backflow prevention device is tested by a licensed backflow prevention assembly tester prior to being placed in service and the test results provided to the local water purveyor and the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative within ten business days of testing of the backflow prevention device. 
(Ord. No. 1030, § 2, 12-21-2010) 
Sec. 102-440. - Specific conditions and cross-connection control. 
(a)  Before any chemical is added to an irrigation system connected to the potable water supply, the irrigation system must be connected through a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or air gap. 
(b)  Connection of any additional water source to an irrigation system that is connected to the potable water supply can only be done if the irrigation system is connected to the potable water supply through a reduced-pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or an air gap. Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested upon installation and annually thereafter. 
(c)  If an irrigation system supplied by any source other than the public water supply is installed, whether connected to the public supply or not, a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device must be installed immediately (within five feet) downstream of the public water supply point meter assembly. 
(d)  Irrigation system components with chemical additives induced by aspiration, injection, or emission system connected to any potable water supply must be connected through a reduced pressure principle backflow device. 
(e)  If an irrigation system is designed or installed on a property that is served by an on-site sewage facility, as defined in Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 285, then: 
(1)  All irrigation piping and valves must meet the separation distances from the on-site sewage facilities system as required for a private water line in Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Section 285.91(10); 
(2)  Any connections using a private or public potable water source that is not the town's potable water system must be connected to the water source through a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly as defined in Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Section 344.50; and 
(3)  Any water from the irrigation system that is applied to the surface of the area utilized by the on-site sewage facility system must be controlled on a separate irrigation zone or zones so as to allow complete control of any irrigation to that area so that there will not be excess water that would prevent the on-site sewage facilities system from operating effectively. 
(Ord. No. 1030, § 2, 12-21-2010) 
Sec. 102-441. - Water conservation. 
    All irrigation systems shall be designed, installed, maintained, altered, repaired, serviced, and operated in a manner that will promote water conservation as defined in the definitions section of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1030, § 2, 12-21-2010) 
Sec. 102-442. - Irrigation plan design: minimum standards. 
(a)  An irrigator shall prepare an irrigation plan for each site where a new irrigation system will be installed. A paper or electronic copy of the irrigation plan must be on the job site at all times during the installation of the irrigation system. A drawing showing the actual installation of the system is due to each irrigation system owner after all new irrigation system installations. During the installation of the irrigation system, variances from the original plan may be authorized by the licensed irrigator if the variance from the plan does not: 
(1)  Diminish the operational integrity of the irrigation system; 
(2)  Violate any requirements of this article; and 
(3)  Go unnoted in red on the irrigation plan. 
(b)  The irrigation plan must include complete coverage of the area to be irrigated. If a system does not provide complete coverage of the area to be irrigated, it must be noted on the irrigation plan. 
(c)  All irrigation plans used for construction must be drawn to scale. The plan must include, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  The irrigator's seal, signature, and date of signing; 
(2)  All major physical features and the boundaries of the areas to be watered; 
(3)  A north arrow; 
(4)  A legend; 
(5)  The zone flow measurement for each zone; 
(6)  Location and type of each: 
a.  Controller; and 
b.  Sensor (for example, but not limited to, rain, moisture, wind, flow, or freeze); 
(7)  Location, type, and size of each: 
a.  Water source, such as, but not limited to a water meter and point(s) of connection; 
b.  Backflow prevention device; 
c.  Water emission device, including, but not limited to, spray heads, rotary sprinkler heads, quick-couplers, bubblers, drip, or micro-sprays; 
d.  Valve, including but not limited to, zone valves, master valves, and isolation valves; 
e.  Pressure regulation component; and 
f.  Mainline and lateral piping. 
(8)  The scale used; and 
(9)  The design pressure. 
(Ord. No. 1030, § 2, 12-21-2010) 
Sec. 102-443. - Design and installation: minimum requirements. 
(a)  No irrigation design or installation shall require the use of any component, including the water meter, in a way which exceeds the manufacturer's published performance limitations for the component. 
(b)  Spacing. 
(1)  The maximum spacing between emission devices must not exceed the manufacturer's published radius or spacing of the device(s). The radius or spacing is determined by referring to the manufacturer's published specifications for a specific emission device at a specific operating pressure. 
(2)  New irrigation systems shall not utilize above ground spray emission devices in landscapes that are less than 48 inches not including the impervious surfaces in either length or width and which contain impervious pedestrian or vehicular traffic surfaces along two or more perimeters. If pop-up sprays or rotary sprinkler heads are used in a new irrigation system, the sprinkler heads must direct flow away from any adjacent surface and shall not be installed closer than four inches from a hardscape, such as, but not limited to, a building foundation, fence, concrete, asphalt, pavers, or stones set with mortar. 
(3)  Narrow paved walkways, jogging paths, golf cart paths or other small areas located in cemeteries, parks, golf courses or other public areas may be exempted from this requirement if the runoff drains into a landscaped area. 
(c)  Water pressure. Emission devices must be installed to operate at the minimum and not above the maximum sprinkler head pressure as published by the manufacturer for the nozzle and head spacing that is used. Methods to achieve the water pressure requirements include, but are not limited to, flow control valves, a pressure regulator, or pressure compensating spray heads. 
(d)  Piping. Piping in irrigation systems must be designed and installed so that the flow of water in the pipe will not exceed a velocity of five feet per second for polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe. 
(e)  Irrigation zones. Irrigation systems shall have separate zones based on plant material type, microclimate factors, topographic features, soil conditions, and hydrological requirements. 
(f)  Matched precipitation rate. Zones must be designed and installed so that all of the emission devices in that zone irrigate at the same precipitation rate. 
(g)  Irrigation systems shall not spray water over surfaces made of concrete, asphalt, brick, wood, stones set with mortar, or any other impervious material, such as, but not limited to, walls, fences, sidewalks, streets, etc. 
(h)  Master valve. When provided, a master valve shall be installed on the discharge side of the backflow prevention device on all new installations. 
(i)  PVC pipe primer solvent. All new irrigation systems that are installed using PVC pipe and fittings shall be primed with a colored primer prior to applying the PVC cement in accordance with the International Plumbing Code (Section 605). 
(j)  Rain or moisture or freeze shut-off devices or other technology. All new automatically controlled irrigation systems must include sensors or other technology designed to inhibit or interrupt operation of the irrigation system during periods of freezing weather or moisture or rainfall. Freeze, rain or moisture shut-off technology must be installed according to the manufacturer's published recommendations. Repairs to existing automatic irrigation systems that require replacement of an existing controller must include a sensor or other technology designed to inhibit or interrupt operation of the irrigation system during periods of freezing weather or moisture or rainfall. 
(k)  Isolation valve. All new irrigation systems must include an isolation valve between the water meter and the backflow prevention device. 
(l)  Depth coverage of piping. Piping in all irrigation systems must be installed according to the manufacturer's published specifications for depth coverage of piping. 
(1)  If the manufacturer has not published specifications for depth coverage of piping, the piping must be installed to provide minimum depth coverage of six inches of select backfill, between the top of the pipe and the natural grade of the topsoil. All portions of the irrigation system that fail to meet this standard must be noted on the irrigation plan. If the area being irrigated has rock at a depth of six inches or less, select backfill may be mounded over the pipe. Mounding must be noted on the irrigation plan and discussed with the irrigation system owner or owner's representative to address any safety issues. 
(2)  If a utility, manmade structure, or roots create an unavoidable obstacle, which makes the six-inch depth coverage requirement impractical, the piping shall be installed to provide a minimum of two inches of select backfill between the top of the pipe and the natural grade of the topsoil. 
(3)  All trenches and holes created during installation of an irrigation system must be backfilled and compacted to the original grade. 
(m)  Wiring irrigation systems. 
(1)  Underground electrical wiring used to connect an automatic controller to any electrical component of the irrigation system must be listed by Underwriters Laboratories as acceptable for burial underground. 
(2)  Electrical wiring that connects any electrical components of an irrigation system must be sized according to the manufacturer's recommendation. 
(3)  Electrical wire splices which may be exposed to moisture must be waterproof as certified by the wire splice manufacturer. 
(4)  Underground electrical wiring that connects an automatic controller to any electrical component of the irrigation system must be buried with a minimum of six inches of select backfill. 
(n)  Water contained within the piping of an irrigation system is deemed to be nonpotable. No drinking or domestic water usage, such as, but not limited to, filling swimming pools or decorative fountains, shall be connected to an irrigation system. If a hose bib (an outdoor water faucet that has hose threads on the spout) is connected to an irrigation system for the purpose of providing supplemental water to an area, the hose bib must be installed using a quick coupler key on a quick coupler installed in a covered purple valve box and the hose bib and any hoses connected to the bib must be labeled "non potable, not safe for drinking." An isolation valve must be installed upstream of a quick coupler connecting a hose bib to an irrigation system. 
(o)  Beginning January 1, 2011, either a licensed irrigator or a licensed irrigation technician shall be on-site at all times while the landscape irrigation system is being installed. When an irrigator is not on-site, the irrigator shall be responsible for ensuring that a licensed irrigation technician is on-site to supervise the installation of the irrigation system. 
(Ord. No. 1030, § 2, 12-21-2010) 
Sec. 102-444. - Completion of irrigation system installation. 
    Upon completion of the irrigation system, the irrigator or irrigation technician who provided supervision for the on-site installation shall be required to complete four items: 
(1)  A final "walk through" with the irrigation system's owner or the owner's representative to explain the operation of the system; 
(2)  The maintenance checklist on which the irrigator or irrigation technician shall obtain the signature of the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative and shall sign, date, and seal the checklist. If the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative is unwilling or unable to sign the maintenance checklist, the irrigator shall note the time and date of the refusal on the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative's signature line. The irrigation system owner or owner's representative will be given the original maintenance checklist and a duplicate copy of the maintenance checklist shall be maintained by the irrigator. The items on the maintenance checklist shall include but are not limited to: 
a.  The manufacturer's manual for the automatic controller, if the system is automatic; 
b.  The number and labeling of all zones shall be listed, and a copy of this list shall be placed within the controller; 
c.  A seasonal (spring, summer, fall, winter) watering schedule based on either current/real time evapotranspiration or monthly historical reference evapotranspiration (historical ET) data, monthly effective rainfall estimates, plant landscape coefficient factors, and site factors; 
d.  A list of components, such as the nozzle, or pump filters, and other such components; that require maintenance and the recommended frequency for the service; and 
e.  The statement, "This irrigation system has been installed in accordance with all applicable state and local laws, ordinances, rules, regulations or orders. I have tested the system and determined that it has been installed according to the Irrigation Plan and is properly adjusted for the most efficient application of water at this time." 
(3)  A permanent sticker which contains the irrigator's name, license number, company name, telephone number and the dates of the warranty period shall be affixed to each automatic controller installed by the irrigator or irrigation technician. If the irrigation system is manual, the sticker shall be affixed to the original maintenance checklist. The information contained on the sticker must be printed with waterproof ink and include: 
(4)  The irrigation plan indicating the actual installation of the system must be provided to the irrigation system's owner or owner representative. 
(Ord. No. 1030, § 2, 12-21-2010) 
Sec. 102-445. - Maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of irrigation systems. 
(a)  The licensed irrigator is responsible for all work that the irrigator performed during the maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of an irrigation system during the warranty period. The irrigator or business owner is not responsible for the professional negligence of any other irrigator who subsequently conducts any irrigation service on the same irrigation system. 
(b)  All trenches and holes created during the maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of an irrigation system must be returned to the original grade with compacted select backfill. 
(c)  Colored PVC pipe primer solvent must be used on all pipes and fittings used in the maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of an irrigation system in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code (Section 316) or the International Plumbing Code (Section 605). 
(d)  When maintenance, alteration, repair or service of an irrigation system involves excavation work at the water meter or backflow prevention device, an isolation valve shall be installed, if an isolation valve is not present. 
(Ord. No. 1030, § 2, 12-21-2010) 
Sec. 102-446. - Reclaimed water. 
    Reclaimed water may be utilized in landscape irrigation systems if: 
(1)  There is no direct contact with edible crops, unless the crop is pasteurized before consumption; 
(2)  The irrigation system does not spray water across property lines that do not belong to the irrigation system's owner; 
(3)  The irrigation system is installed using purple components; 
(4)  An irrigation system supplied by reclaimed water is approved, a reduced pressure principle backflow assembly shall be installed on the domestic water supply within five feet of the meter assembly, or as approved by the water purveyor, and tested upon installation and annually thereafter; 
(5)  A minimum of an eight-inch by eight-inch sign, in English and Spanish, is prominently posted on/in the area that is being irrigated, that reads, "RECLAIMED WATER - DO NOT DRINK" and "AGUA DE RECUPERACION - NO BEBER"; and 
(6)  Backflow prevention on the reclaimed water supply line shall be in accordance with the regulations of the town's water provider. 
(Ord. No. 1030, § 2, 12-21-2010) 
Sec. 102-447. - Advertisement requirements. 
    All vehicles used in the performance of irrigation installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, or service must display the irrigator's license number in the form of "LI______" in a contrasting color of block letters at least two inches high, on both sides of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1030, § 2, 12-21-2010) 
Sec. 102-448. - Duties and responsibilities of town inspectors. 
    A town inspector shall enforce the ordinance of the town, and shall be responsible for: 
(1)  Verifying that the appropriate permits have been obtained for an irrigation system and that the irrigator and installer or irrigation technician, if applicable, are licensed; 
(2)  Inspecting the irrigation system; 
(3)  Determining that the irrigation system complies with the requirements of this chapter; 
(4)  Determining that the appropriate backflow prevention device was installed, tested, and test results provided to the town; 
(5)  Investigating complaints related to irrigation system installation, maintenance, alteration, repairs, or service of an irrigation system and advertisement of irrigation services; and 
(6)  Maintaining records according to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1030, § 2, 12-21-2010) 
Sec. 102-449. - Items not covered by this article. 
    Any item not covered by this article and required by law shall be governed by the Texas Occupations Code, the Texas Water Code, Title 30 of the Texas Administrative Code, and any other applicable state statute or Texas Commission on Environmental Quality Rule. 
(Ord. No. 1030, § 2, 12-21-2010) 
Sec. 102-450. - Fees. 
    The fee for this permit for each individual residential irrigation system shall be $185.00 payable to the Town of Little Elm and submitted to the building safety division at the time of application. The nonresidential fee for each individual irrigation system will be $250.00 for the first controller, an additional $175.00 for a second controller, with the total not to exceed $500.00 for any individual system and shall be submitted likewise. This fee shall include plan review and approval and inspections. Seventy-five dollars will be charged for all failed inspections. This fee may increase in the future, per the community development comprehensive fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 1030, § 2, 12-21-2010) 
Sec. 102-451. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The town shall have the power to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter as may be required by governing law. Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of this Code, or fails to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, is subject to suit for injunctive relief as well as prosecution for criminal violations. Any violation of the ordinance codified in this chapter is declared to be a nuisance. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum not exceeding $2,000.00. Each day that a provision of this chapter is violated shall constitute a separate offense. An offense under this chapter is a class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to $2,000.00. 
(c)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a waiver of the town's right to bring a civil action to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to seek remedies as allowed by law, including, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Injunctive relief to prevent specific conduct that violates the ordinance or to require specific conduct that is necessary for compliance with the ordinance; and 
(2)  Other available relief. 
(Ord. No. 1030, § 2, 12-21-2010) 
Secs. 102-452-102-475. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - WATER WELL DRILLING 

Sec. 102-476. - Definitions. 
    Approved water supply source means Little Elm's water system. 
    Backflow means the reversal of flow of water or mixtures of water and other liquids, gases or other substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply from any sources other than an approved water supply source. 
    Backflow prevention assembly tester means an individual licensed in accordance with Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) rules, as amended, for the purpose of testing backflow prevention assemblies and registered with the Town of Little Elm as a backflow prevention assembly tester. 
    Building official means the officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of this article or his or her designee, which may include members of other town departments as determined by the building official. 
    Construction permit means a permit issued by the town to a well driller licensed by the state to construct, install, repair or overhaul a water well. 
    Cross-connection means a point in the plumbing system where the public water supply is connected directly, or has the potential of being connected, to a source of nonpotable substance that is not part of the potable water supply, including water wells. Any actual or potential physical connection between a potable water line and any pipe, vessel or machine containing a nonpotable fluid, such that is it possible for the nonpotable fluid to enter into the potable water system by backflow. This connection may be temporary or permanent, potential or actual, indirect or direct. 
    Director of public works means the Director of Public Works for Little Elm or his or her designee. 
    Existing well means a water well or water system which had been installed prior to the effective date of this article. 
    Nonpotable water means a water supply, which has not been approved for human consumption by TCEQ and the town. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
    Potable water means any public water supply, which has been investigated and approved by TCEQ and the town as satisfactory for drinking, culinary and domestic purposes. 
    Premises or property means any property real, improved or personal that is connected to a Town of Little Elm approved water supply source. 
    Public sewer means a common sewer directly controlled by public authority. 
    Reduced pressure principal backflow prevention assembly (RPZ) means a backflow prevention assembly consisting of two independently acting check valves, internally force-loaded to a normally closed position and separated by an intermediate chamber (or zone) in which there is an automatic relief means of venting to the atmosphere, internally loaded to a normally open position between two tightly closing shutoff valves and with a means for testing for tightness of the checks and opening of the relief means. 
    Sanitary sewer means a pipe which carried wastewater and excludes storm, surface water and groundwater. 
    Septic tank means a watertight receptacle which receives the discharge of a drainage system or part thereof, which is designated and constructed so as to separate solids from the liquid, digest organic matter through a period of detention, and allow the liquids to discharge into the soil outside of the tank through a drain field, disposal or perforated piping. 
    Testing or reporting deficiencies means incomplete, or inaccurate backflow prevention assembly test results or reports filed with the town pursuant to this article, use of inaccurate gauges; or the use of improper operational certification methods. 
    Town engineer means the person designated as the town engineer and registered as a professional engineer in the State of Texas. 
    Water main means a water distribution pipe for public or community use. 
    Water well means bored wells, dug wells and driven wells developed into the underground soils, which are to produce water for private use. Water wells are prohibited unless approved under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1078, § 2, 10-18-2011) 
Sec. 102-477. - Permits and licenses. 
(a)  State license required. Construction of water wells shall be performed only by those holding a valid water well driller's license issued by the State of Texas. The state license number shall be displayed during construction at the site of the work. The number shall be clearly readable from the nearest traveled public roadway. Water well drillers must hold a current contractor registration with the town and be in good standing. In addition, the approved permit issued by the town shall be displayed during construction at the site of the work and remain on-site until a final inspection is obtained. 
(b)  Construction permit and registration required. Persons who wish to construct, repair or overhaul water wells in the town must obtain the necessary contractor registration and construction permits as provided for in this article and other applicable ordinances. "Overhaul" and "repair" means work that is not considered routine maintenance. All workmanship and materials shall meet the requirements of this article in regard to the drilling, construction, location and operations of such wells and systems. The forms, plans and other information and documentation required to be provided under this article may be approved by the building official or his or her designees only if all provisions of this article are complied with. 
(c)  Construction permit not required. Construction permits are not required for routine maintenance of water wells. It is the well driller's and well owner's responsibility to notify the building official of routine maintenance prior to the maintenance being performed, and that official, or his designee, will determine if the work to be done may be classified as routine maintenance. 
(d)  Construction permits not transferable. Each construction permit issued under this article shall be specific to the property and shall be obtained by the well driller No such construction permit shall be assigned or transferred to another person, and no person shall permit another person to obtain a construction permit in his/her name or permit any new well construction, repair or overhaul work to be performed under his/her construction permit other than a person authorized to do the same. 
(e)  Issuance of construction permit. The building official, or his or her designee, shall issue all construction permits in accordance with the provisions and requirements of this article and other applicable ordinances. Incomplete applications or applications that do not meet the requirements of this article shall be denied. The decision of the building official shall be final. All applications for permits shall be submitted using a standard form issued by the building inspection department. The application shall provide the following information: 
(1)  Company name, address and telephone number of the well driller; 
(2)  Well driller's State of Texas license number; 
(3)  Name, address, legal description and telephone number of property owner; 
(4)  Company name and State of Texas license number of the assigned electrical contractor who must be registered to work in the Town of Little Elm; 
(5)  Company name and State of Texas license number of the assigned plumbing contractor who must be registered to work in the Town of Little Elm; 
(6)  Company name and State of Texas license number of the assigned irrigation contractor (if applicable) who must be registered to work in the Town of Little Elm; 
(7)  A plan of the property that shows the location of the proposed water well, all buildings, functioning septic tanks, drain fields and other significant structures. The plan shall also show the location of structures and adjacent property if within ten feet of the property line. All setbacks and dimensions shall be shown to be in conformance with section 102-490 of this article; 
(8)  Any other information deemed necessary by the town. 
(f)  Duration of construction permits. Every construction permit issued under the provisions of this article shall expire 180 days after the date issued. In every case where a permit is expired, a new permit shall be obtained before any work is resumed. Any work performed pursuant to an expired permit shall be considered work performed without a permit. 
(g)  False statement or bad faith. Any person who shall willfully make any false statement in order to obtain a construction permit shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalty provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 1078, § 2, 10-18-2011) 
Sec. 102-478. - Offenses and penalties related to permits and licenses. 
    A person commits an offense if he recklessly or negligently violates or fails to comply with the following subsections of this article: 
(1)  Section 102-477, subsections (a), (b), (c), (d), (f), (g). 
(Ord. No. 1078, § 2, 10-18-2011) 
Sec. 102-479. - Fees. 
(a)  Permit and inspection fees. The permit and inspection fees provided in this article shall be paid to the town before the issuance of a permit and before any work is started. Fees shall not be collected prior to permit approval. Inspection and re-inspection fees shall be in accordance with the town's approved fee schedule, as amended. 
(b)  Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this article has been commenced or completed without first obtaining a permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. An investigative fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be double the amount of the permit fee set by the town's approved fee schedule, as amended. The payment of such investigative fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all provisions of this article, nor from any penalty prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 1078, § 2, 10-18-2011) 
Sec. 102-480. - Well completion, inspection and testing. 
(a)  The building official or his or her designee(s) shall have the right, at reasonable times, to enter the property for the purpose of inspections to insure compliance with this article. 
(b)  Upon completion of the well, the well driller shall immediately furnish the building official with a copy of the driller's report. Any well that is not completed shall be sealed and considered a plugged or an abandoned well in accordance with rules, regulations and statutes of the State of Texas. 
(c)  The owner of a well shall have a backflow assembly test completed, immediately upon installation, annually and after any repair to the assembly. Only a state licensed backflow prevention assembly tester registered with the town shall perform the test. A report, on a town approved form, shall be submitted immediately to the department of public works upon the completion of each test. 
(d)  Each completed backflow assembly test form, together with the records of such tests, repairs, or replacements, shall be received by the public works department within ten calendar days after the testing, repair, or replacement by the licensed tester. If an assembly fails, the water supply shall not be restored until the assembly is repaired or replaced and retested and passes the test. A well shall not be operated without having passed the backflow assembly test. 
(Ord. No. 1078, § 2, 10-18-2011) 
Sec. 102-481. - Offenses and penalties related to testing, completion and inspections. 
    A person commits an offense if he recklessly or negligently: 
(1)  Fails to obtain any permit described in this article. 
(2)  Fails to permit an inspection of the well pursuant to subsection 102-480(a). 
(3)  Fails to provide the building official with a copy of the driller's report pursuant to subsection 102-480(b). 
(4)  Fails to seal and plug an incomplete or abandoned well as required by subsection 102-480(b). 
(5)  Fails to provide a copy of the backflow assembly test report within ten calendar days as required by subsection 102-480(d). 
(6)  Performs a backflow assembly test without being licensed and registered as required in subsection 102-480(c). 
(7)  Operates a well without a current successful backflow test report on file with town. 
(Ord. No. 1078, § 2, 10-18-2011) 
Sec. 102-482. - Construction requirements. 
(a)  Electrical. One hundred twenty volt ground fault circuit interrupting ("GFCI") receptacle shall be installed immediately adjacent to the well equipment to allow for maintenance work on the equipment or the use of a freeze protection device. 
(b)  Freeze protection. Adequate provisions must be made to protect piping from freezing by insulation or heat or both on all water wells. The RPZ relief valve must not be enclosed. 
(c)  Backflow protection. An RPZ is the only approved backflow prevention assembly allowed on properties located within Little Elm, its ETJ or other premises. The RPZ is to be installed on all properties which contain a well. 
(d)  Casing. A casing of steel or other approved material shall be provided to prevent caving of the formations penetrated and also to ensure protection of water supply from contamination by water from shallow strata. The wall shall be cased from the bottom of the drilled hole to 24 inches above the finish grade or more if required to keep surface water from entering casing. The well casing shall be cemented in place and sealed to protect the underground water formation from potential contamination resulting from surface water or individual waste disposal systems (i.e., septic tanks). 
(e)  Well seal. The annular space between the drilled hole and the well casing shall be sealed with concrete or grout for a depth of at least ten feet above the water producing formation. The casing shall be covered at the ground with a concrete slab no less than 24 inches by 24 inches by 12 inches in thickness. The top of the slab shall protrude six inches above finished grade and shall be sloped away from the casing. The top of the casing shall be provided with a suitable well seal to prevent contamination of the well. If a vent is provided on the casing, it shall be equipped with an elbow turned downward and screened with a 16 (gauge)-mesh screen. 
(f)  Abandonment of wells. Permanently abandoned wells shall be plugged per TCEQ requirements and a compliance report shall be submitted to the director of public works. Abandoned wells shall not be used for the disposal of wastewater, septic tank effluent, or other wastes. 
(g)  Screening. The water bearing formation shall be screened to control, among other similar conditions, the flow or production of sands and formation materials. 
(h)  Compliance with Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation (TDLR) rules and regulations. Permittee shall comply with any and all TDLR rules and regulations and other governing state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 1078, § 2, 10-18-2011) 
Sec. 102-483. - Offenses and penalties related to construction requirements. 
    A person commits an offense if he recklessly or negligently fails to comply with any of the requirements in section 102-482, subsections (a) through (h). 
(Ord. No. 1078, § 2, 10-18-2011) 
Sec. 102-484. - Applicability of state regulations. 
    The regulations of the TDLR and the Texas Water Well Drillers Act, as existing or as may be amended as they pertain to the construction of water wells, shall be and are hereby incorporated into this article and must be strictly complied with. 
(Ord. No. 1078, § 2, 10-18-2011) 
Sec. 102-485. - Commercial use. 
    It shall be unlawful for a commercial water well to be used for domestic (household) use or for consumption by the public. 
(Ord. No. 1078, § 2, 10-18-2011) 
Sec. 102.486. - Irrigation use only. 
    Any water well must be constructed in accordance with the provisions of this article and may be used only for irrigation purposes. It shall be unlawful for a water well to be used for domestic (potable water) use. 
(Ord. No. 1078, § 2, 10-18-2011) 
Sec. 102-487. - Location. 
(a)  Water wells shall be constructed no closer to property lines or buildings than the following distances: 
(1)  Not allowed within the front yard setback; 
(2)  Not allowed within the side yard setback; 
(3)  Rear property lines: Ten feet; 
(4)  Buildings: Ten feet; 
(5)  Power lines: 30 feet; 
(6)  Functioning septic tanks and drain fields: 150 feet; 
(7)  Functioning septic tanks and drain fields: 50 feet; if well is concrete cased; 
(8)  Functioning septic spray heads/soil absorption area: 80 feet; 
(9)  Barns and animal pens: 150 feet; and 
(10)  Permanent derricks and towers: No closer than 40 feet to side property lines. 
(b)  Existing wells currently in use as of the effective date of this article do not have to comply with the location restrictions in subsection 102-487(a). Any existing well that is not in use as of the effective date of this article may not be reactivated unless it is in compliance with the location restrictions in subsection 102-487(a). 
(c)  The operation of water wells shall be subject to any and all ordinances or statutes regulating noise. 
(Ord. No. 1078, § 2, 10-18-2011) 
Sec. 102-488. - Offenses and penalties related to location. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he recklessly or negligently fails to comply with any of the location restrictions in subsection 102-487(a). Each distinct violation of a distance restriction shall be considered a separate offense. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he recklessly or negligently reactivates an existing well in violation of subsection 102-487(b). 
(Ord. No. 1078, § 2, 10-18-2011) 
Sec. 102-489. - Debris, etc., on public rights-of-way. 
    It shall be unlawful for any debris, dirty water, mud or any other refuse to be dumped or discharged onto public rights-of-way. The drilling operation of any well shall control and dispose of, among other things, all drilling, cuttings, mud and water so as not to create a mud pit or disposal operation at the well site. 
(Ord. No. 1078, § 2, 10-18-2011) 
Sec. 102-490. - No cross-connections allowed. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to connect a water well to the approved water supply system for the town. This shall include both sewage and potable water sources of the town's water supply. 
(Ord. No. 1078, § 2, 10-18-2011) 
Sec. 102-491. - Enforcement. 
    The building official and the public works department are responsible for the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1078, § 2, 10-18-2011) 
Secs. 102-492-102-520. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - MUNICIPAL DRAINAGE UTILITY SYSTEM[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1087, § 2, adopted Nov. 1, 2011, set out provisions intended for use as art. X, §§ 102-476-102-484. Due to said sections already in use, these provisions have been included, at the editor's discretion, as art. XI, §§ 102-521-102-529, as set out herein. 

Sec. 102-521. - Adoption of Act. 
    The Municipal Drainage Utility Systems (Act) (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 552, subch. C), is hereby adopted and shall be fully implemented as provided by the Act and by the town council; and the drainage of the town is hereby found to be a public utility within the meaning of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 1087, § 2, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 102-522. - Drainage service provided. 
    The town will provide stormwater drainage for all real property within its boundaries upon payment of the determined drainage charges, as defined in the Act, and excluding certain exempted real property, and that the fees, assessments, and charges will be based on nondiscriminatory, reasonable, and equitable terms. 
(Ord. No. 1087, § 2, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 102-523. - Billing for service. 
    The town is hereby authorized to bill the drainage charges incurred as a result of the adoption of the Act and through the establishment of the municipal stormwater utility system. The stormwater utility fee shall be separately identified from other public utility billings. 
(Ord. No. 1087, § 2, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 102-524. - Authority to levy charges. 
    The town may levy a schedule of drainage charges upon satisfaction of the procedural requirements provided in the Act and passage of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1087, § 2, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 102-525. - Exemption authorized. 
    The town is authorized to exempt certain entities or persons from all ordinances, resolutions, and rules which the town may adopt from time to time in connection with the adoption of the Act and the establishment of its municipal stormwater utility system. 
(Ord. No. 1087, § 2, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 102-526. - Rates. 
(a)  The rates as provided for in section 102-529 (Municipal Stormwater Utility System Fee Schedule) are hereby established and shall be collected through the town's bill for public utilities pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 552, subch. C, including, without limitation, § 580.003, and other applicable law. 
(b)  The rates established above apply to the accounts maintained by the town for utility services. 
(c)  The income of the stormwater utility fee shall be segregated and completely identifiable in the town accounts. The monies received from utility drainage charges shall be used only for purposes that are directly or indirectly related to the municipal stormwater utility system. 
(d)  The town shall not require a deposit for drainage charges as a precondition to accepting surface flow from benefited property into the town's drainage utility system. 
    All real property of the town will be provided with drainage service on payment of drainage charges. 
(e)  All billings, credits, exemptions and other procedures relating to this charge shall be subject to the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 552, subch. C, including, without limitation, § 580.003. 
(Ord. No. 1087, § 2, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 102-527. - Appeals. 
(a)  Billing and payment disputes for administrative issues shall be subject to appeals procedures used by the town for other utility billing disputes. 
(b)  Appeals for the following reasons shall be directed to the public works director or his designee for evaluation and determination. 
(1)  Exempt property has been assessed a stormwater utility fee. 
(2)  Stormwater utility fee for an individual property is based on an incorrect determination of the property's contribution to the stormwater system, as established in section 102-529 (Municipal Stormwater Utility Fee Schedule). 
(3)  Stormwater utility fee for an individual property is assessed on more than one utility account. 
(4)  Stormwater utility fee is assessed to individual property outside the town's jurisdictional area. 
(c)  The public works director or his designee shall render a written decision on such appeals within 30 days after receiving a written notice of appeal from the landowner. 
(d)  Any landowner who disagrees with the decision of the public works director or his designee may appeal such decision to the town council. The decision of the town council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1087, § 2, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 102-528. - Penalties. 
    The stormwater utility fee is delinquent if payment for such fee and/or full payment on the utility account is not received by the due date and a delinquent account will be levied a ten percent penalty on the entire amount due. If full payment is not received within ten days after the due date, the water utility service will be disconnected and a reconnect fee will be assessed before service will be restored as provided in sections 102-141 and 102-168 of the Town of Little Elm's Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1087, § 2, 11-1-2011) 
Sec. 102-529. - Municipal stormwater utility system fee schedule. 
    The following rates are hereby established and shall be collected through the town's bill for public utilities pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 552, subch. C, including, without limitation, section 580.003, and other applicable law: 
(1)  Equivalent residential unit. 
a.  Rates shall be charged based on a property's contribution to the public stormwater utility system. The contribution shall be based on the impervious area for the property. 
b.  One equivalent residential unit (ERU) is defined as 3,687 square feet of impervious area. ERUs shall be calculated in whole increments, with no fee maximum. 
c.  The rate per ERU is $3.35 per month. 
d.  Single-family residential properties will be assessed one ERU per month. 
e.  All other nonexempt properties will be assessed based on their measured impervious area at a rate of $3.35 per ERU per month. 
f.  A minimum charge of one ERU shall be applied monthly to each nonexempt property, regardless of classification. 
(2)  Tax-exempt religious institutions are exempt from the municipal stormwater utility fee, in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 552.053. 
(3)  The rates established above apply to the accounts maintained by the town for public utility services. 
(4)  All billings, credits, exemptions and other procedures relating to this charge shall be subject to the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, including, without limitation, §§ 552.053 and 580.003. 
(Ord. No. 1087, § 2, 11-1-2011) 
Secs. 102-530-102-555. - Reserved. 
Chapter 106 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1407, § 2, adopted Aug. 15, 2017, repealed and replaced ch. 106 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 106, arts. I-III, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the following ordinances: Ord. No. 1005, § 2, adopted Mar. 16, 2010; Ord. No. 1009, §§ 2.1, 2.2, adopted June 15, 2010; Ord. No. 1010, § 2, adopted May 18, 2010; Ord. No. 1029, §§ 2.1, 2.2, adopted Dec. 21, 2010; Ord. No. 1058, § 2, adopted July, 5, 2011; Ord. No. 1067, § 2, adopted Sept, 6, 2011; Ord. No. 1076, § 2, adopted Oct. 18, 2011; Ord. No. 1151, § 2, adopted June, 4, 2013; Ord. No. 1162, § 2, adopted Sept. 17, 2013; Ord. No. 1180, § 2, adopted Nov. 5, 2013; Ord. No. 1189, §§ 2, 3, adopted Dec. 17, 2013; Ord. No. 1189, § 3, adopted Dec. 17, 2013; Ord. No. 1222, § 2, adopted July, 15, 2014; Ord. No. 1285, § 2, adopted Aug. 4, 2015; Ord. No. 1322, §§ 2.A-2.H, adopted Apr. 5, 2016; and Ord. No. 1402, § 2, adopted July 18, 2017. 
Federal law references -Preservation of local zoning authority concerning wireless telecommunications facilities, 47 USC 322(c)(7); limited federal preemption of state and local zoning laws affecting amateur radio facilities, Memorandum Opinion and Order , PRB-1, 101 FCC 2d 952 (1985) and 47 CFR 97.15(b); Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act, 42 USC 2000cc et seq. 
State Law reference- Municipal zoning authority, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.001 et seq.; zoning commission, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.007; comprehensive plan, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 213.002; board of adjustment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 211.008-211.013; zoning districts, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.005; municipality may regulate parking on private property, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 431.001. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 106.01.01 - Title and purpose. 
(a)  Title. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Town of Little Elm's "Zoning Ordinance." 
(b)  Purpose. The zoning regulations and districts as herein established have been made in accordance with an adopted comprehensive plan for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, morals and general welfare, and protecting and preserving places and areas of historical, cultural and/or architectural importance and significance within the town. They have been designed to lessen the congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to ensure adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land and thus avoid undue concentration of population; and to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, wastewater treatment, schools, parks and other public requirements. They have been made with reasonable consideration, among other things, for the character of each zoning district and its particular suitability for the uses specified; and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and attributes and to encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the town. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.01.02 - Authority. 
    This zoning chapter is adopted under the authority of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 211, which is hereby made a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.01.03 - Jurisdiction and application. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter apply to the use and development of all land within the incorporated limits of the town. 
(b)  No buildings or structures, including signs and temporary structures, are allowed to be constructed within the Town of Little Elm unless all applicable permits have been approved by the appropriate department and/or the governing body responsible for approving such permit. 
(c)  No person shall erect, construct, or proceed or continue with, the erection or construction of any building or structure within the town in a manner that does not comply with this chapter. 
(d)  All land, buildings, structures or building appurtenances within the town which are occupied, used, erected, altered, removed, demolished or converted shall be used, removed, placed and erected in conformance with the development and use regulations applicable to the zoning district in which such land or building is located. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.01.04 - Compliance required. 
(a)  Compliance hereafter. All land, buildings, structures or appurtenances thereon located within the town which are occupied, used, constructed, erected, removed, placed, demolished, or converted after the effective date of this chapter shall be occupied, used, erected, altered, removed, placed, demolished or converted in conformance with the zoning regulations prescribed for the zoning district in which such land or building is located, as hereinafter provided, or such shall be subject to penalties provided in section 106.01.11, "penalties and enforcement" of this chapter. All of the standards and regulations prescribed herein shall be considered as the minimum requirement unless explicitly stated otherwise. 
(b)  Use conflicting with other regulations. No uses shall be allowed that are prohibited by state or federal law or that operate in excess of state or federal environmental, pollution or performance standards as determined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Texas Air Control Board (TACB), Texas State Department of Health (TSDH), Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Federal Communications Commission (FCC), or any other applicable state or federal agency, as the case may be. 
(c)  Restrictiveness. Where the regulations imposed herein are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provision of any other applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive and impose higher standards are the requirements that shall govern. 
(d)  Abrogation. The provisions of these regulations are not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or other private agreement, provided that where the requirements of these regulations are more restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations than such easement, covenant or other private agreement, the requirements of these regulations shall govern. 
(e)  Cumulative effect. The provisions of these regulations are cumulative and additional limitations upon all other laws and ordinances heretofore passed or which may be passed hereafter governing any subject matter set forth in the provisions of these regulations. 
(f)  Error correction. In the event that any property or zoning district set forth on the zoning district map as provided in section 106.01.07, "official zoning map" of this chapter is misnamed, designated incorrectly, the boundaries are incorrect or the property is omitted, in part or in whole, the zoning district map may be amended and/or supplemented according to the following. 
(1)  Applicants. The property owner of said tract, the town council, or the planning and zoning commission may submit an application to the director to initiate the error correction process. 
(2)  Process. The error correction must be processed as a zoning map or text amendment according Section 106.02.11, "map amendments to the zoning ordinance" and section 106.02.12, "text amendments to the zoning ordinance." 
(g)  Director authority to interpret the zoning ordinance. 
(1)  Unless specified within a section, the director shall have the authority to interpret and enforce this zoning ordinance. 
(2)  A person aggrieved by the director's interpretation may appeal the interpretation to the board of adjustment pursuant to section 106.02.02(d), "appeal of director's decision." 
(h)  Setbacks, yards, and open spaces. No lot upon which a building has been erected shall later be so reduced in area that the setbacks, yards and/or open spaces shall be smaller than those required by this chapter, nor shall a part of a yard or other open space required by this chapter for any building or lot be included as a part of a yard or other open space similarly required for another building or lot. 
(i)  Residential pavement. Any concrete flatwork (e.g. drives, patios, etc.) is subject to the setback regulations included in this chapter and in the subdivision ordinance. 
(j)  Applications in relation to zoning. No construction or final plat applicable to land that is located within the town limits must be submitted for approval until the area contained within the plat has been zoned for the proposed use of the property. 
(k)  Existing uses. All existing uses that may be nonconforming after the effective date of this chapter must comply with section 106.05.05, "nonconforming uses." 
(l)  Establishment of legal nonconforming status. For purposes of interpretation of this section, any uses, structures and/or lots which in whole or part are not in conformance with current zoning standards shall be considered as follows: 
(1)  Legal nonconforming. Defined as those uses, structures or lots which in whole or part are not in conformance with current zoning standards, but were legally established at a prior date at which time they were in conformance with applicable standards. Such uses, structures or lots may be maintained or potentially altered subject to the provisions of section 106.05.05, "nonconforming uses." 
(2)  Illegal status. Those uses, structures or lots which in whole or part are not in conformance with current zoning standards and were not in conformance with applicable standards at the time of their inception shall not be considered nonconforming, but shall be considered illegal uses, structures, or lots and shall not be approved for any alteration or expansion, and must undertake necessary remedial measures to reach conformance with current standards, or be discontinued. 
(3)  Time of adoption. Any use, platted lot, and/or structure is a lawful use at the time of the adoption of any amendment to this chapter but by such amendment is placed in a district wherein such use, platted lot, and/or structure is not otherwise permitted shall be deemed legal nonconforming. 
(4)  Annexation. If a use, platted lot and/or structure was in existence at the time of annexation to the town and has since been in regular and continuous use shall be deemed legal nonconforming. 
(m)  Burden of demonstrating nonconformance. The burden of establishing that any nonconformity is a legal nonconformity as defined in this subsection shall be borne by the owner or proponent of such nonconformity. 
(n)  Characteristic of the land. Zoning is considered to be a characteristic of the land rather than a characteristic of the landowner. Zoning cannot be bought or sold separate from land and improvements. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.01.05 - Document rules of construction. 
    The language set forth in these regulations will be interpreted in accordance with the following rules of construction: 
(a)  Number. The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular. 
(b)  Tense. The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future the present. 
(c)  Mandatory and permissive language. The words "shall," "will" and "must" are mandatory while the words "may" and "should" are permissive (i.e. optional). 
(d)  Gender terms. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. 
(e)  Parentheses. Any word appearing in parentheses directly after a word herein defined shall be construed in the same sense as that word. 
(f)  Conflicts. If there is an expressed conflict: 
(1)  The text of this chapter controls over the charts or any other graphic display in this chapter; and 
(2)  The use regulations control over the district regulations in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.01.06 - Zoning districts established. 
    The following zoning districts are established and are applied to property with the town as set forth on the official zoning district map. 
ARTICLE I, TABLE A - Current Zoning DistrictsSF-RE Ranchette Estate SF-1 Single-Family 1 SF-2 Single-Family 2 SF-3 Single-Family 3 SF-4 Single-Family 4 SF-X Single-Family Mixed A-1 Single-Family A-1 A-2 Single-Family A-2 TH Townhouse PH Patio Homes MH-1 Manufactured Home District MH-2 Manufactured Home Park D Duplex MF Multifamily AG Agricultural O Office CF Community Facilities NS Neighborhood Services LC Light Commercial HC Heavy Commercial TC Town Center LI Light Industrial HI Heavy Industrial  
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.01.07 - Official zoning district map. 
(a)  Division into zoning districts. The town is hereby divided into zones, or districts, and the boundaries of zoning districts set out herein are delineated upon the zoning district map of the town, which may also be cited as the "zoning map," said map being adopted as a part of this chapter as fully as if the same were set forth herein in detail. 
(1)  One original of the zoning district map shall be filed in the office of the town secretary and labeled as "Zoning Map of the Town of Little Elm, Texas - Ordinance No. 1407." This copy shall be the official zoning district map and shall bear the signature of the mayor, attested by the town secretary, and shall bear the seal of the town under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the official zoning map referred to in section 106.01.07(a)(1) of the zoning ordinance of the town of Little Elm, Texas, adopted on the [date of ordinance adoption]". The original map shall not be changed in any manner. In case of any question, this copy, together with amending ordinances, shall be controlling. 
(2)  A copy of the original zoning district map shall be placed in the office of the mayor/town manager or his/her designee. The map copy shall be used for reference and shall be maintained up-to-date by posting thereon all subsequent amendments. Reproductions for informational purposes may only be made of the official zoning district map or this copy. 
(b)  Zoning map changes/amendments. Any changes/amendments made to the zoning district boundaries shall be made on the map copy promptly after the amendment has been approved by the town council, together with a descriptive entry on the map as follows: "On the ___ th day of ___________, 20__, by official action of the town council of Little Elm, Texas, the following change was made on the town's official zoning district map: _________ (enter a brief description of the nature of the change), Ordinance No. _______, effective date __________, 20___". The descriptive entry shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the town secretary. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.01.08 - Zoning district boundaries. 
(a)  Boundary delineations. The zoning district boundary lines shown on the zoning district map are usually along streets, alleys, property lines, or extensions thereof. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the zoning district map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Centerlines. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways or alley shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(2)  Platted lot lines. Boundaries indicated as approximately following lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
(3)  Town limits. Boundaries indicated as approximately following town limits shall be construed as following town limits. 
(4)  Shore lines. Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to follow such shore lines and in the event of change in the shore line shall be construed as moving with the actual shore line; boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(5)  Natural features. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of feature indicated in subsections (1) through (4) of this section shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
(6)  Vacated public way. Whenever any street, alley, or other public way is vacated by official action of the town council or whenever such area is franchised for building purposes, the vacated area must be rezoned according to section 106.02.11 "map amendments to the zoning ordinance." 
(7)  Boundary as a condition of zoning approval. The zoning classification applied to a tract of land adjacent to a street shall extend to the centerline of the street, unless as a condition of zoning approval, it is stated that the zoning classification shall not apply to the street. 
(8)  Interpretation. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map or in other circumstances not covered by subsections (1) through (7) of this section, the town council shall interpret the district boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.01.09 - Fees. 
(a)  The town council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges, and expenses, and a collection procedure, for building permits, certificates of zoning compliance, appeals, and other matters pertaining to this chapter. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the director and may be altered or amended only by the town council. 
(b)  No permit, certificate, special exception, or variance shall be issued unless or until such costs, charges, fees, or expenses have been paid in full; nor shall any action be taken on proceedings before the board of adjustment unless or until preliminary charges and fees have been paid in full. 
(c)  For the establishment of a schedule of fees for changes in zoning, the fee shall cover all of the costs which the town incurs in processing a zoning case, including the costs of publication and the cost of individual notices, engineering review, potential legal fees, etc. The town incurs those costs whether or not an applicant is successful in the request for a change in zoning. Therefore, the fee is not refundable to an applicant in the event a change in zoning is not approved. 
(d)  If the applicant for a permit has not paid all amounts then due and outstanding to the town (other than amounts for ad valorem taxes) directly related to any project, including, without limitation, the payment of any amounts secured by liens filed against any property by the town and fines owed by the owner, the town will not issue any permits of any kind until the liens, fines or fees against the applicant for said permit are paid in full including any interest owed to the town. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.01.10 - Severability and repealer. 
(a)  Severability. Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(b)  Repealer. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed insofar as the same are in conflict with the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.01.11 - Penalties and enforcement. 
(a)  Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined a sum not to exceed $2,000.00. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(b)  The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. 
(c)  Nothing herein contained shall prevent the town from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.01.12 - Publication required. 
    Providing for publication of the caption of this chapter and an effective date hereof. The caption of this chapter shall be published one time in a newspaper having general circulation in the town and shall be effective immediately upon its passage and publication. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.01.13 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular number include the plural number, and words in the plural number include the singular number; the word "building" includes the word "structure;" the word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.01.14 - Land use definitions. 
    Accessory structure. Any structure, either attached or detached from the main building, located on the same lot, the use of which is incidental to that of the main structure. Accessory structures include, but are not limited to, patio covers, arbors, gazebos, cabanas, outdoor kitchens, recreational fire enclosures, trellis, and structures/sheds or the like. A permit is required for many accessory structures (see sections 106.05.02.1(a) and (b), "accessory uses - residential" and "accessory uses - nonresidential," respectively, for regulations). 
    Airport or landing field. A landing facility for fixed or rotary wing aircraft containing a minimum of 60 acres (see section 106.05.02.2(a), "airport/helipad/heliport" for regulations). 
    Airport/heliport. A place where aircraft and/or helicopters can land and take off, usually equipped with hangars, facilities for refueling and repair, and various accommodations for pilots and passengers (see section 106.05.02.2(a), "airport/helipad/heliport" for regulations). 
    Alternative energy systems. 
(1)  Solar devices. A solar panel or device is a structure that is intended to capture the light from the sun and transfer that energy to electricity for general use (see section 106.05.02.2(b), "alternative energy sources - solar" for regulations.) 
(2)  Wind energy conversion system (WECS). Any mechanical device, such as a wind charger, windmill, or wind turbine, which is designed to extract kinetic energy from the wind and converts or stores it for practical use or a form of usable energy. (see section 106.05.02.2(c), "alternative energy sources - wind energy" for regulations) 
    Alternative financial services. A check cashing business, payday advance or loan business, money transfer business, car title loan business or pawn shop (see section 106.05.02.2(d), "alternative financial services" for regulations). 
(1)  Car title and loan services. An establishment that makes small consumer loans that leverage the equity value of a car or other vehicle as collateral where the title to such vehicle is owned free and clear by the loan applicant and any existing liens on the car or vehicle cancel the application. The loan terms are often for 30 days and failure to repay the loan or make interest payments to extend the loan allows the lender to take possession of the car or vehicle. This excludes state or federally chartered banks, savings and loan associations or credit unions engaged primarily in the business of making longer term loans and which make loans that leverage the total equity value of a car or vehicle as collateral. 
(2)  Check cashing business. An establishment that provides to the customer an amount of money that is equal to the face of the check or the amount specified in the written authorization for an electronic transfer of money, less any fee charged for the transaction, and where there is an agreement not to cash the check or execute an electronic transfer of money for a specified period of time, the business of cashing checks, warrants, drafts, money orders, or other commercial paper serving the same purpose for compensation by any person or entity other than a retail seller engaged primarily in the business of selling consumer goods, including consumables to retail buyers, that cashes checks or money orders or issues money orders or money transfers for a minimum flat fee as a service that is incidental to its main purpose or business. This definition excludes a state or federally chartered bank, savings and loan association or credit union, pawnshop, grocery store or gas station, so long as the gas station does not handle more than 100 such transactions within any calendar month. 
(3)  Pawn shop. A shop that lends money in exchange for valuable personal property as security deposited with it or pledged to it. This definition includes the sale of such securities after repossession and the sale of merchandise generally found in retail stores. 
(4)  Payday advance or loan business. An establishment that makes small consumer loans, usually backed by postdated check or authorization to make an electronic debit against an existing financial account, where the check or debit is held for an agreed-upon term, or until an applicant's next payday, and then cashed unless the customer repays the loan to reclaim such applicant's check. 
(5)  Bank, savings and loan or credit union. An establishment, open to the public, for the deposit, custody, loan, exchange or issue of money, the extension of credit, and/or facilitating the transmission of funds and that is typically licensed by the appropriate state or federal agency as a bank, savings and loan association, or credit union. This includes businesses' activities listed under SIC Codes 60 and 61, but excludes pawnshops, check cashing businesses, payday advance/loan businesses and car title loan businesses. 
    Amenity center. A recreational facility, including, but not limited to, clubhouse, swimming pool, or play area, operated for the exclusive use of private residents or neighborhood groups and their guests, and not open to the general public. 
    Antenna. An instrument or device consisting of wires, poles, rods, or reflecting discs, designed for transmitting or receiving any portion of the radio, microwave, or electromagnetic spectrum (see section 106.05.02.2(h), "communications antennas" for regulations) 
    Antenna support structure. Any tower, mast, pole, tripod, box frame, or other structure utilized for the purpose of transmission, retransmission, and/or reception of electromagnetic, radio, television, or microwave signals and used for commercial broadcasting or telecommunication purposes. This definition shall also include a satellite dish exceeding 12 feet in diameter and a microwave-transmitting tower. All radiating equipment must comply with Federal Communications Commission (FCC), Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Occupational Health and Safety Administration (OSHA), and all other applicable state and federal regulatory agency requirements and guidelines for human safety, as they exist or may be amended. Definition includes ancillary ground equipment. (See section 106.05.02.2(i), "communications support structures/towers" for regulations) 
    Antenna, stealth. A stealth antenna is a commercial antenna that is designed to be non-obtrusive, or virtually transparent or invisible to the surrounding neighborhood. Stealth antennas include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Antennas within a building's attic space, 
(2)  Antennas on the roof of a minimum three-story building and not visible from the property line of the lot on which the antenna is located, 
(3)  Antennas on a public utility structure, such as a water tower or high transmission line support tower, and painted to match the structure, 
(4)  Antennas located within a structure such as a flagpole, church steeple, lamppost, subdivision monument, clock tower, or similar architectural feature, and antennas located on an athletic field light pole. 
    Antique shop and used furniture. A retail establishment engaged in the selling of works of art, furniture, or other artifacts of an earlier period, with all sales and storage occurring inside a building. 
    Arcade. An establishment in which there are located six or more skill or pleasure machines used for compensation found in the schedule of uses as "Commercial Amusement, Indoor." 
    Assembly uses. A building or structure for the gathering together of persons for purposes of civic, social or religious functions. 
    Athletic stadium or field, private. A private field and/or structure used for sporting events with associated spectator seating, either permanent or temporary. 
    Athletic stadium or field, public. A field and/or structure owned and operated by the town and/or a local independent school district used for sporting events with associated spectator seating, either permanent or temporary. The stadium may include other accessory buildings such as a food service or catering facility and/or dressing rooms/showers. 
    Automated dispenser machine. An unmanned, freestanding structure that dispenses goods that may include, but are not limited to, water, ice, entertainment videos or CDs, newspapers, and soft drinks, that may be located outside of or separate from the primary structure. 
    Automated intake machine. An unmanned, freestanding structure that is designed to receive certain goods that include, but are not limited to, recycling items, library books and donations, that may be located outside of or separate from the primary structure. 
    Automated teller machine (ATM). An unmanned, freestanding structure that performs banking financial functions at a location that may be separate from the controlling financial institution. 
    Automobile. A self-propelled mechanical vehicle designed for use on streets and highways for the conveyance of goods and people, including, but not limited to, passenger cars, trucks, buses, motor scooters, and motorcycles. 
    Automobile and boat repair, major. A building or portion thereof whose principal use is for the repair, servicing, equipping, or maintenance of motor vehicles or motor vehicle components, including engines, radiators, starters, transmissions, brakes, tires and wheels, seats and similar components that may require overnight outdoor storage of vehicles awaiting or under repair, if screened in compliance with all applicable regulations. General repair or reconditioning of engines, air-conditioning systems, and transmissions for automobiles; wrecker or towing service with on-site storage of vehicles; collision services including body, frame, or fender straightening or repair; customizing; painting; vehicle steam cleaning; tire retreading; insurance estimations with on-site storage; undercoating and rust proofing, and other similar uses. 
    Automobile and boat repair, minor. A daytime retail operation wherein the sale, installation, and/or inspection of tires, batteries, brakes and other related minor parts or accessories is carried on; specifically intended to exclude major automotive repair and overnight outdoor storage of vehicles awaiting or under repair. 
    Automobile and boat sales, accessories. A retail shop that sells parts or accessories for vehicles that does not include any installation of same. 
    Automobile and boat sales, new. Retail sales or leasing of new automobiles, light load vehicles or boats. Sales, rental, and/or leasing of new automobiles or light load vehicles, including, as accessory uses: sales, repair, and automobile storage. 
    Automobile and boat sales, outside display. The use of any land area for the display and sale of new or used vehicles and accessory parts, including tires, for automobiles, trucks, vans, trailers, or recreation vehicles. 
    Automobile and boat sales, used. Retail sales or offering for sale of used automobiles, light load vehicles or boats. 
    Automobile and boat/rv storage. The storage on a lot or tract of operable motor vehicles for the purpose of holding such vehicles for sale, distribution or storage. 
    Automobile parking garage. A structure where the parking of automobiles. 
    Automobile parking lot. An area where a fee is charged for parking automobiles. 
    Automobile wash, automated secondary use. A facility for the washing of motor vehicles, including a self-service operation, operated in conjunction with another primary use, such as fueling stations or convenience stores. 
    Automobile wash, full service. A facility where a customer may have an automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicles washed in exchange for financial remuneration. This definition generally includes detailing of the vehicle and may include other services, such as leather or upholstery cleaning. 
    Automobile wash, self service. A facility, typically coin or token operated, used by the customer to wash their own automobiles, motorcycles, and other vehicles. 
    Bakery, candy or ice-cream shop. A relatively small retail establishment that primarily sells baked goods, candy and other confections, and/or ice-cream/yogurt for on-premises consumption or take-out. 
    Bar. An establishment principally for the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises that derives 75 percent or more of its gross revenue on a quarterly (three-month) basis from the sale or service of alcoholic beverages, as defined in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, for on-premises consumption. If an establishment is located in a hotel or motel, the gross revenues of the particular establishment, rather than the gross revenues of the entire hotel or motel, will be used in calculating the percentage of revenues derived from the sale or service of alcoholic beverages. (See section 106.05.02.2(e), "bar or brewpub" for regulations) 
    Bed and breakfast inn. An owner-occupied private home which offers lodging for paying guests not to exceed one week in duration, and which serves breakfast to these guests and which contains one or more guest bedrooms. (See section 106.05.02.2(f), "bed and breakfast" for regulations) 
    Body art studio. An establishment whose services include tattooing and/or body piercing. Tattooing shall mean the placing of designs, letters, figures, symbols or other marks upon or under the skin of any person, using ink or other substances that result in the permanent coloration of the skin by means of the use of needles or other instruments designed to contact or puncture the skin. Body piercing shall mean the creation of an opening in an individual's body, other than ear piercing, to insert jewelry or other decoration. 
    Brewpub. An establishment where the on-site brewing of beer occurs as well as tasting and/or retail sales. (See section 106.05.02.2(e), "bar or brewpub" for regulations) 
    Building material and hardware sales, major. An establishment for the sale of materials customarily used in the construction of buildings and other structures, including outside storage or display of materials or merchandise and may include the rental of construction tools and/or vehicles. 
    Building material and hardware sales, minor. An establishment for the sale of materials customarily used in the construction of buildings and other structures, without any outside storage or display of materials or merchandise. 
    Campground or RV park. Any area that is designed for occupancy by transients using tents, mobile trailers, or recreational vehicles for temporary sleeping purposes. Also, a tract of land on which two or more campsites are located, established, or maintained as temporary living quarters for recreation, education or vacation purposes. 
    Caretaker's/guard's residence. A residence located on a premises with a main nonresidential use and occupied only by a caretaker or guard, and his/her family, employed on the premises. (see section 106.05.02.2(g), "caretaker or guard residence" for regulations) 
    Catering service. A business which offers prepared food and drink for consumption elsewhere. 
    Child care center, incidental. A place designed solely for the care of children belonging to employees and/or patrons of the primary use. The center shall be completely contained within the primary use and shall not constitute more than 15 percent of the main use. The operating hours of the center shall be the same as the primary use and shall not include overnight lodging, medical treatment, counseling, or rehabilitation services. This use may be subject to regulation by the Texas Department of Family and Protective Services. 
    Child care center. A facility that is licensed to care for any number of children for less than 24 hours per day, at a location other than the permit holder's primary residence. 
    Child care, group home. An adult and/or child caring facility licensed by the state, designed to provide resident services to individuals who are physically handicapped, mentally ill, mentally retarded, or developmentally disabled, in which no more than eight such individuals reside with one or more resident counselors or other staff persons. For the purposes of this section, mental illness and developmental disability shall not include illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance or any criminal behavior. 
    Child care, foster family home (independent). Per the definition of the department of family and protective services (DFPS) or as amended by the DFPS, a single independent home that is the primary residence of the foster parents and licensed to provide care for up to six children up to the age of 18 years. 
    Child care, foster group home (independent). Per the definition of the department of family and protective services (DFPS) or as amended by the DFPS, a single independent home that is the primary residence of the foster parents licensed to provide care for seven to 12 children up to the age of 18 years. 
    Child care, licensed child care center. Per the definition of the department of family and protective services (DFPS) or as amended by the DFPS, an operation providing care for seven or more children younger than 14 years old for less than 24 hours per day at a location other than the permit holder's home. 
    Child care, licensed child care home. Per the definition of the department of family and protective services (DFPS) or as amended by the DFPS, the primary caregiver provides care in the caregiver's own residence for children from birth through 13 years. The total number of children in care varies with the ages of the children, but the total number of children in care at any given time, including the children related to the caregiver, must not exceed 12. 
    Child care, listed family home. Per the definition of the department of family and protective services (DFPS) or as amended by the DFPS, a caregiver at least 18 years old who provides care in her own home for compensation, for three or fewer children unrelated to the caregiver, ages birth through 13 years. Regular care is provided, which is care provided for at least four hours a day, three or more days a week, and more than nine consecutive weeks. The total number of children in care, including children related to the caregiver, may not exceed 12. 
    Child care, registered child care home. Per the definition of the department of family and protective services (DFPS) or as amended by the DFPS, a caregiver who provides regular care in her own home for not more than six children from birth through 13 years. Child day care can be provided for six additional school-aged children before and after the customary school day. The total number of children in care at any given time, including the children related to the caregiver, must not exceed 12. 
    Clinic, animal (no outside runs). An animal medical facility designed for immediate and short term care (i.e. not requiring the animal to be boarded or kept within the facility overnight), for diagnosis, treatment of household pets including but not limited to dogs, cats, and birds. 
    Clinic, animal (with outside runs). A facility for diagnosis, treatment or hospitalization of household pets including but not limited to dogs, cats, birds, and horses. 
    Clinic/medical lab. Offices for one or more physicians, surgeons or dentists engaged in treating sick or injured persons, but not including rooms for the lodging of patients. The facility may also conduct the testing of blood and other tissue samples for the purpose of diagnosis of diseases. 
    College, university, or trade school. An institution established for educational purposes offering courses for study beyond the secondary education level, including trade schools and commercial schools offering training or instruction in a trade, art, or occupation. 
    Commercial amusement, indoor. An enterprise providing for indoor recreational activities, services, amusements, and instruction, usually for an admission fee. Uses may include, but are not limited to, bowling alleys, ice or roller skating rinks, bingo parlors, amusement arcades, and/or sports practice areas. Such business shall be constructed to limit noise by installing adequate acoustic barriers. 
    Commercial amusement, outdoor. An enterprise providing for outdoor recreational activities, services, amusements, and instruction, usually for an admission fee, including, but not limited to, batting cages, miniature golf, go-kart tracks, and carnivals. 
    Commissary. A facility that is the home base for a restaurant-equipped vehicle that serves as a mobile food vendor. The commissary also is used for the storage and partial production of food items that are delivered to customers by the mobile food vendor located away from the commissary location. 
    Communication tower/antenna. Any tower, mast, pole, tripod, box frame, or other structure utilized for the purpose of transmission, retransmission, and/or reception of electromagnetic, radio, television, or microwave signals. See also "antenna support structure." (See section 106.05.02.2(h), "communication antennas" for regulations) 
    Concrete batch plant, permanent. A permanent manufacturing facility for the production of concrete or asphalt. 
    Concrete batch plant, temporary. A temporary manufacturing facility for the on-site production of concrete or asphalt during construction of a project, and to be removed when the project is completed. Following removal, the tract shall be returned to its previous condition. (See section 106.05.03(a), "batch plants, temporary" for regulations) 
    Construction yard, field office, temporary. A building, structure, or storage/assembly yard used in conjunction with a development project for housing temporary supervisory or administrative functions related to development, construction, or the sale of real estate properties within the development and subject to removal at completion of construction. A facility used for the temporary office and material storage in connection with a project under construction or remodel. (See section 106.05.03(d), "construction yard, temporary" for regulations) 
    Contractor's shop. A facility for the contractor's office and the storage and maintenance of contractor's supplies and operational equipment. 
    Custom personal service. A shop, such as tailor, shoe repair, barbershop, beauty shop, health studio, spa/salon, or travel consultant. 
    Dwelling, assisted living facility. A private facility that provides care for chronically ill, aged, or disabled persons who need some health supervision and related care but not including hospital care. Such facilities do not contain facilities for surgical care or the treatment of alcoholism, drug addiction, communicable disease or injury. A facility designed for adults or children with special needs and/or who need assistance with daily living, including but not limited to the production of meals, assistance with shopping, management of medications and personal grooming. Typically, the resident occupies a room or suite of rooms and eats the majority of meals communally. 
    Dwelling, assisted living home. A facility located in a private residential home designed for adults who need or desire assistance with daily living, including but not limited to the production of meals, assistance with shopping, management of medications and personal grooming. (See section 106.05.02.2(j), "home child care" for regulations) 
    Dwelling, boardinghouse or rooming house. A building other than a hotel where lodging and/or meals for three or more persons are provided for compensation. 
    Dwelling, duplex. A building containing two single-family dwelling units totally separated from each other by an unpierced fire wall from basement to roof, intended or designed for occupancy by two families. 
    Dwelling, factory-built home. Any manufactured single-family mobile home constructed prior to June 15, 1976. (See also dwelling, HUD-Code manufactured home) 
    Dwelling, group home. An adult and/or child care facility, licensed by the state, designed to provide resident services to individuals who are physically handicapped, mentally impaired, or developmentally disabled, but does not provide services to individuals with psychiatric, addiction, substance abuse or who exhibit criminal behavior. (See section 106.05.02.2(j), "home child care" for regulations) 
    Dwelling, HUD-Code manufactured home. A HUD-Code compliant single-family structure constructed after June 15, 1976, designed for long-term residential use that is constructed elsewhere and is moved from the factory or sales location to its permanent site (see also dwelling, factory-built home) 
    Dwelling, listed family home. A home that provides child care for compensation for three or fewer children, excluding children who are related to the caretaker, for at least four hours a day, three or more days a week, for more than nine consecutive weeks in the caretaker's own residence and that is required to [be] listed with the state. (See section 106.05.02.2(j), "home child care" for regulations) 
    Dwelling, live-work. A dwelling unit that contains, to a limited extent, a separate commercial component on the ground floor and is typically in the form similar to a townhouse or store with residential quarters above or behind the commercial use. 
    Dwelling, mobile home. Any manufactured single-family mobile home constructed prior to June 15, 1976. 
    Dwelling, multifamily. Any building or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented, leased, or let to be occupied as three or more dwelling units or apartments or which is occupied as a home or place of residence by three or more families living in independent dwelling units. Though residential in use, it is considered a commercial development in regard to and application of development standards and regulations. A building containing three or more dwelling units on a single lot or tract designed to be occupied by three or more families living independent of one another. 
    Dwelling, patio home. A dwelling on a separate lot with open space setbacks on at least three sides. 
    Dwelling, single-family, detached. A platted lot containing one dwelling unit, not attached to any other dwelling by any means and is surrounded by open space or yards, designed and constructed for occupancy by one family and has no physical connection to a building located on any other separate lot or tract. 
    Dwelling, townhome. A structure containing three or more dwelling units with each unit designed for occupancy by one household and each unit attached by a common fire wall. 
    Electrical power generating plant. All equipment, fixtures, and property operated or maintained in connection with the production of electricity and transmission of electricity produced. 
    Electrical substation. A location for transforming electricity prior to the distribution of electricity to individual customers. 
    Fairgrounds/exhibition area. An area that may include structures or outside areas for the exhibition of rodeos, conventions and similar special events. 
    Farm accessory building. A structure located on an active farm, ranch, or orchard in which livestock, feed, equipment, vehicles, or accessories necessary for the running of the business are kept, including but not limited to, barns, silos, sheds and exercise pavilions. 
    Farm, ranch, stable, garden or orchard. An area of five acres or more which is used for growing of usual farm products, vegetables, fruits, trees and grain and for the raising thereon of the usual farm poultry and farm animals such as horses, cattle, and sheep and including the necessary accessory uses for raising, treating, and storing products raised on the premises, but not including the commercial feeding of offal or garbage to swine or other animals and not including any type of agriculture or husbandry specifically prohibited by ordinance or law. 
    Farmers market. An area containing individual vendors who offer fruits, vegetables, herbs, spices, edible seeds, nuts, live plants, flowers, and honey for sale. This definition does include the sale of meat, fish, poultry, eggs, refrigerated dairy products, or home canned or packaged items when the proper health rules and regulations are followed and/or health permit obtained. (See section 106.05.03(c), "farmers market, temporary" for regulations) 
    Florist. A facility for the retail sale of flowers, ornamental plants, and accessory items. This definition does not include a nursery with outside display. (See also Greenhouse and Nursery) 
    Fraternal organization, lodge, civic club, fraternity or sorority. A group of people whose membership is restricted by a set of bylaws or regulations. 
    Funeral home/crematorium. A place for the storage of human bodies prior to their burial or cremation, or a building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial or cremation, where cremation occurs within the building, with or without place where ceremonies or gatherings connected to the deceased may occur. 
    Funeral home/mortuary. A place for the storage of human bodies prior to their burial, or a building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial and the display of the deceased, a place where ceremonies or gatherings connected to the deceased may occur, but does not allow the cremation of human remains. 
    Gas pumps/fuel sales. A retail fuel sales facility selling fuel for motor vehicles including, but not limited to, automobiles, motorcycles, buses, or recreational vehicles with no ancillary services such as vehicle service, vehicle repair, or sale of items other than fuel. The fueling or gasoline station may be attended or automated. 
    Golf course, tennis club, polo club, or country club (private). An area of 20 acres or more containing a golf course, polo facilities, tennis facilities and/or a clubhouse and available only to private specific membership; such a club may contain adjunct facilities such as private club, dining room, swimming pool, retail sales, and similar recreational or service facilities. A tract of land with at least nine holes for playing the game of golf that may include a clubhouse, dining and snack bar, pro shop, practice facility and other accessory uses. 
    Greenhouse or nursery for retail plant sales. A facility that may include the outside display of plants offered for sale when such display is located behind the front yard line established in the district in which the nursery or greenhouse is located. 
    Gun or archery range, indoor. Any indoor facility open to the public and occupying all or a portion of a building where firearms are discharged or arrows are shot for either testing or recreation purposes. Such business shall be constructed to limit noise by installing adequate acoustic barriers. 
    Gunsmith. A retail establishment for the sale and service of guns and related items. 
    Gymnastics/dance studio/martial arts . A building or portion of a building used by a gymnast, dancer, or martial artist for practice or for instructional classes in gymnastics, dance, or martial arts and similar activities. 
    Health/fitness center. A facility which promotes physical fitness, weight control, exercise, and personal improvement that may also include massage or bathing. 
    Heavy machinery sales, service, and storage. A retail or wholesale facility that sells, services and stores heavy machinery such as farm equipment, dredging equipment, paving equipment, etc. 
    Helipad. A place, typically on the roof of a building or a small ground area where helicopters may land and take off, but without any service or fueling capabilities. (See section 106.05.02.2(a), "airport/helipad/heliport" for regulations) 
    Home occupation. An occupation, which is secondary to the primary use of a dwelling as a residence, conducted on residential premises by the occupant of the residence. Home occupations shall be subject to the conditions set forth in section 106.05.02.2(k), "home occupations." Any activity carried out for personal gain in a dwelling unit by a resident of the premises, which occupation is secondary to the residential purpose of the premises. 
    Hospital. An institution or place where sick or injured patients are given medical or surgical care either at public (charity) or private expense. 
    Hotel. A building or group of buildings designed for and occupied as a temporary abiding place of individuals with access to the rooms from an indoor corridor and providing six or more room units where customary services such as linen, maid service, telephone, and upkeep of furniture are provided for a daily fee. 
    Hotel, extended stay (also called "residence hotel"). A building or group of buildings used as a temporary dwelling place for individuals in exchange for financial consideration where customary hotel services such as linen, housekeeping service, and telephone are provided. Residence hotel room units are designed to be suitable for long term occupancy with financial consideration typically being calculated on a weekly and/or monthly basis. Typical residence hotel attributes include, but are not limited to, kitchen facilities, and external doorways into room units. (See section 106.05.02.2(l), hotel, extended stay" for regulations) 
    Hotel, full-service. A full service hotel is considered a top tier hotel in terms of amenities and service provided to the clientele. (See section 106.05.02.2(m), "hotel, full-service" for regulations) 
    Hotel, limited service. A limited service hotel provides travelers an economical choice with fewer amenities than a full service hotel. (See section 106.05.02.2(n), "hotel, limited-service" for regulations) 
    Household appliance service and repair. A retail establishment where household appliances are serviced and repaired on site. May also include sales of new or used household appliances. 
    Incidental retail and service uses. Defined as operating within another establishment, such as a bank branch, nail salon, eyewear service, tax service, etc. within a "big box" store. May also be located within an office complex or hotel, such as a deli, convenience store, or restaurant for the use of the employees and guests. 
    Kennel, indoor. An establishment where domesticated animals(four or more dogs, cats or other domestic animals at least four months of age) are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained, or sold for commercial purposes that does not include outside pens or runs. 
    Kennel, outdoor. An establishment where domesticated animals (four or more dogs, cats or other domestic animals at least four months of age) are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained, or sold for commercial purposes that includes outdoor pens or runs. 
    Laundry and/or dry cleaning, commercial. A plant for cleaning garments, fabrics, rugs, uniforms, draperies, or other similar items on a commercial or bulk basis. 
    Laundry and/or dry cleaning, pickup and receiving station. A facility that only receives and dispenses laundry and dry cleaning that is processed in bulk by a commercial laundry or dry cleaning facility located elsewhere. 
    Laundry and/or dry cleaning, self-service. A facility for washing and/or dry cleaning garments and similar items where typically the customer supervises and handles the cleaning of his/her garments and items, such as a laundromat. Machines for use are typically of a similar size as found in the home and not a commercial laundry or cleaning plant. 
    Laundry and/or dry cleaning, small custom shop. A retail establishment for the cleaning of individual garments, fabrics, rugs, draperies or other similar items on the premises, which may include minor garment repair. A custom cleaning shop not exceeding 5,000 square feet of floor area or a pickup station. 
    Liquor store. A facility for the sale of beer, wine, and/or liquor not for on-premises consumption that derives 75 percent or more of its gross revenue from the on-premises sale of beer, wine, and/or liquor. (See section 106.05.02.2(o), "liquor stores" for regulations). 
    Machine/welding shop. A facility in which materials are processed by machining, cutting, grinding, welding, etc. 
    Manufactured home. Any manufactured single-family mobile home constructed prior to June 15, 1976. (See also Dwelling, factory-built home. (See section 106.05.02.2(p), "manufactured home replacement" for replacement regulations) 
    Manufactured/mobile home display and sales. The offering for sale, storage, or display of trailers, HUD-Code manufactured homes or mobile homes on a parcel of land but excluding the use of such facilities as dwellings either on a temporary or permanent basis. Such use may be permitted with the approval of the town council in the MH Mobile Home District to permit sale of mobile homes or HUD-Code manufactured homes owned by the mobile home park owner or operator for placement in the mobile home park. 
    Manufacturing and industrial, heavy. A facility that involves assembly and fabrication activities and the use of machines, tools and labor to make items for use or sale and typically requires access to major thoroughfares, major highways, and/or other means of transportation such as the railroad for transfer of parts and final products. May also include warehousing, research and development, wholesaling operations with infrequent customer or client visits, and may include related office and shipping areas. Heavy industry involves one or more of the following characteristics such as large and heavy products; large and heavy equipment and facilities (such as heavy equipment, large machine tools, and spacious buildings); or complex and numerous processes. The labor for heavy industry often must be highly skilled. Examples of heavy industry include, but are not limited to, steel manufacturing, automotive assembly, machine tool design and construction, boat or aircraft manufacturing, and power plants. 
    Manufacturing and industrial, light. A facility that involves assembly and fabrication activities and the use of machines, tools and labor to make items for use or sale. May also include warehousing, research and development, wholesaling operations with infrequent customer or client visits, and may include related office and shipping areas. Light industry is often assembly-based and is typically consumer-oriented (i.e., most light industrial products are sold to retail stores or end users rather than as intermediate parts for use by other industries). Light industry generally has less environmental impact than those associated with heavy industry. Light industry may employ lower skilled workers with only moderate training and often employ large numbers of people. Light industries require a relatively small amount of raw materials, area and power. Examples of light industry include, but are not limited to, plastic items, clothing, shoes, foods, beverages, personal care and home care products, cosmetics, drugs, furniture, consumer electronics, and home appliances. 
    Media studio. A facility where the production, editing, storage, and/or transmittal of audio/visual media occurs. Includes, but is not limited to, a TV studio, a radio studio, a production or editing facility. (See section 106.05.02.2(q), media studio" for regulations) 
    Mini-warehouse/self storage. A building containing separate, individual self-storage units for rent or lease. The conduct of sales, business, or any activity other than storage is prohibited within any individual storage unit. 
    Mixed-use building. A vertical mixed use building that includes a variety of retail, office, and/or residential uses such as lofts, live-work units, apartments and condominiums, but contains nonresidential use in a majority of the ground floor. 
    Mobile food vendor, food truck. Any person who operates and sells food from a motorized vehicle capable of moving from place to place during the course of the day and may include some preparation of food or drink for sale. 
    Mobile food vendor, stationary. Any person or person who operates and sells food from a stationary cart or trailer mounted on a chassis, for a period of 15 calendar days or more per year. Stationary mobile food vendors include, but are not limited to, snow-cone stands, hot-dog carts, and ice-cream carts. Any similar facility that operates for fourteen calendar days or less shall be considered a "temporary food establishment" as defined by the town health ordinance, as it exists or may be amended. 
    Model home. A single-family dwelling in a developing subdivision located on a legally platted lot of record that is limited to temporary use as a sales office for the subdivision and to provide an example of the dwellings which have been built or which are proposed to be built in the same subdivision. (See section 106.05.03(e), "model home, temporary" for regulations) 
    Motel. A facility offering short-term overnight lodging accommodations on a daily rate to the general public and having direct access to individual guest rooms from the parking area or outside balconies. 
    Motorcycle sales/service. A facility that sells, leases, and services motorcycles, usually defined as two-wheeled, self-propelled vehicle having one or two saddles or seats, and may have a sidecar attached. For purposes of this chapter, motorbikes, motor-scooters, mopeds and similar vehicles are classified as motorcycles. 
    Municipal uses operated by the Town of Little Elm. Any structure, park, open space, or roadway owned and/or operated by the Town of Little Elm, including but not limited to town hall, libraries, recreation centers, parks, and roadways. 
    Museum/art gallery. A building serving as a repository for a collection of natural, scientific, artistic, or literary objects of interest, and designed to be used for viewing, with or without an admission charge, and which may include as an accessory use the sale of goods related to the collection. 
    Office, administrative, medical, or professional. A building used for the provision of executive, management, or administrative services. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, administrative offices and services including real estate, property management, investment, medical, architect, engineer, travel, secretarial services, accounting organizations and associations, and vehicle rental office without on-site storage of fleet vehicles. 
    Office, showroom. A building that primarily consists of sales offices and sample display areas for products and/or services delivered or performed off-premises. Catalog and telephone sales facilities are examples. Incidental retail sales of products associated with the primary products and/or services are also permitted. Warehousing facilities shall not exceed 50 percent of the total floor area. This designation does not include contractor's shop and storage yard. 
    Office, warehouse, distribution center. A building primarily devoted to storage, warehousing, and distribution of goods, merchandise, supplies, and equipment. Accessory uses may include retail and wholesale sales areas, sales offices, and display areas for products sold and distributed from the storage and warehousing areas. Also referred to as "flex space." 
    Open storage and display, permanent. A secondary land use providing outdoor storage or display of commodities, materials, goods, equipment, vehicles, or merchandise in its normal day-to-day business activities. This definition excludes new and used sale or lease of automobiles, motorcycles recreational vehicles, boats, or watercrafts. This definition does not include temporary outside merchandise display, such as a sidewalk sale. (See section 106.05.02.2(s), "open storage, permanent or ongoing" for regulations) 
    Open storage and display, temporary. The temporary display of merchandise for sale outside of a building. (See section 106.05.03(f), "open storage, temporary" for regulations) 
    Open storage and display, under eave display, temporary. The temporary display of merchandise for sale located immediately outside the main entrance to the building and generally in the area that is adjacent to the building and between the building and the walkway/entrance. Items include, but are not limited to, firewood, plants, pumpkins, shopping carts, and other similar items. (See section 106.05.03(g), "open storage, temporary, under eave display" for regulations) 
    Park or playground. An open recreation facility or park owned and operated by a public agency such as the municipal park department or school board and available to the general public. 
    Portable building sales. A retail establishment that sells portable buildings meant to be used as accessory uses only and not for habitation. 
    Print shop, major industrial plant. An establishment specializing in long-run printing operations including, but not limited to, book, magazine, and newspaper publishing using engraving, die cutting, lithography, and thermography processes. 
    Print shop, minor retail shop. An establishment specializing in short-run operations to produce newsletters, flyers, resumes, maps, construction documents and plans, and similar materials using photocopying, duplicating, and blue printing processes. This definition shall include mailing and shipping services, but excludes the on-site storage of heavy load fleet vehicles, such as a Kinko's. 
    Printing plant, reprographic shop. A facility for the reproduction of materials or drawings on a job order or bulk basis utilizing lithography, off-set printing, or other printing techniques. 
    Private club. A facility that caters to a limited clientele that requires membership standing in order to participate. May include, but is not limited to, cigar clubs, gaming clubs, pool rooms, or other similar type uses. May require additional licenses from TABC or the state for operation. Does not include not-for-profit gaming operations, such as Bingo, offered by charitable organizations. 
    Religious facility. A building used primarily for religious assembly and worship and those accessory activities which are customarily associated therewith, and the place of residence for ministers, priests, nuns, rabbis, or other religious personnel on the premises (tax exempt as defined by state law). For the purposes of this chapter, Bible study and other similar activities that occur in a person's primary residence do not constitute a "religious facility." 
    Research and development center. Facilities for research including laboratories, experimental equipment and operations involving compounding or testing of materials or equipment. Any facility that is determined by health, fire, or building official to be a hazard or nuisance to adjacent property or the community at large, due to the possible emission of excessive smoke, noise, gas, fumes, dust, odor, or vibration, or the danger of fire, explosion, or radiation is not to be included in this category. 
    Restaurant. A building or portion of a building where food and drink is served for consumption in the building, and where provisions may be made for serving food on the premises outside the building. 
    Restaurant, dine-in only. An establishment where food and drink are prepared, served and consumed by the general public within an indoor dining area and may include an outdoor seating area. 
    Restaurant, dine-in only with alcoholic beverages. An establishment where food and drink, including alcoholic beverages, are prepared, served and consumed by the general public within an indoor dining area and may include an outdoor seating area. 
    Restaurant, drive-in. An eating establishment where food or drink is served to customers in motor vehicles or where facilities are provided on the premises which encourage the serving and consumption of food in automobiles on or near the restaurant premises. An establishment where food and drink are prepared and ordered via service screens and served to customers either in an outdoor seating area or in their motor vehicles that are temporarily parked and which the food will generally be consumed in their vehicles or off-premises. 
    Restaurant, drive-through service. An establishment where food and drink are prepared, served and consumed by customers who are given the option of dining within the indoor dining area, the outdoor seating area or via a service window and drive-through lane to customers in motor vehicles who will be consuming the food off-premises. 
    Restaurant, pick-up or delivery only. An establishment preparing food to the general public in which the food, once prepared, is either picked up for consumption off-premises, or is delivered to the end user by the restaurant staff. 
    Restaurant, temporary. A retail food establishment that operates at a fixed location for a limited period of time. 
    Restaurant, with micro-brewery. An establishment that serves food and alcoholic beverages that prepares handcrafted natural beer or ale intended for consumption on the premises as an accessory use. 
    Salvage yard, wrecking yard. Any lot upon which four or more motor vehicles of any kind which are incapable of being operated due to condition or a lack of license or have been placed for the purpose of obtaining parts for recycling or resale. 
    School, charter. An alternative institution to the public school system licensed and funded by the state which provides a basic academic education comparable to that provided in the public schools and receives funding from the state and charges no admission fees to its attendees. 
    School, private or parochial. A school under the sponsorship of a private or religious agency having a curriculum generally equivalent to public elementary or secondary schools, but not including private or trade or commercial schools, and receives no funding from any governmental agency. 
    School, public. An educational institution regulated by the state which is operated by the public or an independent school district, having a curriculum that includes kindergarten, elementary or secondary education, but not including private, business, commercial, trade, or craft schools. 
    Seasonal sales. Temporary display and sale of items customarily associated with a particular season, such as Christmas trees, holiday decorations, firewood; pumpkins, or any other similar product for sale during a recognized holiday. 
    Senior living facility. A multiple family dwelling means any building or portion thereof which is designed, built, rented, leased or let to contain three or more age-restricted (55 or older) dwelling units or apartments on a single lot, or which is occupied as a home or place of residence by three or more age-restricted (55 or older) families living in independent dwelling units. 
    Sewage pump station. A facility for transporting sewer including pumps, piping, valves and controls. 
    Sewage treatment plant. A facility that treats sewage so that it may be returned to the natural water supply without negative effects. Water from a sewage treatment plant is considered "gray water" and is suitable for irrigation but no consumption. 
    Sexually oriented businesses. Sexually oriented establishments and businesses as defined in town Ordinance No. 628 as it exists or may be amended. Sexually oriented uses include, but are not limited to, adult bookstore, adult video store, adult theater, adult cabaret, sexual encounter center, and nude modeling center. (See section 106.05.02.2(v), "sexually oriented businesses" and the aforementioned town ordinances for regulations) 
    Store, big box. A retail establishment with a single-tenant that comprises more than 50,000 square feet, such as Target or Walmart. 
    Store, convenience. A retail establishment providing for the sale of food items, nonprescription drugs, small household items and gifts. Gasoline and diesel fuel may also be offered for sale. Maximum size of the establishment shall be no more than 6,000 square feet, not including storage areas and administrative offices. 
    Store, discount, variety or department. A retail establishment offering a wide variety of merchandise in departments and exceeding 6,000 square feet in floor area. 
    Store, drugstore or pharmacy. A retail establishment for preparing, preserving, compounding and dispensing of drugs and medicines; and may include the display and sale of other merchandise such as cosmetics, notions, fountain service and similar items. 
    Store, feed. A retail establishment for the sale of grain, prepared feed, and forage for pets, livestock and fowl, but not involving the grinding, mixing, or commercial compounding of such items. An establishment for the selling of corn, grain, and other foodstuffs for animals and livestock and including other implements and goods related to agricultural processes, but not including farm machinery. 
    Store, furniture, home furnishings and appliance store. A retail facility that sells primarily goods for the home, such as furniture, carpet, appliances, and accessories. 
    Store, grocery. A retail establishment that displays and sells consumable goods and sundries and may include secondary uses such as a pharmacy, photo shop, banking service, delicatessen, bakery and/or prepared foods. 
    Store, hardware and home improvement. A retail establishment that sells building materials, paint, cutlery, tools, utensils, screws, nails, etc. This definition does not include "big box" hardware/lumber/home improvement type stores with outdoor display. 
    Store, incidental retail or service uses. Located within an office or other employment center, such uses include barbershop or beauty shop, smoke shop, candy counter, restaurant, pharmacy, or other incidental activity secondary to the primary office or employment occupancy. 
    Store, pet shop. A retail establishment offering small animals, fish, or birds for sale as pets and where all such creatures are housed within the building. 
    Store, shopping center. A group of retail, service, commercial, and restaurant establishments planned, constructed and managed as a single entity with customer and employee parking provided on-site, provision for goods delivery separated from customer access, provision of aesthetically appropriate design and protection from the elements. 
    Street, private. A thoroughfare which affords access to property abutting thereon for residents of that property and service vehicles only via controlled gate access. The land on which the street is constructed is owned by a homeowners association and the street is maintained by that entity. (See sections 106.05.02.2(t), "private street development/gated communities - existing subdivisions" and (u), "private street development/gated communities - new subdivisions", for regulations) 
    Street, public. A thoroughfare which affords principal means of access to property abutting thereon. The land on which the street is constructed is owned by a governmental entity and the pavement is maintained by that entity. 
    Telephone exchange. A telecommunications facility to which subscribers' telephones connect that switches calls among subscribers or to other exchanges for further routing. 
    Theater, drive-in. An outdoor facility arranged so that patrons can view the screen and receive the sound in the privacy of their cars, or while seated outside. 
    Theater, indoor. A facility for showing motion pictures to an audience inside an enclosed structure. 
    Transit center/bus terminal. Passenger terminal or loading facilities for franchised private or publicly-owned transit system. 
    Truck terminal. An area where trucks used to transport goods are stored or parked between trips. 
    Truck/trailer/heavy equipment/RV/bus repair. An establishment providing major and minor automobile repair services to heavy load vehicles defined as self-propelled vehicles having a manufacturer's recommended gross vehicle weight (GVW) of greater than 11,000 pounds, such as large recreational vehicles, tractor trailers, buses and other similar vehicles. Such vehicle repair may occur within a structure or outside the structure due to the size of the vehicles. 
    Truck/trailer/heavy equipment/RV/bus sales. A facility which sells or leases vehicles having a manufacturer's recommended gross vehicle weight (GVW) of greater than 11,000 pounds, such as large recreational vehicles, tractor trailers, buses and other similar vehicles. The term "truck" shall be construed to mean "heavy load vehicle" unless specifically stated otherwise. The sales and leasing facility includes outdoor storage and display of the vehicles listed. 
    Utility distribution/transmission line. Facilities, including subsidiary stations, that serve to distribute, transmit, transform, or reduce the pressure of gas, water, or electric current, including, but not limited to, electrical transmission lines, gas transmission lines, and metering stations. 
    Vending kiosk, commercial. An unmanned structure that provides a product for remuneration. Examples are ice machines, video vending machines (see section 106.05.02.2(w), "vending kiosk, commercial" for regulations). 
    Vending kiosk, not-for-profit. An unmanned structure that provides a product. The fee for such product may be reduced or waived. (See section 106.05.02.2(x), "vending kiosk, not-for-profit" for regulations) 
    Warehouse. A large facility used primarily for the storage of goods and may include an office incidental to the primary use. 
    Water pumping station. A facility for transporting water including pumps, piping, valves and controls. 
    Water reservoir or well. An artesian well or manmade underground reservoir where water is collected and kept in quantity for use by a water system. 
    Water treatment plant. A facility for the purifying, storage, and distribution of town water including a system of reservoirs, channels, and mains. 
    Wholesale and distribution center. An establishment engaged in the receipt, storage, and distribution of goods, products, cargo, and materials to retailers, wholesalers, agents, brokers, and/or to industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business users and may include an office incidental to the primary use. 
    Winery/brewery retail sales. An establishment operated by the holder of a winery or brewery permit which has been lawfully issued to the permittee for the premises by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission (or any successor entity thereto) in accordance with V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code ch. 16 for the on-premises consumption of wine and or beer. 
    Winery/brewery/distillery. A manufacturing plant designed to distill alcoholic spirits such as wine, beer, ale or liquor. No on-premises individual sales of alcoholic drinks are allowed. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.01.15 - Other zoning ordinance definitions. 
    Access lane, major. Any privately owned on-site drive or lane intended to access the primary entrance(s) to land parcels and parking areas, and which accommodates vehicles or pedestrians. Such major access lanes may serve as fire lanes. Such lanes will likely intersect a major roadway at a median break, subject to the director's approval. 
    Access lane, minor. Any privately owned on-site drive or lane intended for internal access to land parcels and parking areas, and which accommodates vehicles or pedestrians. 
    Accessory use. Defined as any land use or building that, by its nature, is not the primary use of the tract of land upon which it is located. For example, a garage is secondary to the residence. In commercial districts, an accessory use is that which occupies less than 50 percent of the square footage of the main building. 
    Acts of nature. An extraordinary interruption by a natural cause (such as a flood or earthquake) of the usual course of events that experience, prescience, or care cannot reasonably foresee or prevent. 
    Advertising sign or structure. Any cloth, card, paper, metal, glass, wooden, plastic, plaster, or stone sign or other sign, device, or structure of any character whatsoever, including a statuary or place for outdoor advertising purposes on the ground or any tree, wall, bush, rock, post, fence, building, or structure. The term placed shall include erecting, constructing, posting, painting, printing, tacking, mailing, gluing, sticking, carving, or otherwise fastening, affixing or making visible in any manner whatsoever. The area of an advertising structure shall be determined as the area of the largest cross-section of such structure. Neither directional, warning, nor other signs posted by public officials in the course of their public shall be construed as advertising signs for the purpose of this chapter. (See chapter 86 of the Code of Ordinances, "Signs" for further details) 
    Agricultural use. A use that consist of the growing of crops mainly for food and fiber, or the keeping, grazing, breeding, or feeding of animals for the products they produce or for eventual sale. 
    Alley. A minor, one-lane drive which is used primarily for vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting or facing a street. 
    Animal shelter. A public or private facility for the enclosure of animals, especially stray, abandoned or unlicensed pets, with the intention of animal adoption. 
    Apartment. A room or suite of rooms arranged, designed, or occupied as the residence by a single-family, individual or group of individuals. Also known as a "unit." 
    Apartment accessory uses. Any structure that is intended for the use of residents, visitors, or employees of an apartment complex and includes, but is not be limited to, leasing centers, amenity centers, offices, and/or laundry facilities. 
    Applicant. Any person or entity that submits to the town an application for a permit required by the town for a project. To be qualified as an applicant under this chapter, the person or entity must have sufficient legal authority or proprietary interests in the land to commence and maintain proceedings under this chapter. The term shall be restricted to include only the property owner or a duly authorized agent and representative of the property owner. 
    Application for a permit. Any document filed with the town that clearly indicates that the applicant is seeking consideration for a permit, the type of permit sought, and provides the town with fair notice of the project, and when used in this zoning ordinance, shall include a plan for development; but excluding applications to establish or amend a zoning district, including but not limited to a request to establish or amend a Planned Development District or to receive or amend a specific use permit. 
    Area of the lot. The square footage of a lot shall be the net area of the lot and shall not include portions of streets or alleys. 
    Basement. A story located primarily below the natural grade line of the property. 
    Bay. A large opening in a wall or building, whether with or without bay doors, which is designed to allow vehicle access. Also referred to as docks or internal loading spaces. 
    Bay door. An oversized door, typically with roll-up or swing-type doors, commonly used in conjunction with docks, bays, and loading spaces. 
    Block. An area enclosed by streets and occupied by or intended for buildings, or if said word is used as a term of measurement, it shall mean the distance along a side of a street between the nearest two streets which intersect said street on the said side. 
    Block face. The portion of a block adjacent to the street. 
    Block length. The length of the block face between two street intersections. 
    Buildable area. The allowable area available to construct a building or structure after complying with the town's applicable setback and maximum lot coverage requirements. 
    Building. Any structure built for the support, shelter, and enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind. 
    Building ends. Those sides of a building having the lesser dimensions as compared to the front or rear of a building. As used herein for the building spacing regulations for multiple family dwelling, a "building end" shall be interpreted as being the more narrow side of a building regardless of whether it fronts upon a street, faces the rear of the lot or is adjacent to the side lot line or another building. 
    Building height. The vertical distance between the average of the highest and lowest points of grade of that portion of the lot covered by the building to the highest point of a structure, not including chimneys, aerials, and similar projections. 
    Building line. A line parallel or approximately parallel to the street line at a specific distance there from, marking the minimum distance from the street line that a building may be erected. 
    Building official. The building inspector or administrative official charged with responsibility for issuing permits and enforcing the zoning ordinance and building code. 
    Building, main. A building in which the principal use of the lot on which it is situated is conducted. In a residential district any dwelling shall be deemed to be a main building on the lot on which it is situated. 
    Building site. A single tract of land located within a single block, which (at time of filing for a building permit) is designed by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. It shall front upon a street or approved place. A building site may be subsequently subdivided into two or more building sites, and a number of building sites may be combined into one building site, subject to the provisions of this chapter and subdivision ordinance. 
    Build-to line. A line parallel or approximately parallel to the street line at a specific distance therefrom, marking the maximum distance from the street line that a building may be erected - generally used in form-based zoning districts. 
    Candlepower. The quantity of light required to illuminate a surface one foot distance from a light source to the intensity of one footcandle. 
    Carnival or circus. A traveling show or exhibition, sometimes housed in tents which has no permanent structure or installation and may include restaurants and retail shops incidental to the use. 
    Carport. A structure open on a minimum of three sides designed or used to shelter the owner's vehicle, not to exceed 24 feet on its longest dimension. Carports are generally prohibited in the town. Also called "covered parking area." 
    Cellar. That portion of a building between floor and ceiling which is partly below and partly above grade but so located that the vertical distance from grade to the floor below is greater than the vertical distance from grade to ceiling. 
    Cemetery and/or mausoleum. A cemetery is a place designed for the burial of the dead. A mausoleum is a building with places for the entombment of the dead. 
    Certificate of occupancy or compliance. An official certificate issued by the town through the building official which indicated conformance with or approved conditional waiver from the zoning regulations and authorized legal use of the premises for which it is issued. 
    Comprehensive plan. Policies adopted by the town council which govern the future development of the town and which consist of various components governing specific geographic areas as well as functions and services provided by the town. 
    Court. An open, unoccupied space, bounded on more than two sides by the walls of a building. An inner court is a court entirely surrounded by the exterior walls of a building. An outer court is a court having one side open to a street, alley, yard or other permanent space. 
    Day services, adult. A facility that provides services under an adult day care program on a daily or regular basis, but not overnight, to four or more elderly or handicapped persons who are not related by blood, marriage, or adoption to the owner of the facility. Adult day services centers (also referred to as adult day care centers) must be licensed by the Texas Department of Human Services. 
    Decibel (dBA). A unit of measurement of sound pressure. 
    Depth of lot. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
    Depth of rear yard. The mean horizontal distance between the rear line of a building other than an accessory building and the rear lot line except as modified by this chapter. 
    Development. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings and/or other structures, paving, drainage, utilities, storage, and agricultural activities. 
    Director. The director of development services for the Town of Little Elm. 
    Disability or handicap. With respect to an individual: 
(1)  A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities, 
(2)  A record of having such an impairment, or 
(3)  Being regarded as having such an impairment, but such term does not include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance. (as defined in Section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 802)) 
    District. A section of the town for which the regulations governing the area, height, or use of buildings are uniform for each type and class of structure. 
    Dwelling unit. A building or portion of a building which is arranged, occupied, or intended to be occupied as living quarters of an individual or family and including facilities for food preparation and sleeping. 
    Easement. A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation, or another person or entity. 
    Fence, open ornamental. Fencing constructed with wrought iron, tubular steel, or similar materials and designed to allow for partial visibility from one side of the fence to the other. Open ornamental fences may have solid masonry foundations, columns, or similar features. Chain link fences are not included in this definition. 
    Fence, residential. Fencing for residential rear yard screening is generally wood. See regulations in section 106.06.32, "residential fences." 
    Fence, solid masonry screening wall. Fences or screening walls are generally solid masonry with columns. See regulations in section 106.06.31, "screening." 
    Fire lane. A fire apparatus access road according to the International Fire Code adopted by the town. 
    Floodplain. Any property within the limits as delineated by FEMA (Federal Emergency Management Agency) of the 100-year floodplain or as amended by an engineering flood study of the ultimate developed conditions prior to any reclamation. 
    Floor area. The total square feet of usable floor space within the outside dimensions of a building including each floor level, but excluding cellars, carports or garages. Sometimes called "air conditioned space." 
    Floor area ratio (FAR). An indicated ratio between the number of square feet of total floor area in the main building on a lot and the total square footage of land in the lot; it is the number resulting from dividing the main building floor area by the lot area. 
    Footcandle. A unit of illumination produced on a surface, all points of which are one foot from a uniform point source of one candle. When metric units are used, lux is the unit of light quantity. One lux equals one lumen per square meter of area. One footcandle equals 10.76 lux. 
    Frequency. The number of times per second a vibration or sound wave oscillates. 
    Glare. Direct light emitted from a light source, which is sufficient to cause annoyance, discomfort, or temporary loss of visual performance and visibility. 
    Grade. 
(1)  For buildings having walls adjoining one street only, it is the elevation of the sidewalk at the center of the wall adjoining the street. 
(2)  For buildings having walls adjoining more than one street, it is the average of the elevation of the sidewalk at the center of all walls adjoining the street. 
(3)  For buildings having no wall adjoining the street, it is the average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior wall of the building. 
(4)  Any wall approximately parallel to and not more than five feet from a street line is to be considered as adjoining the street. 
(5)  Where no sidewalk has been constructed, the building official shall establish such sidewalk level or its equivalent for the purpose of these regulations. 
    Gross floor area. The gross floor space of an apartment house shall be measured by taking the outside dimension of the apartment building at each floor level, excluding, however, the floor area of basements or attics not used for residential purposes. 
    Height of buildings. The vertical distance measured from the highest of the following three levels: 
(1)  From the street curb level; 
(2)  From the established or main street grade in case the curb has not been constructed; 
(3)  From the average finished ground level adjoining the building if it sets back from the street line. 
(4)  To the level of the highest point of the roof beams of flat roofs or roofs inclining not more than one inch to the foot, or to the mean height level of the top of the main plates and highest ridge for other roofs. 
    Height of yard or court. The vertical distance from the lowest level of such yard or court to the highest of any boundary wall. 
    Home occupation. An occupation, which is secondary to the primary use of a dwelling as a residence, conducted on residential premises by the occupant of the residence. Home occupations shall be subject to the conditions set forth in section 106.05.02.2(k) "home occupations" of the zoning ordinance. Any activity carried out for personal gain in a dwelling unit by a resident of the premises, which occupation is secondary to the residential purpose of the premises. A residential structure used exclusively for a business with no permanent, overnight residence is considered a business and not a home occupation. 
    Infill development. The development of structures in vacant lots within developed areas which can utilize existing infrastructure. 
    Junk. The term "junk" includes scrap iron, scrap tin, scrap brass, scrap copper, scrap lead or scrap zinc and all other scrap metals and their alloys, bones, rags, used cloth, used rubber, used rope, used tinfoil, used bottles, old cotton or used machinery, used tools, used appliances, used fixtures, used utensils, used boxes or creates, used pipe or pipe fittings, used automobile or airplane tires, and other manufactured goods that are so weak, deteriorated or obsolete as to make them unusable in their existing condition. 
    Landfill. A tract of land used for the burial of farm, residential, institutional, industrial, or commercial waste that is not hazardous, medical, or radioactive. 
    Landscape architect. A person who holds a license to practice landscape architecture in the State of Texas. 
    Landscaping. Material such as, but not limited to, grass, groundcovers, shrubs, vines, hedges, trees, and non-living durable material commonly used in landscaping, such as, but not limited to, rocks, pebbles, sand, walls or fences, but excluding paving. 
    Loading space. An off-street space or berth used for the delivery and loading or unloading of vehicles. 
    Lot. A parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by one building, or unit group of buildings or uses customarily incident thereto, including such open spaces as are required under this chapter, and having its principal frontage upon a public street or a place. 
    Lot coverage. The percentage of the total area of a lot occupied by the base (first story or floor) of buildings located on the lot. The lot area covered by all structures located thereon. Structures shall include main structures and accessory structures with or without a permeable roof. Lot coverage does not include uncovered patios, drives, walkways, swimming pools or swimming pool decks. 
    Lot depth. The mean horizontal distance from the front street line to the rear line. 
    Lot lines. The lines bounding a lot as defined herein. 
    Lot line, front. The boundary between a lot and the street on which it fronts. 
    Lot line, rear. The boundary line which is opposite and most distant from the front street line; except that in the case of uncertainty the building official shall determine the rear line. 
    Lot line, side. Any lot boundary line not a front or rear line thereof. A side line may be a party lot line, a line bordering on an alley or place or side street line. 
    Lot of record. A lot which has been recorded in the office of the county clerk. 
    Lot, corner. A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. A corner lot shall be deemed to front on that street on which it has the smaller dimension, unless otherwise specified by the building official. 
    Lot, flag or panhandle. A lot having access to a street by means of a parcel of land having a depth greater than its frontage, and having a width less than the minimum required lot width, but not less than 25 feet. The maximum distance of the area less than the required width from the front property line shall be 110 feet. 
    Lot, interior. A lot whose property lines do not abut upon any street. 
    Lot, key. A corner lot that is so designed that the lots located directly behind it face the side street of the corner lot and are not separated by an alley shall be considered a key lot. 
    Lot, reverse corner. A corner lot abutting upon two intersecting streets where the rear lot line of one lot is also the side lot line of an adjoining lot. 
    Lot, through. An interior lot having frontage on two streets. 
    Lot, width. The horizontal distance between side property lines, measured at the front building or setback line, as established by the minimum front yard requirement of this chapter. 
    Nonconforming use, legal. A building, structure, or use of land lawfully occupied at the time of the effective date of this ordinance [from which this chapter is derived] or amendments thereto, but which does not currently conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is situated. (See section 106.05.05, "nonconforming uses" for more detailed information) 
    Nonresidential. Property zoned or used for other than residential purposes. For the purposes of this chapter, multifamily developments are considered to be commercial and nonresidential. 
    Occupancy. The use or intended use of the land or buildings by proprietors or tenants. 
    Octave band. A portion of the audible sound spectrum. An octave band analyzer divides the audible sound spectrum into eight octave bands. 
    Odor threshold. The concentration of odorous matter in the atmosphere necessary to be perceptible to the olfactory nerve of a normal person. Determination of the odor threshold is prescribed by A.S.T.M.D. 1391-57, Standard Method for Measuring Odor in Atmosphere. 
    Open space. Area included in any side, rear or front yard or any unoccupied space on the lot that is open and unobstructed to the sky except for the typical projections of cornices, eaves or porches. 
    Outside merchandise display, temporary. A temporary display of merchandise for sale outside of a building. 
    Outside storage and display, permanent. A primary land use providing outdoor storage or display of commodities, materials, goods, equipment, vehicles, or merchandise in its normal day-to-day business activities. This definition excludes new and used sale or lease of automobiles, motorcycles recreational vehicles, boats, or watercrafts. This definition does not include temporary outside merchandise display, such as a sidewalk sale. 
    Outside storage and display, under eave display, temporary. The temporary display of merchandise for sale located immediately outside the main entrance to the building and generally in the area that is adjacent to the building and between the building and the walkway/entrance. Items include, but are not limited to, firewood, plants, pumpkins, shopping carts, and other items. (See section 106.05.03(g), "open storage, under eave display," for regulations) 
    Parking space. An area of not less than 180 square feet (measuring approximately nine feet by 20 feet not on a public street or alley, surfaced with concrete, enclosed or unenclosed, together with a driveway connecting the parking space with a street or alley permitting free ingress and egress. Head-in parking adjacent to a public thoroughfare or major access lanes shall not be permitted unless in the Lakefront District. 
    Particulate matter. Finely divided solid or liquid matter, other than water, which is released into the atmosphere. 
    Permit. A license, certificate, approval, registration, consent, permit, contract, or other agreement for the construction or provision of service from a utility owned, operated, or controlled by the town, or other form of authorization required by law, rule, regulation, order, or ordinance, which has been approved by the town, that a person or entity must obtain to perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project for which the permit is sought, and for which the application for the permit or information required to be submitted for consideration provides fair notice of the project to the town. Notwithstanding, an ordinance establishing or changing a zoning district, including but not limited to an ordinance establishing or amending a Planned Development District or specific use permit, is not considered a permit under this definition. 
    Photometric plan. A point-by-point plan depicting the intensity height, and location of lighting on the property. 
    Planned Development District. Intentional associations of uses developed as integral land use units such as industrial parks or industrial districts, offices, commercial or service centers, shopping centers, residential developments of multiple or mixed housing, including attached single-family dwellings or any appropriate combination of uses which may be planned, developed, or operated or integral land use units either by a single owner or a combination of owners. 
    Planning and zoning commission. The agency appointed by the town council as an advisory body to council and which is authorized to recommend changes in the zoning ordinance and is authorized to decide matters relating to platting. 
    Plat. A plan of a subdivision of land creating legal building lots or tracts and showing all essential dimensions and other information essential to comply with the subdivision standards of the town and subject to approval by the planning and zoning commission. Reference to a plat in this chapter means an official plat of record which has been approved by the planning and zoning commission and filed in the plat records of Denton County. 
    Premises. Land together with any buildings or structures occupying it. 
    Primary use. The principal or predominant use of any lot or building. 
    Private franchised utility, other than listed. A nonpublic utility requiring special facilities in residential areas or on public property such as heating, cooling, or communications not customarily provided by the municipality or the normal franchised utilities. Railroad track and right-of-way, but not including railroad stations, sidings, team tracks, loading facilities, dock yards or maintenance areas. 
    Private street development. A development of two or more lots sharing private gated vehicular accessways that are not dedicated to the public and are not publicly maintained. Private streets and alleys may be established only under the terms of both the subdivision ordinance and the zoning ordinance, sections 106.05.02.2(t), "private street development/gated communities - existing subdivisions" and (u), "private street development/gated communities - new subdivisions." The term "private street" shall include alleys within a private gated community. 
    Riparian buffer. An area of permanent vegetation adjacent to a watercourse and actively managed to maintain the integrity of stream channels and shorelines to reduce the impact of upland sources by trapping, filtering, and converting pollutants and supplying food, cover, and thermal protection to fish and other wildlife. The director shall establish and maintain a riparian buffer/corridor map. 
    Riparian corridor. An ecosystem that includes three major components: stream channel, floodplain, and transitional upland fringe. The director shall establish and maintain a riparian buffer/corridor map indicating riparian corridor locations. 
    River stone. This is smooth river cobble measuring approximately three to eight inches in diameter. 
    Room. A building or portion of a building which is arranged, occupied, or intended to be occupied as living or sleeping quarters, but not including toilet or cooking facilities. 
    Screening. Screening is defined as a solid barrier of permanent material of sufficient height and density so that the objects being screened are not visible from any point on the lot line when viewed from any height between ground level and seven feet above ground level. 
    Secondary use. A use included in a building or on a lot that is a lesser percentage of area than the primary use. 
    Shopping cart. A shopping cart is a metal or plastic conveyance meant to move goods from the store to a vehicle. The carts are owned by the store and not to be taken off premises (see section 106.05.03(f), "open storage, temporary" and (g), "open storage, under eave display" for regulations). 
    Shopping center. A group of primarily retail, service, commercial, and restaurant establishments planned, constructed and managed as a single entity with customer and employee parking provided on-site, provision for goods delivery separated from customer access, provision of aesthetically appropriate design and protection from the elements, and includes a managed sign program for all tenants. 
    Sign. Any device, including its structure and component parts, which conveys commercial messages for visual communication or advertising that is used for the purpose of attracting attention of the public, but not including any lawful display of merchandise. Signs are governed by chapter 86 of the Code of Ordinances. 
    Site plan. A detailed set of plans including such things as building footprints, parking, landscaping, photometrics, and building elevations. (See section 106.02.15, "site plan approval" for more detailed information) 
    Smoke. The visible discharge of particulate matter from chimney, vent, exhaust, or combustion process. 
    Snow cone establishment. A structure for the temporary sale of snow cones and similar pre-packaged food items. 
    Special exception. A special exception is a use that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout the zoning district but which, if controlled as to number, area, location, or relation to the neighborhood, would promote the public health, safety, welfare, morals, order, comfort, convenience, appearance, prosperity or general welfare. Such uses may be permitted in such zoning district as special exceptions if specific provision for the special exception is made. 
    Story. That part of a building included between the surface of one floor and the surface of the floor next above, or if there is no floor above, that part of the building which is above the surface of the highest floor thereof. A top story attic is a half-story when the main line of the eaves is not above the middle of the interior height of such story. The first story is the highest story having its interior floor surface not more than four feet above the curb level established or mean street grade or average ground level, as mentioned in "height of buildings" of this section. The standard height for a story is eleven feet, six inches. 
    Story, half. A single room within a dwelling unit above the second floor. A half-story will occupy no less than two-thirds of the area under the roof, and shall have non-operating opaque windows for facades that face adjacent properties. Transparent windows may face the front yard. A half-story containing independent apartment, living quarters, or bedroom shall be counted as a full story. 
    Street. A thoroughfare which affords principal means of access to property abutting thereon. 
    Street line. The dividing line between the street and the abutting property. 
    Streetscape. The urban elements that establish the major part of the public realm. The streetscape is composed of thoroughfares (travel lanes for vehicles and bicycles, parking lanes for cars, and sidewalks or paths for pedestrians) as well as the visible frontages (building facades and elevations, porches, yards, fences, awnings, etc.), and the amenities of the public frontages (street trees and plantings, benches, streetlights, etc.). 
    Structure. Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or attached to something having a location on the ground, including but not limited to advertising, signs, billboards, and poster panels but exclusive of customary fences or boundary or retaining walls. 
    Structural alterations. Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders. 
    Structure, accessory. Any structure, either attached or detached from the main dwelling, the use of which is incidental to that of the main structure and located on the same lot. Accessory structures include, but are not limited to patio covers, arbors, gazebos, cabanas, outdoor kitchens, recreational fire enclosures, solar panels, flagpoles, trellis, and structures/sheds or the like. A permit is required for many accessory structures. (See section 106.05.02.1(a) through (i) for requirements, "accessory uses.") 
    Temporary building. An industrialized or modular building or structure without a permanent foundation shall be considered a temporary building. Membrane structures shall not be considered a temporary building. 
    Thoroughfare. Same as street. 
    Town. References to the "town" shall mean the Town of Little Elm, Texas. 
    Town council. The governing body of the Town of Little Elm, Texas. 
    Toxic and noxious matter. Any solid, liquid or gaseous matter which is present in sufficient quantities to endanger health, safety or comfort of persons in the vicinity or which may cause injury or damage to property. 
    Tri-partite design. The technique of dividing the architectural elements of a building into three horizontal planes, with a distinctive base, middle and top. The top plane may be smaller in size and considered an architectural feature. 

    Urban mixed use. A development or portion of a development that includes a mixture of residential and nonresidential uses in a configuration where a majority of the buildings are two or more stories tall and pedestrian oriented. 
    Usable open space. An open area or recreational facility which is designed and intended to be used for outdoor living and/or recreation. An area of common usable open space shall have a slope not exceeding ten percent, shall have no dimension of less than ten feet, and may include landscaping, walks, recreational facilities and decorative objects such as art work or fountains. Usable open space shall not include: roof tops, accessory buildings, except those portions of any building designed specifically for recreational purposes, parking areas, driveways, turnaround areas, or the right-of-way of easement or public and private streets or alleys. 
    Variance. An adjustment to the application of the specific regulations of the zoning ordinance or subdivision ordinance on a particular parcel of property which, because of special conditions or circumstances of hardship peculiar to the particular parcel, is necessary to prevent the property from being deprived of rights and privileges enjoyed by other parcels in the same vicinity and zoning district. Only the board of adjustment of the town council may grant a variance. (See section 106.02.02(g), "variances" for more information). 
    Vested rights. The specific land use rights that are granted upon receipt of certain applications. (See section 106.02.07, "vested rights" for more information). 
    Vibration. A periodic displacement of the earth measured in inches (related to sound). 
    Yard, front. All the open area across the full width of the lot contained between the front property line of the lot and any portion of the main building. 
    Yard, rear. All the open area between the rear lot line and the rear line of the main building and the side lot lines. 
    Yard, side. All the open area between the building and the side line of the lot and extending from the front yard to the required minimum rear yard. 
    Yard, size. All the open area between the main building and the adjacent side line of the lot, and extending entirely from the front yard to the rear yard thereof. 
    Yard. An open space at-grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided, in measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear year, the least horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Secs. 106.01.16-106.01.20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES 
DIVISION 1. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 106.02.01 - Planning and zoning commission. 
(a)  Authority, duties and responsibilities. In addition to any authority granted to the planning and zoning commission by state law or other ordinances of the town, the planning and zoning commission shall have the following powers and duties under the provisions of these regulations: 
(1)  To make recommendations to the town council concerning adoption, modification, and implementation of the comprehensive plan and supporting studies. 
(2)  To make recommendations to the town council concerning amendments to the zoning ordinance and the creation or modification of zoning districts, as provided in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 211, as amended or superseded. 
(3)  To make recommendations to the town council concerning the rezoning of land, the approval of development plans, and specific use permits. 
(4)  To make recommendations to the town council concerning regulations and modifications to the subdivision regulations governing the platting and development of land. 
(5)  To approve or disapprove all plats pursuant to the terms of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 212 and the subdivision ordinance. 
(6)  To perform the following functions, mandated under state impact fee enabling legislation, as the town's designated capital improvements program advisory committee. Ad hoc voting member(s) will be added as necessary to meet state requirements when acting as this committee. 
a.  To make recommendations to the town council concerning the development and adoption of land use assumptions; 
b.  To review and file written comments with the town council on the impact fee capital improvements plans; 
c.  To monitor and evaluate implementation of the impact fee capital improvements plans; 
d.  To advise the town council of the need to update or revise the land use assumptions, impact fee capital improvements plans, the impact fee ordinance, and fee rates; and 
e.  To file a semiannual report evaluating the progress of the town in achieving the impact fee capital improvements plans and identifying any problems in implementing the plans or administering impact fees. 
(7)  To make recommendations to the town council concerning amendments to the thoroughfare plan. 
(8)  To make recommendations to the town council concerning amendments to the sign ordinance. 
(9)  To make recommendations to town council concerning the annexation of land into the corporate limits of the town. 
(10)  To gather information and make recommendations to the town council in cooperation with the park board and similar organizations concerning recreation areas, the development and improvement of parks and boulevards, the extension and opening of streets and other public rights-of-way, and the general town plans and improvements. 
(11)  To keep itself informed concerning the progress of town planning in all areas and conduct studies and provide recommendations for the improvement of the town with a view to the present and future movement of traffic, and the convenience, health, recreation, safety, general welfare, and needs of the town dependent on such plans. 
(12)  To consider and report to the town council with reference to all facts bearing upon all new public ways, lands, buildings, bridges, extensions, or opening of streets and their relation to the adopted comprehensive plan. 
(13)  To act as an advisory board to the town council relating to all nature of public utilities, controlling and regulating traffic upon the public streets of the town, and such other matters relating to civic improvements as the commission may deem beneficial and in the best interests of the town. 
(14)  To conduct related business and make other recommendations on matters that may be specifically assigned or required by the town council or director of development services. 
(15)  Submit in March of each year a written progress report to the town council summarizing its activities, major accomplishments for the past year, and proposed work program for the coming year. The report shall contain the attendance record of all members and the identity of the commission members and officers for the preceding year. 
(16)  All current and alternate members are required to attend a recognized class regarding planning and zoning rules and procedures within 12 months of appointment or the first available class. 
(17)  Staff shall provide commission members with periodic workshops regarding the subject of planning, zoning, comprehensive plans, open meetings, or other subjects of benefit to the members and the functioning of the commission. 
(b)  Composition of commission and terms of service. The planning and zoning commission shall be composed of seven regular members. Each regular member shall be appointed by the town council, and shall occupy a place on the planning and zoning commission, such places being numbered places one, two, three, four, five, six and seven, respectfully. In addition, two alternate members shall be appointed to places eight and nine, who shall serve in the absence of one or more of the regular members of the commission when requested to do so by the director. Each member and alternate shall be a resident citizen of the town and must forfeit his office should he cease to reside in the town during his term of office. The town council will consider for appointment to the commission only citizens who have demonstrated civic interest, general knowledge of the community, independent judgment, interest in planning and zoning matters, and availability to prepare for and attend meetings. It is the intent of the town council that members and alternates shall, by reason of diversity of their individual occupations, be broadly representative of the community. 
(1)  Terms shall be staggered to expire on February 28 of every year, with places one, four, and seven grouped, places two, five, and eight grouped, and places three, six, and nine grouped so that each group's terms expire every third year. 
(2)  Members shall serve at the will and pleasure of the town council. The terms of office for members of the commission, whether regular or alternate, shall be three years. Vacancies shall be filled for unexpired terms. Newly appointed members shall be installed at the first regular commission after their appointment. 
(3)  No person shall serve as a regular member of the commission for more than three successive terms of office. For purposes of this section, the phrase "terms of office" shall not include any unexpired portion of any three-year term. Alternate members shall have no term limits. 
(4)  Members and alternates of the commission shall serve without compensation and may not hold any elective office of the State of Texas or any other political subdivision thereof during their terms. 
(c)  Meetings and procedure. The commission shall hold an organizational meeting in March of each year or as soon thereafter as is possible and shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman from among its members before proceeding to any other matters of business. The secretary of the commission will be the development services director or his designee. Meetings of the planning and zoning commission may be held as often as necessary to conduct the business of the commission at the call of the chairman and as such other times the commission may determine. The commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and keep records of its proceeding consistent with the provisions of this section and the requirements of law. 
(1)  Meetings. All meetings and hearings of the commission shall be open to the public in accordance with applicable law and shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set forth in these regulations and rules of procedure adopted by the commission. Any action calling for a formal vote shall take place only at a public meeting. Executive sessions shall not be open to the public and shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures consistent with the laws of the State of Texas. 
(2)  Rules of procedure. The commission shall have the power to adopt its own rules of procedure insofar as same are consistent with the laws of the State of Texas and the ordinances of the Town of Little Elm, and shall keep a written record of all of its proceedings. The development services director shall have the duty of care, custody, and control of all records of the commission. 
(3)  Regular and special meetings. The commission shall hold meetings regularly at least twice each month within the corporate limits of the town, and shall designate the time and place of such meetings. The commission may hold special meetings as necessary, with all rules for regular meetings applicable. 
(4)  Expenses. Whenever deemed necessary by the commission to incur any expenses in the performance of duties assigned to the commission, an estimate of such proposed expenses shall be submitted to the development services director, who must obtain approval from the town manager. No debts of any kind or character shall be made or incurred by the commission, or anyone acting for the commission, unless and until such expenditures have been specifically authorized in writing by the town manager prior to the time such obligations are incurred. 
(5)  Quorum. Four members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(6)  Chairman's duties. The chairman shall preside over meetings. If a question regarding procedures arises, Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, shall apply. 
(7)  Vice-chairman's duties. The vice-chairman shall assist the chairman in directing the affairs of the board of adjustment. In the absence of the chairman, the vice-chairman shall assume the duties of the chairman. 
(8)  Alternate member rights. An alternate sitting as a regular member has all the rights and privileges as a regular member. 
(9)  Motions. A motion may be made by any member other than the presiding officer. 
(10)  Voting. Approval of all matters and motions before the commission shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of all members of the commission present and voting, unless otherwise provided by law or the adopted by rules of procedure. 
(11)  Minutes. The commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which are public records and shall be immediately filed in the office of the commission. 
(12)  Voluntary disqualification for cause. A member shall disqualify himself from voting whenever he finds that he has a personal or monetary interest in the property under review, or that he will be directly affected by the decision of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.02.02 - Board of adjustment. 
(a)  Authority, duties and responsibilities. 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the development services director in the enforcement of this chapter, including any appeal from a vested rights determination by the town manager pursuant to the town's vested rights policy, originally adopted by Resolution No. 11210602, and as amended by Resolution No. 03050801, and detailed in section 106.02.07, "vested rights," and any other applicable amendments. 
(2)  To hear and decide only such special exceptions as the board of adjustment is specifically authorized to pass on by the terms of this chapter; to decide such questions as are granted; and to grant special exceptions with such conditions and safeguards as are appropriate under this chapter, or to deny special exceptions when not in harmony with the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(3)  To hear and decide upon only such variances or modifications of the height, yard, area, coverage and parking regulations as the board is specifically authorized to pass on pursuant to the terms of this chapter. 
(4)  To hear and decide upon the existence of any nonconforming use and to enforce the amortization provisions as set forth in this chapter. 
(5)  To provide a reasonable interpretation of the provisions of chapter 22, article III, of the Code of Ordinances relating to substandard structures, to mitigate specific provisions of the substandard structure ordinances which create practical difficulties in their enforcement and to hear cases and make determinations relating to substandard structures. 
(6)  To hear and decide upon only such variances or modifications of the ordinance requirements relating to the size, shape or nature of a sign as the board is specifically authorized to pass on pursuant to the terms of chapter 86 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Composition of the board and terms of service. 
(1)  The board shall consist of five regular members who shall be appointed by the town council. Two of the regular members shall be appointed in one year and the remaining three members shall be appointed in the following year, with terms expiring on February 28 of the year the term ends. 
(2)  In addition to the five regular members of the board of adjustment, two alternate members of the board, who shall serve in the absence of one or more regular members, shall be appointed by a majority vote of the town council so that all cases heard by the board will always be heard by a minimum of four members. The initial term of office of two of the alternate members shall be one year while the initial term of the other two alternates shall be two years. Thereafter, all of the alternates shall be appointed for two-year terms. In determining which of the two alternate members shall serve in the absence of a member, the alternate members shall be contacted to serve on a rotating basis starting first with the alternate member having the longest tenure. If for any reason more than one member must be absent, more than one (alternate may serve consistent with the provisions of this section. 
(3)  Each member or alternate member of the board shall be a resident citizen and qualified voter of the town, at the time of his appointment. A member or alternate member who ceases to reside in the town during his term of office must immediately forfeit his office. 
(4)  The term of office for all members shall be two years. All vacancies on the board shall be filled by the town council. 
(5)  A regular member may not serve more than two consecutive full terms. This term limitation shall not apply to alternates. 
(6)  Members of the board may be removed by the town council in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 211. 
(7)  Members and alternates shall serve without compensation. 
(c)  Meetings and procedures. The board shall adopt procedures and rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs and in keeping with the provisions of this chapter and in accordance with state law. 
(1)  Meetings. Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. The chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act. 
(2)  Quorum. Each case before the board must be heard by at least four members. The concurring vote of at least four members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the director, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which the board is required to act under this Code or to grant any variance authorized by this chapter. 
(3)  Election of officers. At the first scheduled board meeting in March of each year, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the first item of business shall be the selection of the board of adjustment's chairman and vice-chairman by the regular members of the board. The alternate members of the board are not eligible to serve as the board chairman or vice-chairman or to participate in the selection of such chairman or vice-chairman. 
(4)  Chairman's duties. The chairman shall preside over meetings. If a question regarding procedures arises, Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, shall apply. 
(5)  Vice-chairman's duties. The vice-chairman shall assist the chairman in directing the affairs of the board of adjustment. In the absence of the chairman, the vice-chairman shall assume the duties of the chairman. 
(6)  Minutes. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which are public records and shall be immediately filed in the office of the board. 
(7)  Voluntary disqualification for cause. A member shall disqualify himself from voting whenever he finds that he has a personal or monetary interest in the property or case under review, or that he will be directly affected by the decision of the board. 
(d)  Appeal of director's decision. In exercising its powers, the board may, in conformity with the provisions of the state statutes, as existing or hereafter amended, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decision or determination appealed from and make such order, requirement, decision or determination, in the board's opinion, as ought to be made and shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. 
(1)  Appeals to the board concerning interpretation or administration of this chapter may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, or board of the town affected by any decision of the director. Such appeals shall be taken within a reasonable time, not to exceed 15 days, after the decision has been rendered by the director by filing with the official and the board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The director shall forthwith transmit to the board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(2)  The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
(3)  An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the director from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board after the notice of appeal is filed with him, that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board or by a court of record on application, on notice to the director from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
(e)  Appeals resulting from board action. 
(1)  Any persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by a decision of the board under this section, or any taxpayer or any officer, department, or board of the municipality may present to a court of competent jurisdiction a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within ten days after the filing of the decision in the office of the board and not thereafter. 
(2)  Any owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of record of property, jointly or severally, aggrieved by the final decision of the board issued under this section, may file in district court a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within 30 days after the date a copy of the final decision is personally delivered or mailed via first class mail, certified mail return receipt requested, to the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee and not thereafter. 
(3)  Any person aggrieved by a decision of the board issued under this section, may file in district court a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within 20 days after the date the decision is rendered by the board and not thereafter. 
(f)  Special exceptions. 
(1)  A special exception shall not be granted by the board unless and until: 
a.  Written application for a special exception is submitted indicating the section of this chapter under which the special exception is sought and stating the grounds on which it is requested; 
b.  Notice must be given at least 15 days in advance of the public hearing. The owner of the property for which special exception is sought or his agent shall be notified by mail. Notice of such hearings must be posted on the property for which the special exception is sought, at the town hall, and notice must be provided in one other public place, such as a newspaper, at least 15 days prior to the public hearing; 
c.  A public hearing must be held. Any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney; 
d.  The board shall make a finding that it is empowered under the section of this chapter described in the application to grant the special exception, and that the granting of the special exception will not adversely affect the public interest. 
(2)  In granting any special exception, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this chapter. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the special exception is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and the penalties set forth in section 106.01.11, "penalties and enforcement," shall apply. The board shall prescribe a time limit within which the action for which the special exception is required shall begin or be completed, or both. Failure to begin or complete, or both, such action within the time limit set shall void the special exception, without necessity of further action by the board. 
(g)  Variances. 
(1)  To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would result in unnecessary hardship and so that the spirit of this chapter is observed and substantial justice is achieved. A variance from the terms of this chapter shall not be granted by the board unless and until a written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating the following: 
a.  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district or area; 
b.  That a literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district or area under the terms of this chapter; 
c.  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant; and 
d.  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this chapter to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district or area. 
(2)  Nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same district, and permitted use of lands, structures, or buildings in other districts shall not be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance. 
(3)  Notice of public hearing must be given as set forth in this section; 
(4)  A public hearing must be held. Any party may appear in person, or by agent or attorney; 
(5)  The board shall make findings that the requirements of this section have been met by the applicant for a variance; 
(6)  The board shall further make a finding that the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance and that the variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building, or structure; 
(7)  The board shall further make a finding that the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
(8)  In granting any variance, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this chapter. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and the penalties set forth in section 106.01.11, "penalties and enforcement," shall apply. 
(9)  Under no circumstances shall the board grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this chapter in the district involved or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this chapter in said district. 
(h)  Nonconforming uses. 
(1)  The board, on its own motion or at the direction of the town council or an interested property owner, may inquire into the existence of any nonconforming use in the Town of Little Elm, and after public hearing and investigation into the conditions created by the use, fire or health hazards created by the use, and any other danger or nuisance to the public due to or created by any condition or use existing on the property, require the discontinuance or termination of such use. The owner of the use under investigation by the board shall have not less than ten days written notice prior to the day of the public hearing. The board, after having heard from any affected parties and the public, shall prescribe a reasonable time period for compliance, discontinuance and termination of the nonconforming use that allows for amortization of the owner's actual investment in the use that occurred before the time that the use became nonconforming. 
a.  In prescribing said time period, the board shall consider the following factors: 
1.  The capital investment in structures, fixed equipment, and other assets (excluding inventory and other assets that may be feasibly transferred to another site) on the property at the time the use became nonconforming; 
2.  Any costs that are directly attributable to the establishment of compliance date, including demolition expenses, relocation expenses, termination of leases, and discharge of mortgages; 
3.  Any return on investment since inception of the use, including net income and depreciation; and 
4.  The anticipated annual recovery of investment, including net income and depreciation. 
b.  If the board establishes an amortization (or compliance) date for a nonconforming use, the use must cease operation on that date and it may not operate thereafter unless it becomes a conforming use. 
c.  For purposes of this section, "owner" means the owner of the nonconforming use at the time of the board's determination of an amortization (or compliance) date for the nonconforming use. 
d.  The board shall have the power to subpoena witnesses, documents and things; administer oaths; punish for contempt; and may require the production of documents and other things, under such regulations as it may establish or deem appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.02.03 - Development services department. 
(a)  Administration and enforcement. The development services director ("director") shall administer and enforce this chapter. He may be provided with the assistance of such other persons as the town manager may direct. If the director shall find that any of the provisions of this chapter are being violated, he shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or structures or of additions, alterations, or structural changes thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this chapter to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions. 
(b)  Director or designee. The director may designate appropriate staff members to assist and guide decision making for those items that require staff approval. 
(c)  Construction and use to be as provided in applications, plans, permits, and certificates of occupancy. Building permits or certificates of occupancy issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the director authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement or construction. Use, arrangement, or construction or variance with that authorized shall be deemed violation of this chapter, and punishable as provided by section 106.01.11, "penalties and enforcement," hereof. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.02.04 - Zoning upon annexation. 
(a)  Home rule authority to annex. The town may, from time to time, alter its boundaries by annexing or disannexing territory in any size or shape desired in any manner provided by state law, with or without consent of the owners of such territory or the inhabitants thereof. Any additional territory annexed to the town shall be a part of the town for all purposes, and the property situated therein shall bear its pro rata part of the taxes levied by the town as provided by state law. The inhabitants thereof shall be entitled to all rights and privileges of all citizens and shall be bound by the acts, ordinances, and resolutions of the town. Whenever, in the opinion of the town council, there exists within the corporate limits of the town any territory, either inhabited or uninhabited, not suitable or necessary for town purposes, or upon a petition signed by a majority of the qualified voters residing in said inhabited territory, the council may, upon a public hearing and by ordinance duly passed, discontinue said territory as part of the town. The town shall comply with all applicable procedural rules and notice requirements set forth in state law. 
(b)  Annexed territory to be zoned AG Agricultural. All territory which hereafter is annexed to the town shall be temporarily zoned AG Agricultural district until otherwise zoned by the town council. 
(c)  Concurrent annexation and permanent zoning. In the event the planning and zoning commission holds a hearing on proposed annexation, it may, at its discretion, at the same time hold a hearing upon the permanent zoning that is to be given to the area or tract to be annexed, and make a recommendation on both matters to the town council so that the town council, can if it desires, act on the matter of permanent zoning and annexation at the same time. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.02.05 - Creation of a building site. 
    No permit for construction of a building or buildings upon any property within the town shall be issued until a building site, building tract or building lot has been created in compliance with one of the following conditions: 
(1)  The property is within the boundaries of an approved final plat and is located within the town limits of the Town of Little Elm and has been permanently zoned by the town council. 
(2)  The property is outside the town limits of the Town of Little Elm but within its extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) and platted according to the Town of Little Elm Subdivision Regulations, unless stated otherwise in an approved facilities agreement. 
(3)  The property is all or part of a conceptual plan adopted as part of the regulations of an approved Planned Development District and the associated plat which shows all utility and drainage easements, necessary streets and other public improvements, has been approved by the planning and zoning commission. The final plat shall be filed subsequent to the construction, dedication, and acceptance of the required easements, alleys, and streets by the town. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.02.06 - Platting. 
(a)  Property within the town limits. The town shall not approve any plat of any subdivision within the town limits of the town until the area covered by the proposed plat shall have been permanently zoned by the town council. 
(b)  Plat delay pending annexation. The town shall not approve any plat of any subdivision within any area where a petition or chapter for annexation or a recommendation for annexation to the town is pending before the town council unless and until such annexation shall have been approved by the town council. 
(c)  Regulations for property within town limit and ETJ. All plats in the town limits or the town's extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) must comply with the town of Little Elm Subdivision Regulations, unless stated otherwise in an approved facilities agreement. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.02.07 - Vested rights. 
(a)  Purpose, applicability and effect. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of a vested rights petition is to determine whether one or more standards of this chapter should not be applied to a development application by operation of state law, or whether certain permits are subject to expiration. 
(2)  Applicability. A vested rights petition may be filed for an application, permit, plan or plat, or any development application authorized under this chapter, filed in accordance with the V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 245 or successor statute. A vested rights petition may not be filed with a petition for a text amendment, a zoning map amendment or any other request for a legislative decision by the town council. A vested rights petition also may be filed prior to expiration of certain permits pursuant to subsection (b) below of this section. 
(3)  Effect. Upon granting of a vested rights petition in whole or in part, the responsible official (subsection (d) below) shall process the development application and the director of development services shall decide the application in accordance with the standards specified in the relief order based on prior ordinance requirements or development standards, or extend the permit otherwise subject to application pursuant to subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Expiration for projects began on or after August 15, 2017. 
(1)  Two-year permit expiration. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, for any development permit authorized by this chapter for which an expiration date is established and which is submitted for filing on or after August 15, 2017, the expiration date shall be two years following the date of approval of the permit. Exemption: The holder of the permit files a petition before August 15, 2017, for a vested rights determination pursuant to this subsection (b), alleging that progress has been made toward completion of the project for which the application subject to expiration was filed. If a vested rights petition is timely filed, the town manager shall determine the expiration date of the permit in deciding the petition. 
(2)  Five-year application/project expiration. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, for any development permit authorized by this chapter which is submitted for filing on or after August 15, 2017, and which has expired under subsection (b)(1) above of this section, all previously approved development applications for the same land also shall expire no later than five years from the date of filing of the first application for the project for which the expired application was filed, if the filing of an application for or approval of the expired permit was required to avoid expiration for the previously approved permit or permits, unless the holder of such permits files a petition before such date for a vested rights determination pursuant to this section 106.02.07, "vested rights" alleging that progress has been made toward completion of the project for which the applications subject to expiration were filed. If a vested rights petition is timely filed, the town manager shall determine the expiration date of the previously approved permits in deciding the petition. 
(c)  Petition requirements. 
(1)  Who may petition. A vested rights petition may be filed by a property owner or the owner's authorized agent, including the applicant, with any development application or by the holder of a permit subject to expiration pursuant to subsection (b) above of this section. 
(2)  Form of petition. The vested rights petition shall allege that the petitioner has a vested right for some or all of the land subject to the development application under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 245, Issuance of Local Permits or successor statute, or pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 43.002, Continuation of Land Use, or successor statute, that requires the town to review and decide the application under standards in effect prior to the effective date of the currently applicable standards. The petition shall include the following information and documents: 
a.  A narrative description of the grounds for the petition; 
b.  A copy of each approved or pending development application that is the basis for the contention that the town may not apply current standards to the development application that is the subject of the petition; 
c.  The date of submittal of the application for the permit, or of a development plan pursuant to which the permit was subsequently filed, if different from the official filing date; 
d.  The date the project for which the application for the permit was submitted was commenced; 
e.  Identification of all standards otherwise applicable to the development application from which relief is sought; 
f.  Identification of any current standards which petitioner agrees can be applied to the development application at issue; 
g.  A narrative description of how the application of current standards affects proposed use of the land, landscaping or tree preservation, open space, or park dedication, lot size, lot dimensions, lot coverage or building size shown on the development application for which the petition is filed; 
h.  A copy of any prior vested rights determination involving the same land; and 
i.  Where the petitioner alleges that a permit subject to expiration under subsection (b) above of this section should not be terminated, a description of the events constituting progress toward completion of the project for which the permit subject to expiration was approved. 
(d)  Timing for filing petition. A vested rights petition must be filed with a development application for which a vested right is claimed, except that the petition may be filed before the date of expiration of any permit when filed pursuant to subsection (b) above. Where more than one application is authorized to be filed by this chapter, the petition may be filed simultaneously for each application. 
(e)  Processing of petitions and decision. 
(1)  Responsible official. The responsible official for processing the development application in conjunction with a vested rights petition is the director of development services. The director shall promptly forward a copy of the vested rights petition, along with his recommendation, to the town manager and town attorney for their review. 
(2)  Decision by town manager. The town manager is the final decision-maker on all vested rights petitions. A request must be accompanied by a waiver of the time for decision-making on the application imposed under this article pending decision by the town manager on the vested rights petition, which shall stay further proceedings on the application. Upon receipt of the request, the director of development services or his designee shall prepare a recommendation and forward the matter to the town manager for decision, who shall decide the petition within 30 calendar days following the petitioner's request. 
(3)  Appeals. Appeals to the town manager's decision shall be brought to the board of adjustment. Appeals to the decision made by the board of adjustment may be brought to the district or county court, as stipulated in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.011. 
(f)  Criteria for approval. 
(1)  Factors. The town manager shall decide the vested rights petition based upon the following factors: 
a.  The nature and extent of prior development applications filed for the land subject to the petition; 
b.  Whether any prior vested rights determinations have been made with respect to the property subject to the petition; 
c.  Whether any prior approved applications for the property have expired or have been terminated in accordance with law; 
d.  Whether current standards adopted after commencement of the project affect proposed use of the land, landscaping or tree preservation, open space, or park dedication, lot size, lot dimensions, lot coverage or building size based upon the proposed development application; 
e.  Whether any statutory exception applies to the standards in the current zoning ordinance from which the applicant seeks relief; 
f.  Whether any prior approved applications relied upon by the petitioner have expired; 
g.  Any other provisions outlined in the V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 245 or successor statute. 
(2)  Conditions. If the claim of vested rights under a petition is based upon a pending application subject to standards that have been superseded by current standards under this chapter, the decision-maker may condition any relief granted on the petition on the approval of the application under such prior standards. 
(g)  Application for permits following final decision on the vested rights petition. Following the town manager's decision on the vested rights petition, the property owner shall revise the development application or permit to conform to the final decision. The decision-maker on the development application shall consider any application revised under this article in accordance with the procedures for deciding the initial application under this chapter and in conformity with the relief granted on the petition. If the relief granted on the vested rights petition is consistent with the development application on file, no revisions are necessary. If proceedings have been stayed on the development application pending referral of the vested rights petition, proceedings on the application shall resume after the town manager's decision on the vested rights petition. 
(h)  Action on petition and order. 
(1)  Action on the petition. The town manager's decision on the vested rights petition may take any of the following actions: 
a.  Deny the relief requested in the petition, and direct that the development application shall be reviewed and decided under currently applicable standards; 
b.  Grant the relief requested in the petition, and direct that the development application shall be reviewed and decided in accordance with the standards contained in identified prior regulations; or 
c.  Grant the relief requested in part, and direct that certain identified current standards shall be applied to the development application, while standards contained in identified prior regulations also shall be applied; or 
d.  For petitions filed pursuant to subsection (b) above of this section, specify the expiration date or the conditions of expiration for the permit(s). 
(2)  Order on the petition. The town manager's report and each decision on the vested rights petition shall be memorialized in an order identifying the following: 
a.  The nature of the relief granted, if any; 
b.  The approved or filed development applications upon which relief is premised under the petition; 
c.  Current standards which shall apply to the development application for which relief is sought; 
d.  Prior standards which shall apply to the development application for which relief is sought, including any procedural standards; 
e.  The statutory exception or other grounds upon which relief is denied in whole or in part on the petition; 
f.  To the extent feasible, subordinate development applications that are subject to the same relief granted on the petition; and 
g.  For petitions filed pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, the date of expiration of the permit or permits. 
(i)  Expiration and extension. 
(1)  Expiration. Relief granted on a vested rights petition shall expire on occurrence of one of the following events: 
a.  The petitioner or property owner fails to submit a required revised development application consistent with the relief granted through the vested rights decision within 45 days of the final decision on the petition; 
b.  The development application for which relief was granted on the vested rights petition is denied under the criteria made applicable through the relief granted on the petition; or 
c.  The development application for which relief was granted on the vested rights petition expires. 
(2)  Extension. Extension of the date of expiration for the development application for which relief was granted on a vested rights petition shall result in extension of the relief granted on petition for a like period. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Secs. 106.02.08-106.02.10 - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROCEDURES 

Sec. 106.02.11. - Map amendments to the zoning ordinance. 
(a)  Purpose. The zoning ordinance official zoning map may be changed from time-to-time due to changes in market forces, development opportunities, or individual requests for development other than what is designated on the official zoning map. This section describes the process by which the official zoning map may be changed. 
(b)  Authority. Any person or corporation having a legal or equitable ownership interest in any real property may petition the town council for a change or amendment to the official zoning map or the regulations relating to a specific tract of land located within the town. In addition, the planning and zoning commission may on its own motion or on request from the town council institute a study and proposal for such changes and amendments in the public interest. 
(c)  City initiation. The town council may, from time to time, amend or change by ordinance the boundaries of the various zoning districts or the use and development regulations relating to a specific property in accordance with the manner provided by state law. 
(d)  Procedure and approval. 
(1)  Compliance with comprehensive future land use map (FLUP). Before taking action on any proposed amendment or change, staff shall determine that the proposed amendment is consistent with the goals and vision of the comprehensive plan. If it is not, the staff recommendation shall be for denial unless or until a comprehensive plan change has been effected that would bring the request into compliance with the comprehensive plan. 
ARTICLE II, TABLE AFuture Land Use Plan/Zoning District Conversion TableFuture Land Use Plan Designation Supported Zoning Districts* Estate Residential AG, SF-RE, CF Low Density Residential A-1, A-2, SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, SF-4, SF-X Medium Density Residential TH, D, PH, SF-X High Density Residential MF, TH, PH Manufactured Home Area MH-1, MH-2, D Public/Semi-Public CF Parks and Open Space AG, CF Private Recreation CF Town Center LF, CF Retail/Office O, NS, LC, CF Business Commercial LC, HC, LI, HI, CF Lakefront District N/A Eldorado Corridor District N/A  
*PD zoning may be supported in any of the FLUP designations 
(2)  Comprehensive plan and zoning amendment considered concurrently. A future land use plan amendment and a zoning change may be requested together, noticed together, and be considered at the same planning and zoning commission and town council meetings. If processed together there will not be an additional application fee. However, if a future land use plan amendment is requested separate from a zoning request, an application fee is required to be paid. The amount shall be equal to the zoning application fee. 
(3)  Notification prior to the planning and zoning commission public hearing. The commission must hold a public hearing on any application for a zoning map amendment or change prior to making its recommendations and report to the town council. The following state mandated regulations must be met before the public hearing may be convened: 
a.  Written notice of all public hearings before the commission on a proposed amendment or change to the official zoning map, including an amendment or change to the use and development regulations governing a specific tract of land, must be sent to all owners of real property located within 200 feet of the property on which the change is requested. Notice must be given a minimum of ten days prior to the date set for the public hearing by mailing such notice properly addressed and postage-paid to each taxpayer as the ownership appears on the last approved town tax roll. A certificate of mailing shall be obtained from the postal service and copy of same shall be retained in the case records. 
b.  Notice of such hearing by the planning and zoning commission must be given by publication in the official newspaper of the Town of Little Elm stating the time and place of such public hearing a minimum of ten days prior to the hearing. 
c.  Public notification signs must be posted, per subsection (e), below, a minimum of ten days prior to the hearing and remain in place until the public hearing by the commission and must remain in place until the hearing before the town council. 
d.  Notice of the public hearing must be posted at town hall a minimum of 72 hours prior to the commission hearing. 
(4)  Commission recommendation. The town council shall not take action on a proposed zoning amendment without a recommendation from the planning and zoning commission. 
(5)  Town council notification and approval. A public hearing must be held by the town council before adopting any proposed zoning map amendment or development regulation change relating to a specific tract of land. The following state mandated regulations must be met before the public hearing may be convened: 
a.  Notice of the town council public hearing must be given by publication in the official newspaper of the Town of Little Elm stating the time and place of such public hearing a minimum of 15 days prior to the hearing. 
b.  Public notification signs posted, per subsection (e), below, must remain in place until the public hearing by town council. 
c.  Notice of the town council public hearing must be posted at town hall a minimum of 72 hours prior to the hearing. 
(6)  If a written protest against such change is submitted in accordance with section 106.02.13, "zoning amendment protest procedure," by the owners of 20 percent or more of either (i) the area of the lots or land covered by the proposed change or (ii) the area of the lots or land immediately adjoining the area covered by the proposed change and extending 200 feet from that area, such map amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of all the members of the town council. 
(7)  In computing the percentage of land area under subsection (6), above, the area of streets and alleys shall be included. 
(e)  Public notification signage. 
(1)  Any person, firm or corporation requesting a change in zoning from one zoning classification to another zoning classification on a specific site or other amendments to the use and development regulations governing such property shall erect and maintain a notification sign, provided by the town upon said property. Such sign shall be: 
a.  Sized a standard four-foot by four-foot; 
b.  Located within 15 feet of the closest, adjacent, most heavily traveled thoroughfare; 
c.  Located perpendicular to the street so as to be clearly visible and both sides of the sign are clearly readable from the thoroughfare and not obstructed in any manner; 
d.  Located so as not to create a hazard to traffic on, entering or leaving public rights-of-way abutting the property; and 
e.  Erected on the subject property at least ten days prior to the public hearing of such request by the planning and zoning commission, and to remain continuously on said property until final action by the town council or withdrawal of the request by the applicant. Removal of the required public notification sign by the applicant prior to final action of the town council shall constitute a withdrawal of the request. Photographic proof (with time stamp) must be provided to staff to ensure that the notification signs have been placed on the property within the required timeframe. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to remove, destroy, deface or obstruct the view of a required sign which gives notice that a zoning hearing has been requested, however, it shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution of the underlying zoning request has been finally approved or denied by the town council or if such request has been withdrawn by the applicant. 
(3)  In the event the applicant should fail to erect or maintain any required signs in accordance with any appropriate standard in this section, then the public hearing before the planning and zoning commission and/or town council must be postponed to a date in the future that allows adequate time for compliance. 
(4)  The sign shall be two-sided and state that a zoning change is requested and shall list a phone number of an appropriate town department that may be contacted for information regarding this request. 
(5)  There shall be a cost attributed to the receiving of each sign by the applicant and such cost shall be listed in the schedule of fees. 
(6)  Failure to comply with the posting of the signs required by this section 106.02.11(e), "map amendments to the zoning ordinance, public notification signage" or to otherwise strictly comply with the manner in which such signs are posted, shall not invalidate any public hearing or action taken by either the commission or the town council relating to a request to amend the zoning regulations relating to the property. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.02.12 - Text amendments to the zoning ordinance. 
(a)  Purpose. The text of the zoning ordinance may be changed from time-to-time due to changes in market forces, new materials, or new best practices for issues relating to zoning. This section describes the process by which the zoning ordinance text may be changed. 
(b)  Authority. Any person or corporation having a legal or equitable ownership interest in any real property located in the town may petition the town council for a text amendment to the provisions of this zoning ordinance, or the planning and zoning commission may, on its own motion or on request from the town council, institute a study and proposal for changes or amendments that are in the public interest. 
(c)  Procedure and approval. 
(1)  Planning and zoning commission public hearing. The commission shall hold a public hearing on any application for any text amendment or change prior to making its recommendations and report to the town council. The public noticing shall follow the same procedure detailed in section 106.02.11(d)(3), "notification prior to the planning and zoning commission public hearing," although no public notification signs need to be posted. 
(2)  Planning and zoning commission recommendation. The town council shall not take action on a proposed zoning amendment without a recommendation from the planning and zoning commission. 
(3)  Town council public hearing. A public hearing shall be held by the town council shall follow the same procedure detailed in section 106.02.11(d)(5), "town council notification and approval" before adopting any proposed text amendment. 
(4)  Town council approval. The town council may, from time to time, amend, supplement, or change by ordinance this zoning ordinance as provided by state law. 
(5)  Scrivener error. A minor correction to the wording or spelling of the zoning ordinance text that does not in any way change the meaning of the ordinance may be brought to the town council without a public hearing or notification. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.02.13 - Zoning amendment protest procedure. 
(a)  Purpose. 
(1)  State law expressly enables the governing body of a municipality to establish procedures for adopting and enforcing zoning regulations and district boundaries. Pursuant to that authority, the town council enacts this section 106.02.13(b), "zoning amendment protest procedure, form of protest" governing the receipt of written protests submitted for the purpose of requiring the favorable vote of three-fourths of all members of the town council to effect a change in a zoning district classification or boundary. 
(2)  This section 106.02.13(b), "zoning amendment protest procedure, form of protest" is not intended to conflict with state law; it is being enacted at a time when the state law does not explicitly provide how, when, or where a written protest must be filed. The town council expressly recognizes that this section 106.02.13(b) may be partially or completely preempted at any such time that state law is amended to explicitly provide how, when, or where a written protest must be filed. 
(3)  This section 106.02.13(b), "zoning amendment protest procedure, form of protest" is intended to accomplish the following listed objectives that, in the opinion of the town council, are fully in keeping with the purposes, spirit, and intent of the state law: 
a.  To allow town staff sufficient time to accurately calculate the land area percentages that determines the voting requirement; 
b.  To protect the rights of all parties by establishing minimum criteria to ensure the reliability of written protests received; 
c.  To protect the rights of those protesting by establishing procedures and deadlines which are not unduly burdensome or restrictive; and 
d.  To promote order and maintain the integrity of the zoning process. 
(b)  Form of protest. 
(1)  A protest must be in writing submitted on a form prepared by the town secretary and, at a minimum, contain the following information: 
a.  A description of the zoning case at issue; 
b.  The printed or typewritten names of all persons signing the protest of the proposed change in zoning district classification or boundary; 
c.  A description of the area of lots or land owned by the protesting parties that is either covered by the proposed change or located within 200 feet of the area covered by the proposed change; 
d.  The mailing addresses of all persons signing the protest; 
e.  The date and time the protest is signed; and 
f.  If signing the protest on behalf of the owner of property pursuant to a power of attorney, so indicate on the protest and submit a copy of the power of attorney with the protest. 
(2)  The protest must bear the original signatures of all persons required to sign under section 106.02.13(c), "zoning amendment protest procedure, appropriate signers" below. 
(3)  Simply returning the written notice provided to a property owner pursuant to section 106.02.11(d)(3), Notification prior to the planning and zoning commission public hearing" shall not constitute a written protest pursuant to this section 106.02.13(b), "form of protest." 
(c)  Appropriate signers. 
(1)  A protest must be signed by the owner of the property in question, or by a person authorized by power of attorney to sign the protest on behalf of the owner. If the property is owned by two or more people, the protest must be signed by a majority of the owners, or by a person authorized by power of attorney to sign the protest on behalf of a majority of the owners, except that in the case of community property, the town shall presume the written protest of one spouse to be the protest of both. 
(2)  In the case of property owned by a corporation, the protest must be signed by the president, a vice-president, or by an attorney in fact authorized to sign the protest on behalf of the corporation. In the case of property owned by a general or limited partnership, the protest must be signed by a general partner or by an attorney in fact authorized to sign the protest on behalf of the partnership. In the case of property owned by a trust, the protest must be signed by the trustee(s) authorized under the trust agreement to perform actions with respect to the property. 
(3)  Lots or land subject to condominium ownership are presumed to be commonly owned in undivided interests by the owners of all condominium units and under the control of the governing body of the condominium. For such lots or land to be included in calculating the lots or land area protesting a proposed rezoning, the written protest must state that the governing body of the condominium has authorized a protest in accordance with procedures required by its bylaws, and that the person signing the protest is authorized to act on behalf of the governing body of the condominium. A written protest signed by the owner of an individual condominium unit shall not be accepted unless the filing party produces legal documents governing the condominium which clearly establish the right of an individual owner to act with respect to his or her respective undivided interest in the common elements of the condominium. 
(4)  For purposes of this subsection, the "owner" of the property for which a protest is being submitted shall be determined to be the owner of the property shown in the records of the Denton Central Appraisal District as of the date of delivery of the protest to the town secretary. A person with only a leasehold or easement interest in property is not an "owner" for purposes of filing a protest pursuant to this subsection. 
(5)  A person who is not named on the records of the Denton Central Appraisal District as the owner of the property may submit additional information to the town attorney indicating that the person is the current record owner of the property identified in the protest. The determination of the town attorney as to the sufficiency of such information and whether or not the person should be considered the record owner of the property for purpose of filing the protest is final. Any additional information submitted pursuant to this paragraph (c) must be submitted by the deadline required for submission of the protest. 
(d)  Filing deadline. 
(1)  A written protest must be filed with the town secretary before noon of the business day immediately preceding the date advertised for the planning and zoning commission or town council public hearing in the statutory notice published in the official newspaper of the town. A protest sent through the mail must be received by the town secretary before the deadline. 
(2)  Before the public hearing on the case, the filing deadline is automatically extended whenever the public hearing is re-advertised in the official newspaper of the town pursuant to statutory notice requirements. 
(3)  After the public hearing has begun, and 
a.  The public hearing is concluded with no action being taken on the zoning amendment at the same meeting and a subsequent public hearing and advertising that public hearing in the official newspaper of the town pursuant to statutory notice requirements; or 
b.  The public hearing is continued to a date certain as otherwise allowed under the Texas Open Meetings Act; 
c.  The filing deadline may be extended to noon of the working day immediately preceding the newly advertised public hearing date or the date to which the public hearing is continued, as the case may be. 
(4)  Written protests may be filed electronically by emailing the written protest as an attachment in .pdf or similar format to the town secretary or by sending via facsimile transmission to the published facsimile telephone number for the office of the town secretary. 
(5)  For purposes of determining compliance with the filing deadline, the date and time the town secretary's office actually receives the written protest is solely determinative. 
(e)  Withdrawals of filed protests. Withdrawals of protests filed must be in writing and filed with the town secretary before the filing deadline for protests. The provisions of this subsection governing the form and filing of protests apply equally to withdrawals. 
(f)  Presumptions of validity. 
(1)  In all cases where a protest has been properly signed pursuant to this subsection, the town shall presume that the signatures appearing on the protest are authentic and that the persons or officers whose signatures appear on the protest are either owners of the property or authorized to sign on behalf of one or more owners as represented. 
(2)  In cases of multiple ownership, the town shall presume that a properly signed protest which on its face purports to represent a majority of the property owners does in fact represent a majority of the property owners. 
(3)  The presumptions in subparagraphs (1) and (2) above are rebuttable, and the town attorney may advise the town council that a presumption should not be followed in a specific case based on extrinsic evidence presented. 
(g)  Conflicting instruments. In the event that multiple protests and withdrawals are filed on behalf of the same owner, the instrument with the latest date and time execution controls. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.02.14. - Conceptual plan approval. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of a conceptual plan is to promote safe, efficient and harmonious use of land through application of town-adopted design standards and guidelines; protect and enhance the town's environmental and aesthetic quality; ensure adequate public facilities to serve development; prevent or mitigate adverse development impacts; aid the evaluation and coordination of land subdivision; and promote the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(b)  Applicability. A conceptual plan shall be required for all planned development districts. 
(c)  Conceptual plan format and submission requirements. The conceptual plan submission shall be comprised of the items set forth in the conceptual plan checklist, available online, and any additional information/materials, such as plans, maps, or exhibits as deemed necessary by the director in order to ensure that the planned development request is understood and regulations have been met. 
(d)  Official submission date and completeness of application. 
(1)  A conceptual plan is considered filed on the date the applicant delivers the conceptual plan to the town. 
(2)  The town shall consider the approval, disapproval, or conditional approval of a conceptual plan application solely on the basis of any regulations, ordinances, rules, expiration dates, or other properly adopted requirements in effect at the time. 
(3)  A conceptual plan application expires two years after the date the conceptual plan application is received if no further action has been taken. 
(e)  Principles and standards for conceptual plan review and evaluation. The following criteria have been set forth as a guide for evaluating the adequacy of proposed development within the town, and to ensure that all developments are, to the best extent possible, constructed according to the town's codes and ordinances: 
(1)  The plan is in compliance with all provisions of the zoning ordinance, the comprehensive plan, the thoroughfare plan, and other applicable ordinances of the Town of Little Elm. 
(2)  The impact of the development relating to the preservation of existing natural resources on the site and the impact on the natural resources of the surrounding properties and neighborhood. 
(3)  The relationship of the development to adjacent uses in terms of harmonious design, facade treatment, setbacks, building materials, maintenance of property values, and any possible negative impacts. 
(4)  The provision of a safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation system. 
(5)  The design and location of off-street parking and loading facilities to ensure that all such spaces are usable and are safely and conveniently arranged. 
(6)  The sufficient width, suitable grade, and location of streets designed to accommodate prospective traffic and to provide access for firefighting and emergency equipment to buildings. 
(7)  The coordination of streets so as to arrange a convenient system consistent with the thoroughfare plan of the Town of Little Elm. 
(8)  The use of landscaping and screening to provide adequate buffers to shield light, noise, movement, or activities from adjacent properties when necessary, and to complement and integrate the design and location of buildings into the overall site design. 
(9)  Sufficient exterior lighting is provided to ensure safe movement and for security purposes, which shall be arranged so as to minimize glare and reflection upon adjacent properties. 
(10)  The location, size, accessibility, and configuration of open space areas to ensure that such areas are suitable for intended recreation and conservation uses. 
(11)  Protection and conservation of soils from erosion by wind or water or from excavation or grading. 
(12)  Protection and conservation of watercourses and areas subject to flooding. 
(13)  The adequacy of water, drainage, sewerage facilities, solid waste disposal, and other utilities necessary for essential services to residents and occupants. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.02.15 - Site plan approval. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of a site plan is to promote safe, efficient and harmonious use of land through application of town-adopted design standards and guidelines; protect and enhance the town's environmental and aesthetic quality; ensure adequate public facilities to serve development; prevent or mitigate adverse development impacts; aid the evaluation and coordination of land subdivision; and promote the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(b)  Applicability. Site plan review is required for nonresidential development, multifamily development having four or more dwelling units, mobile home parks, parking lot reconstruction and reconfiguration, non-public agricultural buildings, and residential accessory structures (see section 106.05.021 for size requirements), and as otherwise required by the director. Site plan approval is required prior to issuance of a building permit in order to ensure compliance with all provisions of the zoning ordinance, the comprehensive plan, the thoroughfare plan, and other applicable ordinances of the Town of Little Elm. 
(c)  Site plan format and submission requirements. The site plan submission shall be comprised of the items set forth in the site plan checklist, available online, and any additional information/materials, such as plans, maps, or exhibits as deemed necessary by the director in order to ensure that the request is understood and regulations have been met. 
(d)  Official submittal date and completeness of application. A site plan is considered filed on the date the applicant delivers the application and exhibits to the town, either in person or by electronic transfer. 
(e)  Approval. Site plans are administratively approved by the director. Any significant substitution or material alteration to an approved site plan may require town council review and approval, as determined by the director. 
(1)  Site plan approval is revocable if it is determined that the conditions of the approval have not been met or if the plan contains or is based upon incorrect, fraudulent, or misrepresented information. 
(2)  Site plans expire 24 months after approval if an associated building permit application has not been submitted, reviewed, and approved. 
(3)  Staff shall consider the approval, disapproval, or conditional approval of a site plan application solely on the basis of any regulations, ordinances, rules, expiration dates, or other properly adopted requirements in effect at the time. 
(f)  Expedited approval. Should an applicant desire expedited review, a fee shall be charged in addition to the usual site plan fee. This fee ensures that staff will review and return comments within three business days from receipt of the application or revisions. The expedited process does not ensure approval. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.02.16 - Conditional use permit approval. 
(a)  Purpose of a conditional use permit. The purpose of a conditional use permit is to allow certain land uses so long as the applicant/use meets specific stated requirements. 
(b)  Applicability. Land uses subject to specific conditions for approval are marked in the Schedule of Uses with a "C." Explanatory notes are set forth in section 106.05.02, "special regulations for specific permanent land uses" and section 106.05.03, "special regulations for specific temporary land uses." 
(c)  Criteria for approval. Approvals shall be granted once the applicant has shown that the criteria for approval has been met. 
(d)  Approval. Conditional use permits are administratively approved by the director. 
(e)  Expedited approval. Should an applicant desire expedited review, a fee shall be charged in addition to the usual conditional use permit fee. This fee ensures that staff will review and return comments within three business days from receipt of the application or revisions. The expedited process does not ensure approval. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.02.17 - Specific use permit approval. 
(a)  Purpose. A specific use permit (SUP) is a permanent zoning change and as such, the town council has considerable discretion on approving, denying, or modifying such a request. The purpose of an SUP is to add or modify specific land use rights to those already granted within a zoning district. Approvals shall consider the intensity of the proposed use within the context of the proposed location for compatibility, traffic generated, noise, and other issues determined by the director to be pertinent to the case. Since zoning "runs with the land" and not the proposed use, thoughtful consideration should be exercised in approving an SUP since it will remain as part of the official zoning map even should the use for which the SUP was sought has ceased operation. 
(b)  Applicability. Land uses subject to approval of a special use permit are marked in the Schedule of Uses with a "S." Explanatory notes are set forth in section 106.05.02, "special regulations for specific permanent land uses." 
(c)  Procedure and approval. 
(1)  Planning and zoning commission public hearing. The commission must hold a public hearing on any SUP application prior to making its recommendations and report to the town council. The public noticing must follow the same procedure detailed in section 106.02.11(d)(3), "map amendment to the zoning ordinance, procedure and approval." 
(2)  Commission recommendation. The town council shall not take action on a proposed specific use permit request without a recommendation from the planning and zoning commission. 
(3)  Town council public hearing. A public hearing must be held by the town council shall follow the same procedure detailed in section 106.02.11(d)(5), "map amendment to the zoning ordinance, procedure and approval" before approving any SUP. 
(4)  Town council approval. The town council is authorized to approve, deny or modify specific use permit requests. 
(5)  Town council discretion. The town council may impose such additional development standards and safeguards as the conditions and locations indicate important to the welfare and protection of adjacent property from noise, vibration, dust, dirt, smoke, fumes, odor, gas, explosion, glare, offensive view, or other undesirable or hazardous conditions. 
(d)  Zoning map. All specific use permits approved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter in its original form or as hereafter amended shall be referenced on the official zoning map. 
(e)  Termination of specific use permits. 
(1)  If new construction is required to comply with a specific use permit or to be able to use property for the use for which a specific use permit is granted, a building permit for the property described in the specific use permit must be obtained from the town not later than six months after the effective date of the ordinance granting the specific use permit provided; however, the director may authorize one or more extensions of such deadline for a period totaling not more than one additional year after the original deadline. A specific use permit and the ordinance granting same shall terminate and be of no further effect if: 
a.  A required building permit has not been issued within the timeframe required by this section, or 
b.  A building permit has been issued but has subsequently expired. 
(2)  If no new construction is required to comply with a specific use permit or to make the property usable for the use for which a specific use permit is granted, the specific use permit and the ordinance granting same shall expire and be of no further effect if a certificate of occupancy is not obtained and use of the property for which the specific use permit granted has not commenced within six months after the effective date of the ordinance granting the specific use permit unless such ordinance grants a longer period of time to commence such use. 
(3)  If for a period of 180 days a building or property subject to a specific use permit is vacated, or if a building or property, though still occupied, is not being used for the purpose for which the specific use permit was granted, the SUP shall terminate and the use of the building or property described in the specific use permit shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the original zoning district of such property unless a new and separate specific use permit is granted for continuation of the use for which the original specific use permit was granted. 
(4)  Should a specific use permit be terminated, the official zoning map shall be amended by staff to reflect this change without the necessity of a public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.02.18 - Building permits and certificates of occupancy. 
(a)  Building permits. 
(1)  Applicability. No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a permit therefore issued by the town's building official authorized to issue the same. No building permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and all applicable building codes of the town. 
(2)  Town and extraterritorial jurisdiction. Building permits are required within the town limits and on all property within the town's extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) that was platted through the town. 
(3)  Site plan required. No building permit shall be issued for the construction of a building or buildings upon any tract or plot unless the tract is a lot of record and the structure has been reviewed and approved through the site plan process, unless otherwise declared eligible by the director or the town's building official. 
(4)  Approval. Building permits are approved by the town's building official following review and approval of applicable department staff. 
(5)  Expedited approval. Should an applicant desire expedited review, a fee shall be charged in addition to the building permit fee. This fee ensures that staff will review and return comments within three business days from receipt of the application or revisions. The expedited process does not ensure approval. 
(b)  Certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  Applicability. It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued therefore by the director stating that the proposed use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  Nonconforming structures. No nonconforming structure or use shall be maintained, renewed, changed or extended until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the building official. 
(3)  Conformance with zoning ordinance. No permit for erection, alteration, moving or repair of any building shall be issued until an application has been made for a certificate of occupancy and the certificate shall be issued in conformity with the provisions of this chapter upon completion of the work. 
(4)  Retention and public access. The director shall maintain a record of all certificates of occupancy, and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person. 
(5)  Penalty for operating without a certificate of occupancy. Failure to obtain a certificate of occupancy shall be a violation of this chapter and punishable under section 106.01.11, "penalties and enforcement." 
(6)  Approval. Certificates of occupancy and temporary certificates of occupancy are approved by the town's building official following review and approval of applicable department staff. 
(7)  Temporary approval. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the director for a period not exceeding six months during alterations or partial occupancy of a building pending its completion, provided that such temporary certificate may require such conditions and safeguards as will protect the safety of the occupants and the public. 
(8)  Expedited approval. Should an applicant desire expedited review, a fee shall be charged in addition to the usual certificate of occupancy fee. This fee ensures that staff will review and return comments within three business days from receipt of the application or revisions. The expedited process does not ensure approval. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.02.19 - Complaints. 
    Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint stating fully the causes and basis thereof shall be filed with the director. He shall record properly such complaint, immediately investigate, and take action thereon as provided by this chapter. 
Secs. 106.02.20-106.02.30 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 106.03.01 - Established districts. 
(a)  The established zoning districts in the Town of Little Elm are as follows: 
ARTICLE III, TABLE A
CURRENT ZONING DISTRICTS AND REGULATIONS Zoning Ordinance
SectionZoning ClassificationZoning Description106.03.02(a) A-1 Single-Family A-1 District 106.03.02(b) A-2 Single-Family A-2 District 106.03.02(c) SF-RE Single-Family Ranchette Estate District 106.03.02(d) SF-1 Single-Family 1 District 106.03.02(e) SF-2 Single-Family 2 District 106.03.02(f) SF-3 Single-Family 3 District 106.03.02(g) SF-4 Single-Family 4 District 106.03.02(h) SF-X Single-Family Mixed Size District 106.03.02(i) D Duplex District 106.03.02(j) TH Townhome District 106.03.02(k) PH Patio Home 106.03.02(l) MF Multifamily District 106.03.02(m) MH-1 Manufactured Home District 106.03.03(a) AG Agricultural District 106.03.03(b) O Office District 106.03.03(c) NS Neighborhood Services District 106.03.03(d) CF Community Facilities District 106.03.03(e) LC Light Commercial District 106.03.03(f) HC Heavy Commercial District 106.03.03(g) LI Light Industrial District 106.03.03(h) HI Heavy Industrial District 106.03.04(a) 380 OD 380 Overlay District 106.03.04(b) LF Lakefront Overlay District  
(b)  Nonresidential development standards comparison. 
ARTICLE III, TABLE BCOMPARISON OF NON-RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS Nonresidential
Zoning
DistrictsAG O NS CF LC HC LF LI HI AgriculturalOfficeNeighborhood
Services Community
Facilities Light
Commercial Heavy
Commercial LakefrontLight
Industrial Heavy
Industrial Max. height (feet) 35 60 60 60 60 60 See Section 106.04.02 60 60 Min. front yard (feet) 45 20 20 25 20 20 20 20 Max. front yard (feet) - 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 Min. side yard (feet) 20 - - 15 - - - - Min. side yard adjacent to residential (feet) 28 5 5 25 5 5 20 20 Min. rear yard (feet) 30 - - 25 - - - - Min. rear yard adjacent to residential (feet) 30 35 35 35 35 35 40 40 Min. lot width (feet) 60 50 50 - 50 50 - - Min. lot area (acres) 5 1 1 1 1 1 1 1  
(c)  Residential development standards comparison. 
ARTICLE III, TABLE CCOMPARISON OF RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS Residential
Zoning
DistrictsSF-RE SF-1 SF-2 SF-3 SF-4 A-1 A-2 SF-X TH PH MH-1 D MF Ranchette EstateSingle-Family 1
Single-Family 2
Single-Family 3
Single-Family 4
Single-Family A1
Single-Family A2
Single-Family MixTownhomePatio HomeManufactured
Home DistrictDuplexMultifamilyMax height (feet) 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 45 45 35 35 45 Min. front yard (feet) 40 25 25 25 25 25 25 20 6 4 6 1 25 25 25 Min. side yard (feet) 20 10 10 6 6 10 10 6 5 5 Var 6 6 10 15 Min. side yard on corner (feet) 28 25 25 28 28 28 28 28 15 15 28 28 20 Min. rear yard (feet) 30 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 30 Min. lot width (feet) 120 60 60 60 60 80 60 Var 1 25 35 60 60 70 Min. lot area (square feet) 1 acre 10K 8K 7K 6K 10K 6K Var 2 - - 6K 10K 7 - Min. floor area (square feet) 2400 2000 1600 1400 1200 1500 1000 Var 3 - - 1000 700 8 Var 9 Min. garage spaces 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 Min. additional spaces 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 0.3 0.5  
Note 1 - SF-X, minimum lot width: smallest lot = 60 feet; medium lot = 75 feet; largest lot = 90 feet. 
Note 2 - SF-X, minimum lot area: smallest lot = 10K; medium lot = 1/2 acre; largest lot = 1 acre. 
Note 3 - SF-X, minimum floor area: smallest lot = 1,800; medium lot = 2,000; largest lot = 2,400. 
Note 4 - TH and PH, maximum front yard setback for townhomes and patio homes is 12 feet. 
Note 5 - TH, minimum side yard for groups of 3-6 townhomes is 5 feet. 
Note 6 - PH, flexible side yards, but must add up to minimum 10 feet. 
Note 7 - D, minimum lot area with sewer service; without sewer service, minimum lot size is 1 acre. 
Note 8 - D, minimum square footage per family. 
Note 9 - MF, minimum square footage: one bedroom = 650; two bedroom = 800; three bedroom = 1,000; each additional bedroom = add 200/bedroom. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.03.02 - Zoning districts-Residential. 
(a)  A-1 Single-Family District. 
(1)  Use regulations. No building, structure, land or premises will be used, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered, except for one or more of the uses specified in section 106.05.01(a), "schedule of uses - residential." 
(2)  Height and area regulations. The height of buildings, the minimum dimensions of lots and yards, and the minimum lot area per family permitted on any lot, shall be as follows: 
ARTICLE III, TABLE DA-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS Maximum height 35' Minimum front yard setback 25' Minimum side yard setback 10' Minimum side yard setback on corner 1 28' Minimum rear yard setback 20' Minimum lot width (at building line) 2 80' Minimum lot area 10,000 sq. ft. Minimum floor area 3 1,500 sq. ft.  
Note 1. Where interior lots have been planned or sold fronting on the side street, may project not more than ten feet in front of the line established for buildings by the front yard requirements for the interior lots on the side street, provided this regulation shall not be interpreted to reduce the buildable width of a corner lot in separate ownership at the time of the passage of this chapter, to less than 28 feet, and provided that the side yard regulations above shall be observed. 
Note 2. The minimum width of a lot shall be measured at the front building line provided that where a lot has less width than herein required, in separate ownership at the time of the passage of this chapter, this regulation will not prohibit the erection of a one-family dwelling. Lots bordering streets on curves or contours shall be 80 feet in width at the building line. 
Note 3. Each dwelling unit hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed or altered in said A-1 Single-Family District shall have a floor area, excluding basements, open and screened porches and garages, of not less than 1,500 square feet. 
(b)  A-2 Single-Family District. 
(1)  Use regulations. No building, structure, land or premises will be used, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered, except for one or more of the uses specified in section 106.05.01(a), "schedule of uses - residential." 
(2)  Height and area regulations. The height of buildings, the minimum dimensions of lots and yards, and the minimum lot area per family permitted on any lot, shall be as follows: 
ARTICLE III, TABLE EA-2 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS Maximum height 35' Minimum front yard setback 25' Minimum side yard setback 10' Minimum side yard setback on corner 1 28' Minimum rear yard setback 20' Minimum lot width (at building line) 2 60' Minimum lot area 6,000 sq. ft. Minimum lot area (no public sewer) 1 acre Minimum floor area 3 1,000 sq. ft.  
Note 1. Where interior lots have been planned or sold fronting on the side street, may project not more than ten feet in front of the line established for buildings by the front yard requirements for the interior lots on the side street, provided this regulation shall not be interpreted to reduce the buildable width of a corner lot in separate ownership at the time of the passage of this chapter, to less than 28 feet, and provided that the side yard regulations above shall be observed. 
Note 2. The minimum width of a lot shall be measured at the front building line provided that where a lot has less width than herein required, in separate ownership at the time of the passage of this chapter, this regulation will not prohibit the erection of a one-family dwelling. Lots bordering streets on curves or contours shall be 60 feet in width at the building line. 
Note 3. Each dwelling unit hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed or altered in said A-2 Single-Family District shall have a floor area, excluding basements, open and screened porches and garages, of not less than 1,000 square feet. 
(c)  SF-RE Single-Family Ranchette Estate District. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of the SF-RE Single-Family Ranchette Estates District is to allow single-family detached dwellings on lots of not less than one acre per family, together with allowed incidental and accessory uses. 
(2)  Application. Lots in a subdivision or plat legally approved and properly recorded in Denton County prior to the effective date of Ordinance No. 427 which do not meet the minimum lot sizes and area requirements set forth in this section shall not be considered to be in violation of said requirements and, for purposes of this section, shall be deemed to conform to the requirements set forth in this section. 
(3)  Use regulations. No building, structure, land or premises shall be used, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, installed, or altered, except for one or more of the uses specified in section 106.05.01(a), "schedule of uses - residential." 
(4)  Accessory buildings. The following accessory buildings or shall be permitted as accessory to the principal structure or use within the SF-RE Single-Family Ranchette Estates District in accordance with the following: 
a.  If the SF-RE parcel is three acres or greater, accessory uses may also include all agricultural/farm buildings including, but not limited to, a stable, barn, pen, corral, kennel, greenhouse, or coop. 
b.  When allowed, agriculture-related accessory structures shall be made of masonry materials, wood, or cementitious fiber board and are not required to meet the maximum square footage requirements as referenced in section 106.05.01(a), "schedule of uses - residential." 
c.  The minimum setback from any property line for any accessory agricultural/farm structure shall be 25 feet. 
(5)  Height and area regulations. Height and area regulations. The height of buildings, the minimum dimensions of lots and yards, and the minimum lot area per family permitted on any lot, shall be as follows: 
ARTICLE III, TABLE FSF-RE SINGLE-FAMILY RANCHETTE ESTATE
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS Maximum height 35' Minimum front yard setback 40' Minimum side yard setback 20' Minimum side yard setback on corner 1 28' Minimum rear yard setback 30' Minimum lot width (at building line) 2 120' Minimum lot area 1 acre Minimum floor area 3 2,400 sq. ft. Minimum number of garage spaces 4 2 Minimum number of drive spaces 2  
Note 1. Where interior lots have been planned or sold fronting on the side street, may project not more than ten feet in front of the line established for buildings by the front yard requirements for the interior lots on the side street, provided this regulation shall not be interpreted to reduce the buildable width of a corner lot in separate ownership at the time of the passage of this chapter, to less than 28 feet, and provided that the side yard regulations above shall be observed. 
Note 2. The minimum width of a lot shall be measured at the front building line provided that where a lot has less width than herein required, in separate ownership at the time of the passage of this chapter, this regulation will not prohibit the erection of a single-family dwelling. Lots bordering streets on curves or contours shall be 120 feet in width at the building line. 
Note 3. Each dwelling unit hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed or altered in said SF-RE Single-Family Ranchette Estate District shall have a floor area, excluding basements, open and screened porches and garages, of not less than 2,400 square feet. 
Note 4. Garages may not be used for living quarters unless 2 other enclosed parking spaces are provided on the lot. 
(d)  SF-1 Single-Family District . 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of the SF-1 Single-Family District is to allow single family detached dwellings on lots of not less than 10,000 square feet, together with allowed incidental uses. 
(2)  Uses regulations. No building, structure, land or premises shall be used, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, installed, or altered, except for one or more of the uses specified in section 106.05.01(a), "schedule of uses - residential." 
(3)  Height and area regulations. The height of buildings, the minimum dimensions of lots and yards, and the minimum lot area per family permitted on any lot, shall be as follows: 
ARTICLE III, TABLE GSF-1 SINGLE-FAMILY DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS Maximum height 35' Minimum front yard setback 25' Minimum side yard setback 10' Minimum side yard setback on corner 1 25' Minimum rear yard setback 20' Minimum lot width (at building line) 2 60' Minimum lot area 10,000 sq. ft. Minimum floor area 3 2,000 sq. ft. Minimum number of garage spaces 4 2 Minimum number of drive spaces 2  
Note 1. Where interior lots have been planned or sold fronting on the side street, may project not more than ten feet in front of the line established for buildings by the front yard requirements for the interior lots on the side street, provided this regulation shall not be interpreted to reduce the buildable width of a corner lot in separate ownership at the time of the passage of this chapter, to less than 25 feet, and provided that the side yard regulations above shall be observed. 
Note 2. The minimum width of a lot shall be measured at the front building line provided that where a lot has less width than herein required, in separate ownership at the time of the passage of this chapter, this regulation will not prohibit the erection of a single-family dwelling. Lots bordering streets on curves or contours shall be 60 feet in width at the building line. 
Note 3. Each dwelling unit hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed or altered in said SF-1 Single-Family District shall have a floor area, excluding basements, open and screened porches and garages, of not less than 2,000 square feet. 
Note 4. Garages may not be used for living quarters unless two other enclosed parking spaces are provided on the lot. 
(e)  SF-2 Single-Family District. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of the SF-2 Single-Family District is to allow single-family detached dwellings on lots of not less than 8,000 square feet, together with allowed incidental and accessory uses. 
(2)  Use regulations. No building, structure, land or premises shall be used, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, installed, or altered, except for one or more of the uses specified in section 106.05.01(a), "Schedule of uses - residential." 
(3)  Height and area regulations. The height of buildings, the minimum dimensions of lots and yards, and the minimum lot area per family permitted on any lot, shall be as follows: 
ARTICLE III, TABLE HSF-2 SINGLE-FAMILY DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS Maximum height 35' Minimum front yard setback 25' Minimum side yard setback 10' Minimum side yard setback on corner 1 25' Minimum rear yard setback 20' Minimum lot width (at building line) 2 60' Minimum lot area 8,000 sq. ft. Minimum floor area 3 1,600 sq. ft. Minimum number of garage spaces 4 2 Minimum number of drive spaces 2  
Note 1. Where interior lots have been planned or sold fronting on the side street, may project not more than ten feet in front of the line established for buildings by the front yard requirements for the interior lots on the side street, provided this regulation shall not be interpreted to reduce the buildable width of a corner lot in separate ownership at the time of the passage of this chapter, to less than 25 feet, and provided that the side yard regulations above shall be observed. 
Note 2. The minimum width of a lot shall be measured at the front building line provided that where a lot has less width than herein required, in separate ownership at the time of the passage of this chapter, this regulation will not prohibit the erection of a single-family dwelling. Lots bordering streets on curves or contours shall be 60 feet in width at the building line. 
Note 3. Each dwelling unit hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed or altered in said SF-2 Single-Family District shall have a floor area, excluding basements, open and screened porches, and garages, of not less than 1,600 square feet. 
Note 4. Garages may not be used for living quarters unless 2 other enclosed parking spaces are provided on the lot. 
(f)  SF-3 Single-Family District. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of the SF-3 Single-Family District is to allow single-family detached dwellings on lots of not less than 7,000 square feet, together with allowed incidental and accessory uses. 
(2)  Use regulations. No building, structure, land or premises shall be used, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, installed, or altered, except for one or more of the uses specified in section 106.05.01(a), "schedule of uses - residential." 
(3)  Height and area regulations. The height of buildings, the minimum dimensions of lots and yards, and the minimum lot area per family permitted on any lot, shall be as follows: 
ARTICLE III, TABLE ISF-3 SINGLE-FAMILY DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS Maximum height 35' Minimum front yard setback 25' Minimum side yard setback 6' Minimum side yard setback on corner 1 28' Minimum rear yard setback 20' Minimum lot width (at building line) 2 60' Minimum lot area 7,000 sq. ft. Minimum floor area 3 1,400 sq. ft. Minimum number of garage spaces 4 2 Minimum number of drive spaces 2  
Note 1. Where interior lots have been planned or sold fronting on the side street, may project not more than ten feet in front of the line established for buildings by the front yard requirements for the interior lots on the side street, provided this regulation shall not be interpreted to reduce the buildable width of a corner lot in separate ownership at the time of the passage of this chapter, to less than 28 feet, and provided that the side yard regulations above shall be observed. 
Note 2. The minimum width of a lot shall be measured at the front building line provided that where a lot has less width than herein required, in separate ownership at the time of the passage of this chapter, this regulation will not prohibit the erection of a single-family dwelling. 
Note 3. Each dwelling unit hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed or altered in said SF-3 Single-Family District shall have a floor area, excluding basements, open and screened porches and garages, of not less than 1,400 square feet. 
Note 4. Garages may not be used for living quarters unless two other enclosed parking spaces are provided on the lot. 
(g)  SF-4 Single-Family District. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of the SF-4 Single-Family District is to allow single-family detached dwellings on lots of not less than 6,000 square feet, together with allowed incidental and accessory uses. 
(2)  Use regulations. No building, structure, land or premises shall be used, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, installed, or altered, except for one or more of the uses specified in section 106.05.01(a), "schedule of uses - residential." 
(3)  Height and area regulations. The height of buildings, the minimum dimensions of lots and yards, and the minimum lot area per family permitted on any lot, shall be as follows: 
ARTICLE III, TABLE JSF-4 SINGLE-FAMILY DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS Maximum height 35' Minimum front yard setback 25' Minimum side yard setback 6' Minimum side yard setback on corner 1 28' Minimum rear yard setback 20' Minimum lot width (at building line) 2 60' Minimum lot area 6,000 sq. ft. Minimum floor area 3 1,200 sq. ft. Minimum number of garage spaces 4 2 Minimum number of drive spaces 2  
Note 1. Where interior lots have been planned or sold fronting on the side street, may project not more than ten feet in front of the line established for buildings by the front yard requirements for the interior lots on the side street, provided this regulation shall not be interpreted to reduce the buildable width of a corner lot in separate ownership at the time of the passage of this chapter, to less than 28 feet, and provided that the side yard regulations above shall be observed. 
Note 2. The minimum width of a lot shall be measured at the front building line provided that where a lot has less width than herein required, in separate ownership at the time of the passage of this chapter, this regulation will not prohibit the erection of a single-family dwelling. 
Note 3. Each dwelling unit hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed or altered in said SF-4 Single-Family District shall have a floor area, excluding basements, open and screened porches and garages, of not less than 1,200 square feet. 
Note 4. Garages may not be used for living quarters unless two other enclosed parking spaces are provided on the lot. 
(h)  SF-X Single-Family Mixed Size District. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of the SF-X Single-Family District is to allow a mix of relatively large single-family detached dwellings on lots that range from a minimum of 10,000 square feet to one acre or more, together with allowed incidental and accessory uses. 
(2)  Mix of lot sizes. A minimum of three lots sizes, defined by lot width and overall lot area, shall be provided within the subdivision. 
(3)  Minimum and maximum percentages. A minimum of 20 of the largest lot sizes shall be provided and a maximum of 50 of the smallest lot size may be provided. 
(4)  Use regulations. No building, structure, land or premises shall be used, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, installed, or altered, except for one or more of the uses specified in section 106.05.01(a), "schedule of uses - residential." 
(5)  Height and area regulations. The height of buildings, the minimum dimensions of lots and yards, and the minimum lot area per family permitted on any lot, shall be as follows: 
ARTICLE III, TABLE KSF-X SINGLE-FAMILY DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS Maximum height 35' Minimum front yard setback 20' Minimum side yard setback 6' Minimum side yard setback on corner 1 28' Minimum rear yard setback 20' Minimum lot width (measured at building line) 2 Smallest lot width 
(maximum of 50% of total number of lots) 60' Medium lot width 75' Largest lot width 
(minimum of 20% of the total number of lots) 90' Minimum lot area Smallest lot area 
(maximum of 50% of total number of lots) 10,000 sq. ft. Medium lot area 14,520 sq. ft. or ? acre Largest lot area 
(minimum of 20% of the total number of lots) 21,780 sq. ft. or 1/2 acre Minimum floor area 2 Smallest lot area 
(maximum of 50% of total number of lots) 1,800 sq. ft. Medium lot area 2,000 sq. ft. Largest lot area 
(minimum of 20% of the total number of lots) 2,400 sq. ft. Minimum number of garage spaces 3 2 Minimum number of drive spaces 2  
Note 1. Where interior lots have been planned or sold fronting on the side street, may project not more than ten feet in front of the line established for buildings by the front yard requirements for the interior lots on the side street, provided this regulation shall not be interpreted to reduce the buildable width of a corner lot in separate ownership at the time of the passage of this chapter, to less than 28 feet, and provided that the side yard regulations above shall be observed. 
Note 2. The minimum width of a lot shall be measured at the front building line provided that where a lot has less width than herein required, in separate ownership at the time of the passage of this chapter, this regulation will not prohibit the erection of a single-family dwelling. 
Note 3. Garages may not be used for living quarters unless two other enclosed parking spaces are provided on the lot. 
(i)  D Duplex Two-Family District. 
(1)  Use regulations. No building, structure, land or premises will be used, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered, except for one or more of the uses specified in section 106.05.01(a), "schedule of uses - residential." 
(2)  Separate utilities. All utilities shall be provided separately to each duplex such that each unit is individually metered. 
(3)  Height and area regulations. The height of buildings, the minimum dimensions of lots and yards, and the minimum lot area per family permitted on any lot shall be as follows: 
ARTICLE III, TABLE LD DUPLEX TWO-FAMILY DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS Maximum height 35' Minimum front yard setback 25' Minimum side yard setback 10' Minimum side yard setback on corner 1 28' Minimum rear yard setback 20' Minimum lot width (at building line) 2 60' Minimum lot area per family 2,500 sq. ft. Minimum lot area per family with no sewer 10,000 sq. ft. Minimum floor area per family 3 700 sq. ft. of floor area Minimum number of garage spaces 4 2 Minimum number of drive spaces 2  
Note 1. Lot area per family. Every two-family dwelling unit hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered or enlarged shall provide a lot area of not less than 2,500 square feet per family; provided, however, that where a lot has less area than herein required and was of record and in separate ownership at the time of the passage of this chapter, said lot may be occupied by not more than one family. In areas not served by sanitary sewer the minimum lot area per family shall be 10,000 square feet. 
Note 2. The minimum width of a lot shall be measured at the front building line provided that where a lot has less width than herein required, in separate ownership at the time of the passage of this chapter, this regulation will not prohibit the erection of a single-family dwelling. 
Note 3. Floor area. Every two-family unit hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed or altered shall have a floor area, excluding basements, open and screened porches and garages of not less than 700 square feet of floor area per each single-family dwelling unit. 
Note 4. Garages may not be used for living quarters unless two other enclosed parking spaces are provided on the lot. 
(j)  TH Townhome District. 
(1)  Site plan review required. All townhome developments are subject to site plan review and approval by director. The site plan shall show the typical layout of the townhome lot and an overall layout of the development. 
(2)  Site plan approval. Deviations from the townhome standards in this chapter can be accomplished through the site plan process, subject to review and approval by the planning and zoning commission and town council during public hearings. 
(3)  Use regulations. No building, structure, land or premises will be used, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered, except for one or more of the uses specified in section 106.05.01(a), "schedule of uses - residential." 
(4)  Minimum parking and garage access. All townhome developments shall provide rear entry off-street parking with a minimum two car garage. Alleys servicing these developments shall be a minimum 12 feet in width. 
(5)  On-street parking. Parallel parking shall be provided along the curb in the right-of-way, but shall not count toward the minimum number of parking spaces required per unit. 
(6)  Open space. Ten percent of the total townhome development shall be dedicated as usable open space. This area shall be platted as common area (i.e. owned and maintained by the homeowners' association - HOA); open space must be usable but may include up to 50 percent floodplain. Open space should be located to preserve existing trees. If not practical due to the natural restrictions of the tract of land, then one large canopy tree and one small ornamental tree for every 5,000 square feet of required open space shall be provided. 
(7)  Minimum street widths and orientation . Streets adjacent to townhomes shall have a minimum 62-foot right-of-way. All townhomes shall be platted on individual lots and require public street or public easement frontage, but shall not have both front and rear street frontage. 
(8)  Front access from sidewalks. All buildings which have residential unit floor plates within six feet of grade shall include a primary front door entrance into the unit which may be accessed from the sidewalk. 
(9)  Front door entry. The front door entry shall be located a minimum of two feet above the sidewalk elevation and include a minimum 24 square foot stoop. If pre-empted by topographic conditions, the entry may be lowered in elevation, subject to approval of the director. However, up to 50 percent of units may be ADA accessible from the sidewalk provided there is a metal fence separating the private area from the public sidewalk area. 
(10)  Landscape buffer and screening. A ten-foot-wide rear landscape buffer shall be provided and shall contain one tree for every 30 linear feet. When located in commercial zoning districts, masonry screen wall requirements and the ten landscape buffer do not apply, unless backing against single-family residential, which requires eight-foot-high masonry screen wall. 
(11)  Window views. Units must also include windows which provide residents a view of the street or public access easement and sidewalk area. 
(12)  Commercial design standards included. Any and all graphics from the 2009 Commercial Design Standards report not supported by textual technological limitations are hereby codified as supporting material by reference. 
(13)  Front yard landscape zones. Three zones are required between back of curb and the building line, as described below: 
a.  Streetscape zone (1). A minimum five-foot-wide area adjacent to the back-of-curb for trees and street furniture, including a one-foot dismount strip. An urban tree in a tree well shall be provided for every 25 linear feet in the streetscape zone. For every three urban trees, a bike rack, trash receptacle, bench, lighted bollard, or other approved street furniture is required. 
b.  Sidewalk zone (2). A minimum six-foot-wide clear sidewalk. 
c.  Landscape zone (3). A minimum six-foot landscape/patio area adjacent to the building). In order to differentiate the different zones (public v. private) of the sidewalk, townhome may construct a three-foot-high wrought iron, masonry, or cast stone fence. Balcony and patio railings and fences shall be largely transparent and constructed of tempered glass, wrought iron or metal. Masonry columns may be used on patios provided that they are used as accents. Wood fences and railings and chain-link fencing are prohibited. 
(14)  Rear yard setback landscaping. Within the rear building setback, one urban tree is required. 
(15)  Height and area regulations. The height of buildings, the minimum dimensions of lots and yards, and the minimum lot area per family permitted on any lot shall be as follows: 
ARTICLE III, TABLE MTH TOWNHOME DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS Maximum height 45' Minimum front yard setback 6' Maximum front yard setback 12' Minimum side yard setback 1 5' Minimum side yard setback on corner 15' Minimum rear yard setback 20' Minimum rear fence setback 5' Minimum lot width (at building line) 25' Minimum lot depth 100' Maximum block length 600' Minimum number of garage spaces per unit 2 2 Number of other parking spaces per unit 3 0.3  
Note 1. The minimum side yard is five feet between groups of three to six townhomes; side yard at corner is 15 feet, and requires all three zones referenced in subsection (13) above. 
Note 2. Garages may not be used for living quarters. 
Note 3. Other parking spaces (for guests or employees) may be located tandem to the garage parking spaces, in a separate parking lot, or on-street. 
(k)  PH Patio Home District. 
(1)  Site plan review required. All patio home developments are subject to site plan review and approval by director. The site plan shall show the layout of the typical patio home lot and an overall layout of the development. 
(2)  Site plan approval. Deviations from the patio home standards in this chapter can be accomplished through the site plan process, subject to review and approval by the planning and zoning commission and town council during public hearings. 
(3)  Definition. Patio homes are single-family dwellings that are smaller in scale than typical residential homes, are located on a unique platted lot, and may have a zero lot line on one side of the building. If the zero lot line is chosen, or any side yard setback smaller than five feet, no windows shall be placed on that side of the patio home. Windows, doors, patios and other features should be placed along the wider side yard setback to create a greater sense of open space. 
(4)  Use regulations. No building, structure, land or premises will be used, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered, except for one or more of the uses specified in section 106.05.01(a), "schedule of uses - residential." 
(5)  Minimum parking and garage access. All patio home developments shall provide rear entry off-street parking with a minimum two car garage. Alleys servicing these developments shall be a minimum 12 feet in width. 
(6)  On-street parking. Parallel parking shall be provided along the curb in the right-of-way, but shall not count toward the minimum number of parking spaces required per unit. 
(7)  Open space. Ten percent of the total patio home development shall be dedicated as usable open space. This area shall be platted as common area (i.e. owned and maintained by the homeowners' association); open space must be usable but may include up to 50 percent floodplain. Open space should be located to preserve existing trees. If not practical due to the natural restrictions of the tract of land, then one large canopy tree and one small ornamental tree for every 5,000 square feet of required open space shall be provided. 
(8)  Minimum street widths and orientation. Streets adjacent to townhomes shall have a minimum 62-foot right-of-way. All patio home shall be individually platted and require public street or public easement frontage, but shall not have both front and rear street frontage. 
(9)  Front access from sidewalks. All buildings which have residential unit floor plates within six feet of grade shall include a primary front door entrance into the unit which may be accessed from the sidewalk. 
(10)  Front door entry. The front door entry shall be located a minimum of two feet above the sidewalk elevation and include a minimum 24 square foot stoop. If pre-empted by topographic conditions, the entry may be lowered in elevation, subject to approval of the director. However, up to 50 percent of units may be ADA accessible from the sidewalk provided there is a metal fence separating the private area from the public sidewalk area. 
(11)  Landscape buffer and screening. A ten-foot-wide rear landscape buffer shall be provided and shall contain one tree for every 30 linear feet. When located in commercial zoning districts, masonry screen wall requirements and the ten landscape buffer do not apply, unless backing against single-family residential, which requires eight-foot-high masonry screen wall. 
(12)  Window views. Units must also include windows which provide residents a view of the street or public access easement and sidewalk area. 
(13)  Residential architectural standards apply. Minimum masonry requirements, roof pitch, and design elements listed in section 106.06.03 "architectural standards for residential structures." 
(14)  Front yard landscape zones. Three zones are required between back of curb and the building line, as described below: 
a.  Streetscape zone (1). A minimum five-foot-wide area adjacent to the back-of-curb for trees and street furniture, including a one-foot dismount strip. An urban tree in a tree well shall be provided for every 25 linear feet in the streetscape zone. For every three urban trees, a bike rack, trash receptacle, bench, lighted bollard, or other approved street furniture is required. 
b.  Sidewalk zone (2). A minimum six-foot-wide clear sidewalk. 
c.  Landscape zone (3). A minimum six-foot landscape/patio area adjacent to the building). In order to differentiate the different zones (public v. private) of the sidewalk, townhome may construct a three-foot-high wrought iron, masonry, or cast stone fence. Balcony and patio railings and fences shall be largely transparent and constructed of tempered glass, wrought iron or metal. Masonry columns may be used on patios provided that they are used as accents. Wood fences and railings and chain-link fencing are prohibited. 
(15)  Rear yard landscaping. Within the rear building setback, one urban tree is required. 
(16)  Height and area regulations. The height of buildings, the minimum dimensions of lots and yards, and the minimum lot area per family permitted on any lot shall be as follows: 
ARTICLE III, TABLE NPH PATIO HOME DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS Maximum height 45' Minimum front yard setback 6' Maximum front yard setback 12' Minimum total side yard setback 1 10' Minimum side yard setback on corner 15' Minimum rear yard setback 20' Minimum rear fence setback 5' Minimum lot width (at building line) 35' Minimum lot depth 100' Maximum block length 600' Minimum number of garage spaces per unit 2 2 Minimum number of other spaces per unit 3 0.5  
Note 1. The minimum total side yard is ten feet between each patio home. This may be split evenly (5/5), with a zero lot line (0/10) or any combination that adds to ten feet; side yard at corner is 15 feet, and requires all three zones referenced in subsection (14) above. 
Note 2. Garages may not be used for living quarters. 
Note 3. Other parking spaces (for guests or employees) may be located tandem to the garage parking spaces, in a separate parking lot, or on-street. 
(l)  MF Multifamily District. 
(1)  Use regulations. No building, structure, land or premises will be used, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered, except for one or more of the uses specified in section 106.05.01(a), "schedule of uses - residential." 
(2)  Accessory buildings and use. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above uses are permitted when not involving the conduct of business other than incidental to the residential use of such lot, including private and storage garages; provided, however, that such accessory buildings comply with section 106.05.021, "accessory uses" and said accessory building shall not be used for commercial purposes. (The term "commercial purposes" shall include part-time businesses.) 
(3)  Height and area regulations. The density, lot coverage, height of buildings, the minimum and maximum dimensions of lots and yards, and other development standards permitted shall be as follows: 
ARTICLE III, TABLE OMF MULTIFAMILY DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS Maximum density per acre 16 dwelling units Maximum lot coverage 40% Maximum height 1 45' Minimum front yard setback 25' Minimum side yard between buildings 15' Minimum side yard adjacent to street 20' Minimum rear yard setback 30' Minimum lot width (at property line) 70' Minimum lot width (on curve at building line) 70' Minimum number of bedrooms per unit 1 Minimum floor area per bedroom: 2 One bedroom unit 650 sq. ft. Two bedroom unit 800 sq. ft. Three bedroom unit 1,000 sq. ft. Each additional bedroom over three 200 sq. ft.  
Note 1. The height of any apartment building erected on a lot adjacent to single-family residential uses or zoning shall be limited to one story for a distance of 150 feet from the single-family district boundary, inclusive of streets and/or highways. 
Note 2. Floor area. Every multifamily unit hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed or altered shall have a floor area, excluding basements, open and screened porches, patios, and balconies of not less than specified above. 
(4)  Courts. Where an apartment building is erected so as to create inner courts, the faces of all opposite walls in such courts shall be a minimum distance of 30 feet apart and no balcony or canopy shall extend into such court area for a distance greater than five feet. 
(5)  Lighting. Lighting shall be designed and used to discourage crime and undesirable activity and to provide adequate vision, comfort and safety. It should use the lowest possible illumination to effectively allow surveillance. Open-air parking lot lighting shall be designed to provide for uniform lighting throughout the facility with no dark patches or pockets. The use of sensor technologies, timers or other means to activate lighting during the night may be used to conserve energy, provide safety, and promote compatibility between different land uses. In order to direct light downward and minimize the amount of light spill into the dark night sky, lighting fixtures shall be full cut-off fixtures. Open-air parking lot lighting shall not cause direct illumination on adjacent and nearby properties or streets. Fixtures should be of a type or adequately shielded so as to prevent glare from normal viewing angles. All lighting shall conform to this chapter. 
(6)  Screening, fences, gates and stacking. The entire site shall be screened from view on three sides from persons standing at ground level on the site or immediately adjoining property, by a masonry wall (minimum eight feet in height). A wall not more than eight feet in height shall be erected in the front yard that is of at least 50 percent black tubular steel or decorative metal. It is also mandatory for all apartments to be gated communities. Each gate shall be in proper working order at all times. In addition, there shall be a minimum stacking area for four vehicles at each gate. 
(7)  Balconies/patios. When an apartment building is erected so as to create balconies or patios facing a public street such balconies shall not extend beyond the building line. 
(8)  Refuse facilities. Complexes shall provide sufficient refuse facilities, subject to discretionary review and approval by the director and screened in compliance with the zoning ordinance. 
(9)  Mechanical equipment. Mechanical equipment shall be constructed, located and screened so as not to interfere with the peace and comfort of the occupant(s) of any building or residence. 
(10)  Mail kiosks. Mail kiosk shall have a minimum of three required parking spaces for the development within 50 feet, unless a drive-through facility is provided. The mail kiosk must be constructed of 100 percent masonry and constructed of the same materials as the main structure with a metal roof. 
(11)  Building design. Each building must follow the following conditions in addition to the town's architectural and design standards. (See section106.06.04 for more detail on architectural design and materials) 
a.  Except for windows, doors and garage doors, the exterior of all building elevations shall be 100 percent masonry. Cementations fiberboard may be used for areas not considered conducive for masonry, as determined by the building official, and architectural features, including but not limited to bay windows, dormers, chimneys not part of an exterior wall, and gables. 
b.  Flat primary roofs are prohibited. 
c.  The residential building angle to public streets and single-family zoning districts will be between a minimum of 20 to a maximum of 70 degrees, unless parking is provided between the building and the street. 
d.  As an alternative to angling the buildings along the public street, adjacent buildings may be offset a distance equal to one-half the width of the building closest to the street, not to be less than 30 feet. 
(12)  Parking regulations. The minimum off-street parking and loading regulations shall be poured concrete surfaces, and comply with the following: 
a.  For buildings other than residential dwellings, one off-street parking space for each 200 square feet of floor area shall be provided. 
b.  All buildings hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered, enlarged or converted for one or more uses permitted in the Multifamily District shall provide adequate permanent off-street facilities for the loading and unloading of merchandise and good within or adjacent to the building in such a manner as not to obstruct the freedom of traffic movement on the public streets or alleys. 
c.  Two off-street parking spaces for each apartment dwelling unit plus one space for each additional bedroom unit (more than one) shall be provided. Covered parking spaces for at least 25 percent of the total required parking spaces (not including required guest parking) shall be provided. 
d.  No dead-end parking will be allowed. 
e.  Garages, when provided, shall be 100 percent masonry and be constructed of the same materials as the main structure. The garage may be part of the dwelling structure. The garage shall not be used for storage, thereby prohibiting the parking of an operable vehicle. Enclosed garage parking spaces shall be a minimum of ten by 20 feet. Stacking spaces shall not be counted towards required parking spaces. 
(13)  Open space. Each lot or parcel of land must comply with the following conditions in addition to the town's landscaping ordinance. 
a.  Each lot or parcel of land, which is used for multiple-family residences, shall provide on the same lot or parcel of land, usable open space, in accordance with [table H in section 106.06.18]. The open space shall have a minimum dimension of not less than 30 feet. 
b.  Of the required open space, 15 percent shall be arranged or located in a contiguous mass. This contiguous mass must be located within the required open space. 
c.  In meeting this requirements, a credit of three square feet may be applied for each square foot utilized for swimming pools and adjacent decks, patios, or lounge areas within ten feet of a pool; developed and equipped children's play areas; usable portions of recreational buildings; and private balconies and enclosed patios with a minimum dimension of five feet. Tennis courts are specifically excluded from this increased credit allowance. At the time of site plan approval, the planning and zoning commission and town council may allow a credit not to exceed ten percent of the total required usable open space for adjacent and immediately accessible public parks. The combined credit for areas calculated at a three-to-one basis and for public parks shall not exceed 50 percent of the total usable open space for an individual lot or parcel of land. 
d.  One large canopy tree shall be provided per 3,500 square feet of required open space. 
e.  At the time of site plan approval, the planning and zoning commission and/or town council may give full or partial credit for open areas that exceed the maximum slope, if it is determined that such areas are environmentally significant and that their preservation would enhance the development. 
(14)  Required amenities. A minimum of four of the following must be incorporated into each multifamily development. A minimum of two major and two minor amenities must be provided in significant proportion to the development. The scale of the amenities as well as other comparable amenities can be approved through the site plan approval process. 
a.  Major amenities: 
1.  Dog park. 
2.  Indoor exercise facility. 
3.  Jogging trail. 
4.  Sport courts and fields (volleyball, baseball, tennis etc.). 
5.  Swimming pool. 
b.  Minor amenities: 
1.  Gazebo. 
2.  Improved picnic areas (with tables, grills, shading). 
3.  Playground or tot lot. 
4.  Putting green. 
(15)  Miscellaneous requirements. The following additional regulations are required for all Multifamily District apartment houses: 
a.  Separate sewer drain plumbing for all kitchen sinks that route through a grease trap; 
b.  Washer and dryer connections in each unit; 
c.  Lint traps on all laundry room washers; and 
d.  Storm drain debris collectors. 
(m)  MH-1 Manufactured Home Single-Family District. 
(1)  Purpose. Providing for certain manufactured and modular dwellings with specific reference to the seal of approval granted by appropriate state agencies and meeting federal standards and providing for single-family and two-family dwelling units. 
(2)  Use regulations. No building, structure, land or premises will be used, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered, except for one or more of the uses specified in section 106.05.01(a), "schedule of uses - residential." 
(3)  Building materials. Duplex and single-family residences located within this district may use cementations fiberboard to fulfill the masonry building requirements. 
(4)  Height and area regulations. In said MH-1 Manufactured Home Single-Family District the height of buildings, the minimum dimensions of lots and yards, and the minimum lot area per family permitted on any lot, shall be as follows: 
ARTICLE III, TABLE PMANUFACTURED HOME SINGLE-FAMILY
DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDSMaximum height 35' Minimum front yard setback 25' Minimum side yard setback 6' Minimum side yard setback on corner 1 28' Minimum rear yard setback 20' Minimum lot width (at building line) 2 60' Minimum lot area 6,000 sq. ft. Minimum floor area 3 1,000 sq. ft.  
Note 1. Where interior lots have been planned or sold fronting on the side street, may project not more than ten feet in front of the line established for buildings by the front yard requirements for the interior lots on the side street, provided this regulation shall not be interpreted to reduce the buildable width of a corner lot in separate ownership at the time of the passage of this chapter, to less than 28 feet, and provided that the side yard regulations above shall be observed. 
Note 2. The minimum width of a lot shall be measured at the front building line provided that where a lot has less width than herein required, in separate ownership at the time of the passage of this chapter, this regulation will not prohibit the erection of a single-family dwelling. Lots bordering streets on curves or contours shall be 80 feet in width at the building line. 
Note 3. Each dwelling unit hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed or altered in said Manufactured Home Single-Family District shall have a floor area, excluding basements, open and screened porches and garages, of not less than 1,000 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.03.03 - Zoning districts-Non-residential/commercial/industrial. 
(a)  AG Agricultural District. 
(1)  General purpose and description. Agricultural zoning strives to protect the viability of agriculture in a region. The AG Agricultural District's intent is to prevent the fragmentation of existing farms; provide for agricultural uses and uses compatible with or supportive of agriculture, including crop production, the raising of livestock, poultry and other animals; encourage compatibility of farm buildings with the surrounding neighborhood and avoid conflicts between agricultural and non-agricultural uses. The AG Agricultural District is also intended to protect areas that may be unsuitable for development because of physical problems, lack of infrastructure, constraints, or potential health or safety hazards such as flooding, as well as providing for preservation of natural open space areas. 
(2)  Use regulations. No building, structure, land or premises will be used, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered, except for one or more of the uses specified in section 106.05.01(b), "schedule of uses - nonresidential" or the following: 
a.  All forms of agriculture, horticulture, and animal husbandry, including necessary farm structures; 
b.  All agricultural/farm buildings including, but not limited to, a stable, barn, pen, corral, kennel, greenhouse, or coop; 
c.  Riding schools and/or horse boarding stables; 
d.  On-site sale of farm products, 75 percent of this must be produced on-site; 
e.  Bed and breakfast; or 
f.  Storage of recreational vehicles, camp trailers or other wheeled vehicles used for the pleasure of the owner (may not be inhabited). 
(3)  Height and area regulations. The height of buildings and structures, the minimum dimensions of lots and yards, and the minimum lot area per family shall be as follows: 
ARTICLE III, TABLE QAG AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS Maximum height (21/2 stories) 35' Minimum front yard setback 45' Minimum side yard setback 20' Minimum side yard setback on corner 1 28' Minimum rear yard setback 30' Minimum lot width (at building line) 2 60' Minimum lot area 5 acres Minimum floor area 3 1,600 sq. ft.  
Note 1. Corner lots. Where interior lots have been planned or sold fronting on the side street, it may project not more than ten feet in front of the line established for buildings by the front yard requirements for the interior lots on the side street, provided this regulation shall not be interpreted to reduce the buildable width of a corner lot in separate ownership at the time of the passage of this chapter, to less than 28 feet, and provided that the side yard regulations above shall be observed. 
Note 2. The minimum width of a lot shall be measured at the front building line provided that where a lot has less width than herein required, in separate ownership at the time of the passage of this chapter, this regulation will not prohibit the erection of a single-family dwelling. Lots bordering streets on curves or contours shall be 60 feet in width at the building line. 
Note 3. Each dwelling unit hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed or altered shall have a floor area, excluding basements, open and screened porches, and garages, of not less than 1,600 square feet. 
(4)  Residences. One primary residential structure per lot. 
(5)  Accessory structures. Agriculture related structures shall be made of masonry materials, metal, wood, or cementitious fiber board and are not required to meet the square footage requirements as referenced in section 106.05.021, "accessory uses." 
(6)  Parking requirement. The minimum off-street parking requirements shall be an asphalt or concrete surface with four parking spaces per dwelling unit. 
(b)  O Office District. 
(1)  Use regulations. No building, structure, land or premises will be used, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered, except for one or more of the uses specified in section 106.05.01(b), "schedule of uses - nonresidential." 
(2)  Height and area regulations. The height of buildings, the minimum dimensions of the lots and yards shall be as follows: 
ARTICLE III, TABLE RO OFFICE DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS Maximum height 1 60' Minimum front yard setback 20' Maximum front yard setback 100' Minimum side yard setback 2 No minimum Minimum side yard setback adjacent to residential 2 5' Minimum rear yard setback No minimum Minimum rear yard setback adjacent to residential 35' Minimum lot width 50' Minimum lot area 1 acre  
Note 1. Height. Nonresidential buildings shall not exceed 60 feet. Portions of buildings within 120 feet of a single-family residential lot may not exceed 45 feet in height. Beyond 120 feet, the building must fit within a plane created by a slope of one foot in additional height for each additional three feet from the property line. 
Note 2. Side yard. Where a lot abuts upon the side of a lot zoned for dwelling purposes there shall be a side yard of not less than five feet, otherwise no side yard shall be required but, if provided, it shall be not less than five feet. On corner lots, with lots having reversed frontage at the rear, the side yard requirements shall be the same as A-2 Single-Family District. 
(c)  NS Neighborhood Services District. 
(1)  Use regulations. No building, structure, land or premises will be used, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered, except for one or more of the uses specified in section 106.05.01(b), "schedule of uses - nonresidential." 
(2)  Height and area regulations. The height of buildings, the minimum dimensions of the lots and yards shall be as follows: 
ARTICLE III, TABLE SNS NEIGHBORHOOD SERVICES DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS Maximum height 1 60' Minimum front yard setback 20' Maximum front yard setback 100' Minimum side yard setback 2 No minimum Minimum side yard setback adjacent to residential 2 5' Minimum rear yard setback No minimum Minimum rear yard setback adjacent to residential 35' Minimum lot width 50' Minimum lot area 3 1 acre  
Note 1. Height. Nonresidential buildings shall not exceed 60 feet. Portions of buildings within 120 feet of a single-family residential lot may not exceed 45 feet in height. Beyond 120 feet, the building must fit within a plane created by a slope of one foot in additional height for each additional three feet from the property line. 
Note 2. Side yard. Where a lot abuts upon the side of a lot zoned for dwelling purposes there shall be a side yard of not less than five feet, otherwise no side yard shall be required but, if provided, it shall be not less than five feet. On corner lots, with lots having reversed frontage at the rear, the side yard requirements shall be the same as A-2 Single-Family District. 
Note 3. Lot size. The minimum lot size for nonresidential districts is one acre, unless otherwise approved through the site plan process. 
(d)  CF Community Facilities District. 
(1)  Purpose. The community facilities district is established to apply to those lands where federal, state or local government activities are conducted, where governments hold title to such lands, or for public and private educational and medical facilities. Certain nongovernmental and non-institutional uses may be permitted to provide necessary services to governmental and institutional uses. 
(2)  Use regulations. No building, structure, land or premises will be used, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered, except for one or more of the uses specified in section 106.05.01(b), "schedule of uses - nonresidential." 
(3)  Height and area regulations. The height of buildings, the minimum dimensions of the lots and yards shall be as follows: 
ARTICLE III, TABLE TCF COMMUNITY FACILITIES DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS Maximum height 1 60' Minimum front yard setback 25' Maximum front yard setback 100' Minimum side yard setback 2 15' Minimum side yard setback adjacent to residential 2 25' Minimum rear yard setback 25' Minimum rear yard setback adjacent to residential 35' Minimum lot width No minimum Minimum lot area No minimum Minimum open space 15% Maximum impervious area 75%  
Note 1. Any nonsingle-family use that is over one story in height and that is located adjacent to (and not across any right-of-way from) any existing single-family zoning district shall be setback from the applicable perimeter property line a distance equal to the height of the building, but not less than 25 feet. 
Note 2. Where a lot abuts upon the side of a lot zoned for dwelling purposes there shall be a side yard of not less than five feet, otherwise no side yard shall be required but, if provided, it shall be not less than five feet. On corner lots, with lots having reversed frontage at the rear, the side yard requirements shall be the same as O Office District. 
(e)  LC Light Commercial District. 
(1)  Use regulations. No building, structure, land or premises will be used, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered, except for one or more of the uses specified in section 106.05.01(b), "schedule of uses - nonresidential." 
(2)  Height and area regulations. The height of buildings, the minimum dimensions of the lots and yards shall be as follows: 
ARTICLE III, TABLE ULC LIGHT COMMERCIAL DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS Maximum height 1 60' Minimum front yard setback 20' Maximum front yard setback 100' Minimum side yard setback 2 No minimum Minimum side yard setback adjacent to residential 2 5' Minimum rear yard setback No minimum Minimum rear yard setback adjacent to residential 35' Minimum lot width 50' Minimum lot area 3 1 acre  
Note 1. Height. Nonresidential buildings shall not exceed 60 feet. Portions of buildings within 120 feet of a single-family residential lot may not exceed 45 feet in height. Beyond 120 feet, the building must fit within a plane created by a slope of one foot in additional height for each additional three feet from the property line. 
Note 2. Side yard. Where a lot abuts upon the side of a lot zoned for dwelling purposes there shall be a side yard of not less than five feet, otherwise no side yard shall be required but, if provided, it shall be not less than five feet. On corner lots, with lots having reversed frontage at the rear, the side yard requirements shall be the same as A-2 Single-Family District. 
Note 3. Lot size. The minimum lot size for nonresidential districts is one acre, unless otherwise approved through the site plan process. 
(f)  HC Heavy Commercial District. 
(1)  Use regulations. No building, structure, land or premises will be used, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered, except for one or more of the uses specified in section 106.05.01(b), "schedule of uses - nonresidential." 
(2)  Height and area regulations. The height of buildings, the minimum dimensions of the lots and yards shall be as follows: 
ARTICLE III, TABLE VHC HEAVY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS Maximum height 1 60' Minimum front yard setback 20' Maximum front yard setback 100' Minimum side yard setback 2 No minimum Minimum side yard setback adjacent to residential 2 5' Minimum rear yard setback No minimum Minimum rear yard setback adjacent to residential 35' Minimum lot width 50' Minimum lot area 3 1 acre  
Note 1. Height. Nonresidential buildings shall not exceed 60 feet. Portions of buildings within 120 feet of a single-family residential lot may not exceed 45 feet in height. Beyond 120 feet, the building must fit within a plane created by a slope of one foot in additional height for each additional three feet from the property line. 
Note 2. Side yard. Where a lot abuts upon the side of a lot zoned for dwelling purposes there shall be a side yard of not less than five feet, otherwise no side yard shall be required but, if provided, it shall be not less than five feet. On corner lots, with lots having reversed frontage at the rear, the side yard requirements shall be the same as A-2 Single-Family District. 
Note 3. Lot size. The minimum lot size for nonresidential districts is one acre, unless otherwise approved through the site plan process. 
(g)  LI Light Industrial District. 
(1)  Use regulations. No building, structure, land or premises will be used, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered, except for one or more of the uses specified in section 106.05.01(b), "schedule of uses - nonresidential." 
(2)  Height and area regulations. The height of buildings, the minimum dimensions of the lots and yards shall be as follows: 
ARTICLE III, TABLE WLI LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS Maximum height 1 60' Minimum front yard setback 20' Maximum front yard setback 100' Minimum side yard setback 2 No minimum Minimum side yard setback adjacent to residential 2 20' Minimum rear yard setback No minimum Minimum rear yard setback adjacent to residential 40' Minimum lot width No minimum Minimum lot area 3 1 acre  
Note 1. Height. Nonresidential buildings shall not exceed 60 feet. Portions of buildings within 120 feet of a single-family residential lot may not exceed 45 feet in height. Beyond 120 feet, the building must fit within a plane created by a slope of one foot in additional height for each additional three feet from the property line. 
Note 2. Side yard. Where a lot abuts upon the side of a lot zoned for dwelling purposes there shall be a side yard of not less than five feet, otherwise no side yard shall be required but, if provided, it shall be not less than five feet. On corner lots, with lots having reversed frontage at the rear, the side yard requirements shall be the same as A-2 Single-Family District. 
Note 3. Lot size. The minimum lot size for nonresidential districts is one acre, unless otherwise approved through the site plan process. 
(h)  HI Heavy Industrial District. 
(1)  Use regulations. No building, structure, land or premises will be used, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered, except for one or more of the uses specified in section 106.05.01(b), "schedule of uses - nonresidential." 
(2)  Height and area regulations. The height of buildings, the minimum dimensions of the lots and yards shall be as follows: 
ARTICLE III, TABLE XHI HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS Maximum height 1 60' Minimum front yard setback 20' Maximum front yard setback 100' Minimum side yard setback 2 No minimum Minimum side yard setback adjacent to residential 2 20' Minimum rear yard setback No minimum Minimum Rear yard setback adjacent to residential 40' Minimum lot width No minimum Minimum lot area 3 1 acre  
Note 1. Height. Nonresidential buildings shall not exceed 60 feet. Portions of buildings within 120 feet of a single-family residential lot may not exceed 45 feet in height. Beyond 120 feet, the building must fit within a plane created by a slope of one foot in additional height for each additional three feet from the property line. 
Note 2. Side yard. Where a lot abuts upon the side of a lot zoned for dwelling purposes there shall be a side yard of not less than five feet, otherwise no side yard shall be required but, if provided, it shall be not less than five feet. On corner lots, with lots having reversed frontage at the rear, the side yard requirements shall be the same as A-2 Single-Family District. 
Note 3. Lot size. The minimum lot size for nonresidential districts is one acre, unless otherwise approved through the site plan process. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
ARTICLE IV. - SPECIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 106.04.01 - US 380 Overlay District. 
(a)  Purpose. The U.S. 380 Overlay District (380-OD) is identified in the 2017 Comprehensive Plan as the town's major commercial hub for employment. To this end, enhanced regulations are adopted to stimulate high-quality employment opportunities in this area. The 380 Overlay District is intended to substantially advance a legitimate governmental interest that includes promoting the economic development of the overlay district area, promoting a job base for the residents of Little Elm, and to regulate the character of growth along the 380 Corridor. 
(b)  Description. The Town of Little Elm hereby adopts the U.S. Highway 380 Overlay District establishing development standards for properties within the 380 Corridor in the Town of Little Elm jurisdictional limits, regarding use regulations, height regulations, signage, landscaping, and lighting requirements. 
(c)  Boundary. The physical boundaries of the US 380 Overlay District are identified in exhibit A of Ordinance No. 835, as it exists or is amended by town council. 
(d)  Use regulations. 
(1)  Permitted uses. The base zoning district of the subject property determines the permitted land uses in the US 380 Overlay District. Furthermore, the only permitted zoning districts in the overlay district are as follows: LC Light Commercial, HC Heavy Commercial, LI Light Industrial, HI Heavy Industrial, and related PD Planned Development Districts. Permitted land uses are outlined in section 106.05.01(b), "schedule of uses - nonresidential." All applicable regulations for use, yard, area, lot dimensions, utility placement, and landscaping shall be those specified for each district, including planned development stipulations except as otherwise stated in this chapter. 
(2)  Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited in the US 380 Overlay District, unless approved through the specific use permit process: 
a.  Automobile or truck leasing or renting. 
b.  Automobile sales, new or used. 
c.  Batching plant (concrete or asphalt, permanent). 
d.  Boat repair. 
e.  Boat sales, new or used. 
f.  Brick company with outside storage. 
g.  Building materials and hardware (outside display). 
h.  Church or rectory. 
i.  Commercial amusement (outdoor). 
j.  Dance hall. 
k.  Firing range, indoor/outdoor. 
l.  Flea market. 
m.  Heavy vehicle sales or storage. 
n.  Landfill (commercial). 
o.  Motorcycle sales with outside display. 
p.  Open or outside storage of products or materials that are not screened. 
q.  Pawn shop. 
r.  Portable building sales. 
s.  Recreational vehicle sales, new or used. 
t.  Residence home for the aged. 
u.  Rock quarries, sand, gravel, or earth excavation. 
v.  Salvage or reclamation of products that are not screened. 
w.  School, public primary or secondary. 
x.  Self-storage or mini warehouse. 
y.  Sexually oriented businesses. 
z.  Storage or repair of furniture and appliances, outside building. 
aa.  Tire retreading and recapping. 
bb.  Tire sales with outside storage. 
cc.  Trailer or manufactured home display or sales or rental. 
dd.  Truck and bus rental or repair. 
ee.  Truck sales, new or used. 
ff.  Vehicle or car wash, self-serve. 
gg.  Veterinarian clinic or kennel with outside pens. 
hh.  Wrecking yard, auto salvage, junkyard, or outside reclamation. 
(e)  Buffer zones required between industrial uses or zoning districts and single-family uses or zoning districts. A buffer zone shall be required between industrial and single-family residential zoning districts or uses to provide separation between the two areas. These special buffering requirements are necessary in order to mitigate the impact associated with adjacent non-compatible uses. A 40-foot transitional buffer is required for industrial uses or zoning districts adjacent to single-family residential uses or zoning districts within the 380 Overlay District. Any transitional buffer area that is provided shall be landscaped and irrigated. Trees shall be provided at a rate of one tree per 30 linear feet. Fifty percent of the trees shall be evergreen and shall be evenly dispersed. 
(f)  Height and setback regulations. In the US 380 Overlay District the height of buildings and the setback regulations shall be as follows: 
ARTICLE IV, TABLE AUS 380 OVERLAY DISTRICT HEIGHT AND SLOPE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS Distance from property line of the closest 
residential zoning or use Less than 500' 500' to 750' Over 750' Nonresidential uses with residential proximity 3:1 slope 2:1 slope 1:1 slope Nonresidential uses without residential proximity 1:1 slope  
Note 1. Height. There will be no building height limitation as long as the setback regulations set forth below are met. Setbacks (shown above) shall be applied to all buildings over two and one-half stories or 35 feet in height. Buildings that are less than 35 feet in height shall use the setbacks identified in each zoning district. See the figure below for additional information regarding the required setbacks. 
Note 2. This includes land zoned or used for single-family residential purposes regardless of jurisdiction. 
Note 3. A height setback envelope is a plane projected upward and outward from a site of origination, which is defined as any private property that is zoned or used for single-family residential purposes. 
Note 4. When referring to height setback envelopes, all slopes in this chapter are stated as to horizontal run to vertical rise. 
Note 5. Surface parking facilities may be located within the height setback envelope, as required for nonresidential uses, so long as the parking does not encroach into the required landscape setbacks. 

(g)  Signage. In the US 380 Overlay District, signs shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Internal illumination. Outdoor, internally illuminated advertising signs may have a background, letters, and/or symbols of any color combination. 
(2)  Monument sign. 
a.  Area : The maximum area for a monument sign shall be 100 square feet. 
b.  Height: The maximum height for a monument sign shall be ten feet. 
(3)  Multi-tenant monument sign: 
a.  Area: The maximum area shall be based upon the size of the development. 
b.  Five acres or less is 150 square feet. 
c.  For every acre over five acres, the sign size may be increased by ten square feet with the maximum allowed area 240 square feet is permitted. 
d.  Height: The maximum height shall be 24 feet. 
(4)  Wall sign area: 
a.  For each one linear foot of primary building face, three square feet of wall sign is allowed. A maximum of 200 square feet of wall signage is allowed per building or tenant. 
b.  Big box primary tenants may use a total of 400 square feet. 
(5)  Electronic message signs: 
a.  The portion of the sign that may be electronic message is limited to 60 percent of the total sign. 
b.  Any change of pictures or information on said sign may not include animation but may include transitions which change at a rate no faster than every six seconds. 
(h)  Landscaping. Landscaping shall conform to the requirements found in the landscaping ordinance. In addition to these requirements, the following are required: 
(1)  Perimeter landscaping: 
(2)  A thirty-foot front landscape setback adjacent to US 380 shall be maintained. The landscape setback shall generally consist of trees, shrubs, groundcover, berms, and/or related elements. 
(3)  For the perimeter landscaped area adjacent to US 380, one large canopy tree and one small ornamental tree shall be required every 25 linear feet of street frontage. Trees may be grouped or clustered to facilitate site design. 
(i)  Lighting. The installation of lighting shall limit off-site spill (off the parcel containing the development) to a maximum of 0.5 footcandles at any location on any residential property, and no limit at any location on any nonresidential property, as measurable from any orientation of the measuring device. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.04.02 - Lakefront District. 
DIVISION 1. PURPOSE, GOALS AND INTENT 
(a)  Purpose. 
    The purpose of the Lakefront District is to implement the adopted recommendations of the comprehensive plan by establishing a pedestrian-oriented lakefront which will serve as the civic and cultural heart of the town for generations. 
(b)  Goals. The goals of this Code are: 
(1)  To build on the town's targeted "lakeside community character," with built form and materials that are reminiscent of lakefront communities. 
(2)  Make the sustainable through: 
a.  Providing for integrated mixed use; 
b.  Embodying LEED-ND (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design Neighborhood Development) principles; and 
c.  Assuring pedestrian and bicycle friendliness; 
(3)  To provide development and land use flexibility within the framework of a form-based development code; 
(4)  To provide a mix of residential, retail and office uses in a pedestrian and bicycle-friendly environment; and 
(5)  To encourage high quality development through providing a balance of development standards and expeditious administrative approvals for projects which meet the intent of this Code. 
(c)  Intent. The intent of this Code is: 
(1)  To provide a comfortable and attractive environment for pedestrians, which include such things as buildings framing public space, interesting street walls, street trees, lighting and street furniture; 
(2)  To construct buildings close to the sidewalk and street; 
(3)  To construct continuous building frontage along block faces except where it is desirable to provide for pedestrian and auto pass-through to parking at mid block; 
(4)  To provide shared parking that will benefit the entire district; 
(5)  To encourage the use of public parks and plazas as a focus for mixed use developments; 
(6)  To design and build flexible buildings that can accommodate a range of uses over time; 
(7)  To design streets, access lanes and buildings that will provide a high level of connectivity between parcels and projects for pedestrians, bicycles and autos; and 
(8)  To create a safe multi-modal mixed use environment. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
DIVISION 2. DEFINITIONS 
    The following definitions shall apply within the Lakefront Code. 
    Access lane. Any on-site drive or lane intended to accommodate autos or pedestrians. 
    Charleston house. This is a house that is built close to the front sidewalk but also has one building edge adjacent to a shared property line, thereby creating a useable side yard. (See table 1 Building Disposition) A double Charleston house is two single-family Charleston houses which share a common wall (and property line). 
    Review committee. A committee constituted by the town to advise the director on major development waivers. (See section 106.04.02, "Lakefront District - division 9(b) review process") 
    Building facade, primary. Any facade that faces a public street or open space. 
    District. The entire area covered by the lakefront code. 
    Entry, primary. The main entry to a building on a block face. There must be at least one main building entry for each ground floor use, tenant or lobby on each block face which contains the use or tenant. 
    Flats. Urban apartments located in a pedestrian friendly mixed use development, and usually positioned above the ground floor. 
    Landmark buildings. Buildings which are located on axis with a terminating street or at the intersection of streets. Such buildings shall incorporate architectural features which address height and articulation that emphasize the importance of such a location. 
    Live-work. A fee-simple dwelling unit that contains, to a limited extent, a separate commercial component on the ground floor. It is in the form similar to a townhouse or store with residential quarters above or behind the commercial use. 
    Loft. A flexible residential space which may be partially used for an artist or design studio, and which is characterized by higher than normal ceilings, open floor plans and often, exposed duct work. 
    Loft, mixed use. A mixed use building that includes a majority of residential use such as lofts, apartments, condominiums and offices, but contains nonresidential use in a portion of the ground floor. 
    Major thoroughfare. This refers to the ultimate configuration of Eldorado Parkway. 
    Parking, shared. Parking which is shared by tenants, visitors and the general public. Hours of availability and use may be further defined in cooperation with the town. 
    Patio house. This refers to a home which occupies the boundary of the lot while defining one or more private patios. (See Table 1 Building Disposition) 
    Regulating plan. A plan that governs the development of a multi-phased project area as defined in. (See section 106.04.02, "Lakefront District - division 9(c) regulating plan") 
    Retail use. For the purposes of the Lakefront Code, retail use is defined as a business having as its primary function, the supply of merchandise or wares to the end consumer. Such sales constitute the "primary function of the business when sales equal at least 80 percent of the gross sales of the business. 
    Stacked flat. A condominium, apartment or loft which is part of a building of similar units. Flats located on the ground floor must still meet the requirements for direct front door access to a stoop and a public sidewalk. 
    Stoop. A structure that is located approximately at the level of the first floor of the structure and intended to provide access to a residential unit. 
    Story. That portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling above the floor of such story. This includes any mezzanine or loft which may comprise only a portion of a full floor plate. 
    Streetscape. The urban element that establishes the major part of the public realm. The streetscape is composed of thoroughfares (travel lanes for vehicles and bicycles, parking lanes for cars, and sidewalks or paths for pedestrians) as well as the visible private frontages (building facades and elevations, porches, yards, fences, awnings, etc.), and the amenities of the public frontages (street trees and plantings, benches, streetlights, etc.). 
    Lakefront engineering and landscape standards. Any approved town standards which govern such items as street, streetscape, drainage, signage and other public improvements in the Lakefront District. 
    Town manager. The town manager of the Town of Little Elm or his designee. 
    Townhouse. An attached dwelling unit located on a platted lot which shares at least one common wall with another such unit. Townhouses are grouped together in clusters of three to six units. 
    Urban design officer (UDO). The planning manager shall serve as the urban design officer for the Lakefront District. 
    Waiver to design standards, major (major waiver). A significant change to the standards of this Code, as identified in the district regulations and requiring planning and zoning commission and town council approval. (See section 106.04.02, "lakefront district division 3(g) and 9(e) regarding waivers of design standards") 
    Waiver to design standards, minor (minor waiver). A minor change to the standards of this Code that is not contrary to the stated goals and intent of the district. (See section 106.04.02, "lakefront district division 3(g) and 9(e) regarding waivers of design standards") 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
DIVISION 3. GENERAL DISTRICT STANDARDS 
(a)  Building and land use. 
    Intent. It is intended that allowed uses will encourage pedestrian-oriented mixed use projects that are well integrated with retail and residential activities. 
(1)  Retail, personal service, residential and office uses shall be allowed throughout the district in accordance with the list of authorized uses set forth in appendix 1 Lakefront Land Use. Uses which are not specifically authorized require a major waiver. 
(2)  Where "required retail at-grade construction" is designated on the conceptual framework plan, the ground floor adjacent to the street should be constructed to retail building standards for a depth of at least 50 feet, however a smaller depth may be allowed if the retail is serving as a "liner" use which is masking a parking garage, by minor waiver. 
(3)  All changes to access drives require a minor waiver. 
(b)  Block face. 
    Intent. It is intended that building walls should be continuous along block faces to create a strong edge to the street and contribute to creating an attractive and active pedestrian environment, with allowance for some limited variation and opportunities for outside dining, pocket parks and special building entry features. Buildings should also be constructed close to the street to provide a sense of enclosure. 
    It is also intended that blocks be as short as practical to both support pedestrian access/walkability and to facilitate the process of renewal and regeneration of buildings and frontages over the long term. 
(1)  Continuous building frontage will be considered to be met if 80 percent or more of the primary building facade is located within 15 feet of the right-of-way or build-to line designated on an approved plan. This shall apply to each phase of development unless otherwise approved. However, administrative approval of a minor waiver will permit down to 70 percent, provided that the reduction results in an attractive outdoor dining area, building entry feature or other amenity which contributes to the streetscape. A greater reduction shall require approval of a major waiver. 
(2)  Facades shall generally be built parallel to the street frontage, except at street intersections, where a facade containing a primary building entrance may be curved or angled toward an intersection. 
(3)  Build-to lines. 
a.  Build-to lines shall be measured from the planned street right-of-way or public easement, as established on the approved regulating plan and the standards in this chapter. The entire area between the back-of-curb and the primary building facade shall be dedicated as public right-of-way or have a public access easement placed upon it. 
b.  Exterior steps, stoops, chimneys, and bay windows may encroach beyond the build-to line by two feet, but not into a public right-of-way. Balconies ten feet or more above the sidewalk may encroach up to six feet including a public right-of-way or access lane. 
c.  Awnings may encroach above the public sidewalk without limit, but may not extend into a vehicular roadway or accessway. 
(c)  Streets; intent. It is the intent that public and private streets and accessways provide a framework that will facilitate the movement of pedestrians and autos in an attractive environment, and provide for incremental long term revitalization and redevelopment of parcels to meet changing market sector needs. All streets and blocks in the Lakefront Code shall conform to the provisions of this section. 
1.  Street standards. Standards for streets within the district shall be approved as part of a regulating plan and shall be in generally conformity with appendix 2 thoroughfare assemblies. 
2.  Street pattern. The pattern of all streets in the project area shall be based upon a small scale grid system of interconnecting streets, and shall connect to adjoining nonsingle-family properties. 
(d)  Streetscape and landscape; intent. It is the intent to both encourage and require streetscape and landscaping that reinforces the lakefront character of Little Elm as envisioned in the Comprehensive Plan. It is also the intent to create comfortable pedestrian environments and lower summer ambient temperature by shading sidewalks, parking areas and drive lanes. 
1.  Streetscape standards. Shade trees are required along all public street rights-of-way, either within the ROW or immediately adjacent at an average of 20 feet on center. 
Where buildings are not adjacent to the sidewalk, a second row of trees shall be provided in place of a building wall unless adjacent to a plaza or pocket park or approved by minor waiver as a temporary condition. 
2.  Site landscaping shall include drought tolerant grasses and shrubs as listed in the town's list of approved plant materials. 
3.  Residential ground floor frontages shall be required to landscape a minimum of five feet between the edge of sidewalk and the primary building facade, excluding access to sidewalks, stairs, stoops, porches and patios. This area may be landscaped with ground cover, low shrubs, ornamental trees and street trees. In addition, street tree wells may also be landscaped. Landscaping for tree wells is limited to ground cover and low shrubs. 
(e)  Transition from single-family zoning. On any property in the Lakefront District which shares a lot line with a single-family zoned property: 
(1)  The setback shall be a minimum of 20 feet from the property line, and 
(2)  Maximum building height within 50 feet shall be 35 feet. Beyond 50 feet, the height shall increase at a rate of one foot for each foot the building is set back, to the maximum allowed number of stories. 
(f)  Waivers of design standards. The following waivers are authorized within the Code, subject to the procedures in division 9E and as otherwise specified in this Code. 
Minor waivers include: 
 Requirement to line a parking garage with buildings 
 Requirement for continuous building frontage 
 Establishment of build-to line 
 Encroachment into the build-to line 
 Residential landscape requirement 
 Increased building height for "landmark" buildings 
 Design of buildings without tri-partite architecture 
 Required frequency of building entries along a street edge 
 Window detailing 
 Exterior building and roof materials 
 Exterior building color 
 Retail at-grade design standards 
 Landscape standards 
 Location of bicycle parking 
 Minor revisions to thoroughfare assemblies 
    Major waivers include: 
 Required retail construction 
 Building height for non-landmark buildings 
 Exceeding the maximum leasable retail area 
 Residential at-grade design standards 
 Parking requirements 
 Parking garage design standards 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
DIVISION 4. BUILDINGS 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this section is to create an attractive and active Lakefront Town style district; and the size, disposition, function and design of buildings play an important role in achieving that goal. This includes encouraging the appropriate use of: 
 Landmark "lighthouse" elements 
 Cementitious fiberboard siding in the form of planks or board and batten 
 Metal or tile - (clay or cement) roofing material 
    It is also intended that commercial spaces are designed and constructed in a manner that allows flexibility to accommodate a range of uses over time in order to avoid the need to demolish and rebuild for successive uses. Buildings should directly contribute to the attractiveness, safety and function of the street and public areas. Buildings that accommodate retail at-grade should feature the retail activity over the building's architecture. Buildings should be constructed in a manner, and with materials, that are highly durable and will continue to endure and be attractive over a long time, especially adjacent to public and pedestrian areas. 
    It is intended by this section, to encourage a variety of building and design solutions in response to the standards and regulations outlined herein. 
(b)  General building configuration. 
(1)  General building disposition . 
a.  Buildings shall be disposed in relation to the boundaries of their lots according to Table 1 Building Disposition. 
b.  One principal building at the frontage and one outbuilding to the rear may be built on each lot. A back-building may be built between the principal building and the outbuilding on the side-frontage of corner lots as shown in Table 2 Building Location. 
c.  Facades shall be built generally parallel or tangent to the principal frontage line. For lots having two frontages, the one along the more urban frontage of the two shall be the principal frontage unless otherwise determined by minor waiver. 
d.  Single-Family outbuilding rear setbacks shall be a minimum of eight feet from the alley right-of-way to the garage door if there is one, or three feet to the building wall if not. Townhomes with rear patios and a detached garage may have a minimum setback of three feet. In the absence of a rear alley or lane, the rear setback shall be a minimum of three feet. 
e.  Loading docks and service areas shall be permitted on frontages only when absolutely necessary, by minor waiver. 
Building disposition. This table approximates the location of the structure relative to the boundaries of each individual lot, establishing suitable basic building types for each transect zone. 


(c)  Building standards. 
(1)  Building form. 
a.  Buildings shall not exceed four stories except where adjacent to Eldorado, which may be up to seven stories provided that views of the lake are not significantly blocked for neighboring development. Additional height along Eldorado may be allowed at specific locations by minor waiver. 
b.  All buildings shall be designed and constructed in tri-partite architecture so that they have a distinct base, middle and top. 
c.  Buildings which are located on axis with a terminating street or access lane or at the intersection of streets and/or access lanes shall be considered a landmark building. Such buildings shall be designed with landmark features which take advantage of that location, such as an accentuated entry and a unique building articulation which is off-set from the front wall planes and goes above the main building eave or parapet line. 
(2)  Architectural features. Where clearly visible from a public street, open space or access lane: 
a.  Roofs. For buildings with hip, gable or mansard roofs (unless otherwise allowed by minor waiver): 
1.  Allowed materials include standing seam, clay or concrete tile (barrel or Roman shape) 
2.  Skylights and roof vents shall not be visible. 
b.  Windows, except for retail at-grade, shall be vertical in proportion and have at least a three-inch reveal. Vertically proportioned windows which are joined together by a mullion shall be considered as meeting this standard. 
c.  Each building and separate lease space at-grade along the street edge shall have a functioning primary entry from the sidewalk. Such entries must be inset from the front building plane by at least three feet. Functioning entries must be located no greater than 60 feet apart. Corner entries may count as a primary entry for both intersecting street frontages. 
(3)  Exterior facade materials. The following shall apply to all exterior walls of buildings and parking structures which are clearly visible from a public street, walkway or open space: 
a.  Allowed exterior materials. Allowed exterior surface materials are categorized into three groups: 
1.  Group A. Brick and stone. 
2.  Group B. Stucco, architectural concrete block with integrated color, factory primed cementitious fiberboard (in the form of lap siding or board and batten). Cementitious fiberboard is limited to 20 percent of any facade. 
3.  Group C. Accent; Metal, EIFS, wood and tile. 
b.  Prohibited exterior materials. Prohibited exterior surface materials include cinderblock and aggregate finished surfaces. 
c.  Primary facades. The following shall apply to all exterior walls of buildings which are clearly visible from a public street, open space, or active storefront: 
Primary facades, excluding windows, doors, and other openings, shall be constructed of at least 80 percent group A materials and up to 20 percent group B materials. However, accent materials from group C may be allowed in limited application for architectural features. 
d.  Secondary facades. The following shall apply to all exterior walls of buildings (15,000 square feet or larger) which are not clearly visible from a public street, open space or active storefront: 
1.  Walls, excluding windows, doors, and other openings, shall be constructed of a minimum of 20 percent group A materials and up to 80 percent group B materials. However, the color of the walls shall match the primary facades. 
2.  Wrapping the primary facade treatment. Secondary facades which are adjacent to the primary facade shall contain the primary facade treatment for at least ten percent of its area. This may occur as a simple continuation of the primary facade treatment, or elements such as cornices, bases and vertical elements. In all cases, however, wall surface materials shall wrap the corner. 
3.  Walls which are constructed on a property line as one of a series of in-line buildings where the wall will become part of a common wall shall be subject to minor waiver approval and may include a greater distance of "wrapping" and more lenient use of other materials such as cinder block. 
e.  Two materials. At least two materials shall be used on all exterior facades. 
f.  Windows and glazing shall be limited to a minimum of 30 percent and maximum of 70 percent of each building elevation (see 6.b below for special requirements for retail at-grade). 
g.  A variation of up to 15 percent of the standard above, and the material type may be approved by administrative approval of a minor waiver, provided that it is demonstrated that: 
1.  The requested material use will result in achieving the town's architectural goals, and 
2.  The change will result in an improved architectural design without degrading the quality of public areas or increasing the need for maintenance. 
(4)  Color. 
a.  The dominant color of all buildings (including any above-grade parking structures) shall be muted shades of color. Black and stark white shall not be used except as an accent color. There are no restrictions on accent colors which comprise less than one percent of the building face, except that florescent colors are prohibited. 
b.  Roof colors shall be a muted shade of cool gray, warm gray, brown or red. 
(5)  Residential at-grade. 
a.  All buildings which have residential unit floor plates within six feet of grade shall include a primary front door entrance into the unit which may be accessed from the sidewalk. Any change to this standard shall be considered a major waiver. 
b.  The entry shall be located a minimum of two feet above the sidewalk elevation and include a minimum 24 square foot stoop. If pre-empted by topographic conditions, the entry may be lowered in elevation, subject to approval of the director. However, up to 50 percent of units may be ADA accessible from the sidewalk provided there is a maximum four-foot largely transparent metal fence separating the private area from the public sidewalk area. Any change to this standard shall be considered a major waiver. 
c.  Units must also include windows which provide residents a view of the street or public access easement and sidewalk area. Any change to this standard shall be considered a minor waiver if pre-empted by topographic conditions. 
d.  Lobbies to upper stories may be located at-grade level. 
e.  Balcony and patio railings and fences shall be largely transparent and constructed of glass, wrought iron or metal. Masonry columns may be used on patios provided that they are used as accents. Wood fences and railings and chain-link fencing are prohibited. 
f.  Townhouses shall meet the town standards for that unit type. 
(6)  Nonresidential at-grade. 
a.  The ground floor entry must be located at the approximate elevation of the adjacent sidewalk. 
b.  Retail uses adjacent to the sidewalk at-grade shall: 
1.  Be constructed to meet fire code separation from any other uses constructed above; 
2.  Have a minimum clear height of 16 feet between finished floor and the bottom of the structure above. Mezzanines within the retail space shall be allowed per building code; 
3.  Have an awning or canopy which extends at least six feet over the sidewalk for at least 75 percent of the frontage on any portion of the primary facade. Such awning or canopy shall maintain a minimum seven and one-half foot clearance over the sidewalk; and 
4.  Have highly transparent glass windows for at least 60 percent, but no greater than 80 percent, of the ground floor facade. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
DIVISION 5. PARKING AND ACCESSIBILITY 
(a)  Vehicle parking. 
(1)  Intent. The following is the intent of the town's parking policies and this Code: 
a.  Support the creation of shared parking in order to enable visitors to park once at a convenient location and to access a variety of commercial enterprises in a pedestrian and bicycle-friendly environment. 
b.  Manage parking so that it is convenient and efficient, and supports an active and vibrant mixed use environment. 
c.  Ensure ease of access to parking. 
d.  Provide flexibility for changes in land uses which have different parking requirements within the district. 
e.  Provide flexibility for the redevelopment of small sites. 
f.  Avoid diffused, inefficient single-purpose reserved parking. 
g.  Avoid adverse parking impacts on residential neighborhoods. 
h.  Ensure that any parking structures do not dominate the public environment, by lining the edge of structures with residential or commercial uses where visible from public roads and open space. 
(2)  Parking requirements. Off-street facilities shall be provided in accordance with this subsection. 
a.  Off-street parking spaces for the applicable use classification shall meet the following minimum number of spaces in Table 3 Parking Calculations. 
b.  Parking location. All off-street surface parking shall be located at least 15 feet behind the front facade which faces on a street or public open space, and shall be accessed by alley or short driveway between buildings. Any change to this standard shall be considered a minor waiver. 
c.  At-grade parking. All at-grade parking lots fronting roadways shall be screened from view as outlined in division 3(e) streetscape and landscape and division 8 landscape of this Code. Landscaping of the internal surface parking area shall not be required unless it is planned to serve as long term parking. In which case, such long term surface parking areas shall meet the requirements of division 7(e) parking lot landscape. For the purpose of this section, long term parking shall be determined by the director, and may include parking which has a likelihood of being in place for a period of seven years or more. 
d.  Parking calculations. The shared parking factor for two functions, when divided into the sum of the two amounts as listed on the required parking table below, produces the effective parking needed for each site involved in sharing. Conversely, if the sharing factor is used as a multiplier, it indicates the amount of building allowed on each site given the parking available. 
ARTICLE IV, TABLE CLAKEFRONT PARKING CALCULATIONSLand Use Minimum Parking Requirements Residential 1 space per bedroom, up to 2 spaces per dwelling Lodging (hotel, inn) 1 space per bedroom Office, Retail, Restaurant 1 space per every 400 square feet Civic and Other uses To be determined by minor waiver  
  
ARTICLE IV, TABLE DLAKEFRONT SHARED PARKING FACTORResidential Lodging Office Retail Residential 1 1.1 1.4 1.2 Lodging (hotel, inn) 1.1 1 1.7 1.3 Office 1.4 1.7 1 1.2 Retail 1.2 1.3 1.2 1  
* Parking requirements are based on at least 90 percent non-reserved stalls; otherwise, the requirement shall be 1/300 square feet for office, retail or restaurant use. 
Note 1. Open space and civic space do not require parking. 
Note 2. Active recreation or sports facilities parking requirements shall be determined by minor waiver. 
Note 3. On-street parking shall not count toward meeting residential parking requirements. 
e.  Parking garages-Where approved. 
1.  Parking garages which are adjacent to a street shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet and lined with buildings containing any permitted use but parking. 
2.  Off-street below grade parking is permitted to the lot lines, but must be designed to allow planting of landscape as defined in division 7 landscape. No below grade parking beneath a building shall be visible from the sidewalk. 
f.  Shared parking. 
1.  Uses may join in establishing shared parking areas if it can be demonstrated that the parking for two or more specific uses occurs at alternating time periods, or where shared parking is massed and configured in a way that increases its efficient use. Required parking shall be determined by a parking analysis study approved by the director. 
2.  Shared parking shall be clearly designated with signs and markings. 
(b)  Bicycle parking. 
(1)  Goals. Bicycle parking is required in order to encourage the use of bicycles by providing safe and convenient places to park bicycles. 
(2)  Required bicycle parking. Bicycle parking shall be provided based on at least one space for every ten automobile parking spaces required as part of the base parking requirement in subsection (a)(2) above. 
(3)  Bicycle parking standards. 
a.  Location. 
1.  Required bicycle parking must be located within 50 feet of an entrance to the building. With approval of a minor waiver, bicycle parking may be located in the public right-of-way. 
2.  Bicycle parking may be provided within a building, but the location must be easily accessible to bicycles. 
3.  Any bicycle parking in the public right-of-way should be located within the band created by street trees and pedestrian street lights, however, it must be placed in a manner that avoids conflicts with pedestrian and vehicular paths. 
b.  Signs. If bicycle parking is not visible from the street, then a sign must be posted indicating the location of the bicycle parking facilities. 
(4)  Standards for bicycle rack types and dimensions. 
a.  Rack type. Bicycle rack types and standards shall be approved by the town. 
b.  Parking space dimensions. 
1.  Bicycle parking spaces must be at least six feet long and two feet wide, and in covered situations, the overhead clearance must be at least seven feet. 
2.  An aisle for bicycle maneuvering must be provided and maintained beside or between each row of bicycle parking. This aisle must be at least five feet wide. 
3.  Each required bicycle parking space must be accessible without moving another bicycle. 
(c)  Accessibility throughout the district area. All parcels within a project area shall be platted and laid out in a manner that ensures connectivity for pedestrian and automobile movement both within the project and to adjacent nonsingle-family zoned properties. 
DIVISION 6. LIGHTING AND MECHANICAL 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of this section to provide a level and consistency of lighting that supports pedestrian activity and promotes safety, and to reduce the visual impact of mechanical equipment on the public realm. 
(b)  Standards. 
(1)  Average lighting levels within project areas should be approximately: 
a.  Urban Residential three foot-candles (fc); 
b.  Urban Retail six fc; 
c.  Parking areas 1.5 fc; 
d.  Street intersections three fc; 
e.  Street centerline 1.7 fc. 
(2)  Lighting elements shall be incandescent, metal halide, halogen or LED in a white spectrum light. No HID or fluorescent lights (except fluorescent bulbs that screw into standard socket fixtures) may be used on the exterior of buildings. 
(3)  All lighting shall be focused downward or narrowly focused on its intended target such as signs, parking and pedestrian walkways. No lighting source from a commercial activity shall be visible by a residential unit. 
(4)  The entire district shall utilize the basic fixtures and furnishings in the public areas as are approved by the town. 
(5)  Mechanical and electrical equipment, transformers, meters, garbage containers and loading areas shall meet town standards. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
DIVISION 7. LANDSCAPE 
(a)  Intent. Landscaping within the Lakefront Code shall comply with the provisions in this section, the town's list of approved plant materials and with the standards contained in article VI, part two, landscaping of the town's zoning ordinance. Where conflicts exist between this district and the zoning ordinance, the requirements in this district shall be applied. 
It is the intent of this section to: 
(1)  Support the Comprehensive Plan's goals for a Lakefront character; 
(2)  Provide the town with a unique and identifiable streetscape corridor; 
(3)  Contribute to pedestrian safety and comfort; 
(4)  Reduce the amount of solar heat gain in paved and hard surface areas. 
(b)  Street trees. 
(1)  Street trees may be planted between the sidewalk and the curb. They may also be planted within three feet of a curb, sidewalk or other structure, provided that they are selected from the town's urban tree list. 
(2)  All required street trees shall be: 
a.  At least three-inch caliper; 
b.  Single trunk; 
c.  Limbed-up to six feet. 
(c)  Plant material. Front yards shall be landscaped except at building entries, seating areas and adjacent to commercial uses, where the front yard may be paved. Plant materials shall consist of shade trees, ornamental trees, shrubs, evergreen ground covers, vines, and seasonal color in conformity with the town's list of approve plant materials and article VI of the town's zoning ordinance. Applicants are encouraged to use palm trees or other hardy desert-type plants to enhance the lakefront character. 
(d)  Paving material. 
(1)  Paving material in front yards and on sidewalks shall be warm toned, natural materials such as brick, stone and concrete. 
(2)  Asphalt and gravel as paving materials are prohibited. 
(e)  Parking lot landscape. 
(1)  Surface parking lots shall be screened to a minimum height of 30 inches from all adjacent public streets and open space. The screen must extend along all edges of the parking lot and must be in conformity with screening standards set out in article VI, division 2, landscaping of the town's zoning ordinance. It may be accomplished through the use of masonry walls, ornamental metal, evergreen plant materials, or a combination thereof. Planting beds for screen planting shall be a minimum of four feet in width. 
(2)  Interior parking lot landscape shall also be consistent with article VI, division 2, landscaping of the town's zoning ordinance. However, parking lots shall not exceed eight spaces in a row without being interrupted by a landscaped island (nine-foot minimum). Islands shall be planted with a minimum of one shade tree for every eight vehicle spaces. 
(3)  No landscaping shall be required for the interior of structured parking facilities. 
(f)  Detention/retention ponds. Detention/retention ponds shall be designed in a manner as to be an amenity to the development and shall not require fencing. 
(g)  Open space and landscaping for residential mixed use projects. 
(1)  In lieu of the town's requirement for open space and trees for residential development, a green, square or plaza shall be provided and approved as part of the regulating or site plan. (See Table 4 Open Space) 
(h)  Other landscape requirements. 
(1)  The landscape point system shall not apply to projects within the Lakefront District. 
(2)  The requirement for a ten-foot landscape buffer between parcels shall not apply except where adjacent to single-family zoned property. 

DIVISION 8. SIGN STANDARDS 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this section is to establish architectural controls, limit clutter and regulate commercial and locational signage. It is also intended to help enliven retail and restaurant mixed use areas. These standards should not be interpreted to prevent a for-sale sign, a political sign, or a noncommercial sign that is an exercise of noncommercial freedom of speech. Commercial and locational signage within the district are limited, regulated and controlled as provided in this Code, and all other signage shall be subject to the requirements of such town ordinances, rules and regulations that are in effect from time to time. 
(b)  Signs, general standards. 
(1)  General standards. 
a.  Signage may only be externally lit with full-spectrum source, unless otherwise approved. 
b.  One address number, no more than six inches vertically, shall be attached to the building in proximity to the principal entrance. 
(c)  Prohibited signs. 
(1)  The following signs shall not be allowed: 
a.  Off-premise signs; 
b.  Internally lit sign boxes; 
c.  Flashing or running light signs; 
d.  Pole signs; 
(2)  Signs shall not be mounted on roofs or project above roof line without approval of a minor waiver, and it is determined to make a positive contribution to the district as a whole. 
(d)  Permitted signs. 
(1)  Wall signs. 
a.  One wall sign per occupancy, per street frontage. 
b.  Maximum size is 30 square feet if located 12 feet or higher above grade; ten square feet if less than 12 feet above grade. 
c.  Minimum ten-foot distance between wall signs (excluding building identification sign or directory sign). 
d.  In addition, one wall-mounted sign, not exceeding six square feet in area, is permitted on any side or rear entrance open to the public. Such wall signs may only be lighted during the operating hours of business. 
(2)  Projecting and hanging signs, including graphic or icon signs, mounted perpendicularly to the wall. 
a.  A maximum of one per occupancy per building face. 
b.  A maximum area of six square feet per face; and a maximum of three feet in width. 
c.  Distance from the ground to the lower edge of the sign shall be seven and one-half feet or greater. 
d.  Minimum 15-foot distance between signs. 
e.  The height of the top edge of the signboard shall not exceed the height of the wall from which the sign projects, if attached to a single story building; or the height of the sill or bottom of any second story window, if attached to a multi-story building unless approved by minor waiver. 
(3)  Window signs. 
a.  The sign shall not exceed 30 percent of the window area. 
b.  Neon signs are allowed behind windows in commercial areas, but shall count toward the allowed window sign area. 
(4)  Building identification signs. 
a.  One per building face. 
b.  Must be 12 feet or higher above sidewalk level. 
c.  Maximum size 25 square feet. 
d.  Twenty-four-inch maximum height for letters or logos. 
e.  Applied letters shall be constructed of painted cast metal, bronze, brass, or anodized aluminum. Applied plastic letters are not permitted. 
(5)  Awning signs (for ground floor uses only). 
a.  One per occupancy per building face. 
b.  Minimum eight feet above sidewalk level for pedestrian clearance. 
c.  Ten square feet maximum sign area. 
d.  If acting as an auxiliary business sign, it shall be located on the valance only, and the height of the lettering shall not exceed four inches. 
e.  If acting as the main business sign, it shall not be in addition to a wall-mounted sign. 
(6)  Monument signs. 
a.  Monument signs shall only be allowed adjacent to the Eldorado right-of-way. 
b.  Architecturally compatible monument signs shall not exceed six feet in height or eight feet in length. 
c.  Vertically oriented monument signs may also be allowed by minor waiver where it is deemed that such signs will enliven the area. 
(7)  Building directory signs. 
a.  One per entrance. 
b.  The sign shall be located next to the entrance. 
c.  The sign shall project out from the wall to which it is attached no more than six inches. 
d.  The sign shall not extend above the parapet, eave or building facade. 
e.  Maximum size shall be eight square feet. 
(8)  Restaurants and cafes. 
a.  In addition to other signage, restaurants and cafes shall be permitted the following, limited to one of each type of sign per business: 
b.  A wall-mounted display featuring the actual menu as used at the dining table, to be contained within a shallow wood or metal case, and clearly visible through a glass front. The display case shall be attached to the building wall, next to the main entrance, at a height of approximately five feet, shall not exceed a total area of three square feet, and may be lighted. 
c.  An A-frame sidewalk sign displaying the name of the eatery, offerings and hours of operation. 
d.  Restaurant and retail areas may have a neon or special designed exterior sign, if approved by the CRC. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
DIVISION 9. LAKEFRONT PROCEDURES 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of this section to off-set the high level of detailed standards in this Code with an expeditious approval of projects which meet its general goals and intent, and: 
(1)  To ensure adequate linkages and connections within and between project areas, and 
(2)  To ensure consistency and quality of design through use of professional review assistance. 
(b)  Review process. 
(1)  A review committee ("committee") shall be established to provide guidance of interpretation of the Lakefront Code and make recommendations on significant issues that may arise. It is not intended to meet and review every administrative or legislative application that comes forward within the district. 
 The committee shall be comprised of the following: 
 Director of development services ("director") 
 Director of economic development ("EDC rep") 
 Planning manager (serving as "urban design officer" or "UDO") 
 Town engineer ("engineer") 
 A representative of the town council ("council liaison") 
(2)  The urban design officer (UDO) shall serve as a technical advisor to the director and the committee. The UDO shall be the planning manager and a portion of the expense of the UDO's services will be borne by development fees paid to the town for development of land within the Lakefront District. 
(3)  The director shall coordinate with the UDO and committee, and have staff administrative jurisdiction over any processes authorized under the Lakefront Code. The director of development services, the UDO and the committee shall be expeditious in their review and advance the permitting process by undertaking any action consistent with this code, state law, and the town Charter to facilitate the permitting process. 
(c)  Regulating plan. 
(1)  Approval of a regulating plan is required prior to approval of a site plan for any portion of a multi-phased project site area. 
(2)  The regulating plan provides the framework for development and serves as a conceptual layout of a project area. It shall include such things as: 
a.  Street and access lanes within the project area and connections to adjacent nonsingle-family zoned properties; 
b.  The location of general land use sites and for identification of retail at-grade; 
c.  Public open space and plazas; and 
d.  Hike and bike corridors and trails. 
(3)  An application for a regulating plan shall be processed in accordance with the town's procedures for determining whether an application is complete. Following a determination of completeness, and unless the application is accompanied by a request for a major waiver, the director, or his designee, shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the application for a regulating plan and shall notify the applicant of his decision. in his deliberations, the director may consider a recommendation from the UDO. 
(4)  Denial or conditional approval of a regulating plan by the director may be initially appealed to the planning and zoning commission and, following the recommendation of the commission, to the town council. The appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the date of the director's action on the application for approval of a regulating plan. 
(5)  If the application includes a request for a major waiver, the director shall request a recommendation from the UDO and if appropriate the CRC, and schedule the application for hearing before the planning and zoning commission with his recommendation on the application. The planning and zoning commission, following a public hearing, shall forward its recommendation to the town council for hearing on the application and waiver request. The town council, following a public hearing, shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the application for a regulating plan and the major waiver request. The notice and hearing procedures for approval of a specific use permit shall be used to process the regulating plan and major waiver application. 
(6)  The director in making an initial decision on a regulating plan application, the planning and zoning commission in making recommendations to the town council, or the town council in deciding the application for regulating plan approval, shall determine whether the plan is consistent with the comprehensive plan and meets the goals and intent of the Lakefront Code. 
(d)  Site plan. 
(1)  Prior to obtaining a building permit, a site plan must be approved by the director or town council, demonstrating that the proposal meets the goals, intent and general standards contained in this Code. 
(2)  A site plan application must include the following information and documents that demonstrate compliance with the Lakefront Code: 
a.  Detailed site plan showing proposed streets, buildings, parking areas, and landscaped areas; 
b.  Proposed uses; 
c.  Building elevations and sections; 
d.  Proposed parking calculations; 
e.  Any waivers being requested; 
(3)  An application for a site plan shall be processed in accordance with the town's procedures for determining whether an application is complete. Following a determination of completeness, and unless the application is accompanied by a request for a major waiver, the director, or his designee, shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the application for a site plan and shall notify the applicant of his decision. In his deliberations, the director may consider a recommendation by the UDO. 
(4)  Denial or conditional approval of a site plan by the director may be initially appealed to the planning and zoning commission and, following the recommendation of the commission, to the town council. The appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the date of the manager's action on the application for approval of a site plan. 
(5)  If the application includes a request for a major waiver, the director shall request a recommendation from the UDO and if appropriate the CRC, and schedule the application for hearing before the planning and zoning commission with his recommendation on the application. the planning and zoning commission, following a public hearing, shall forward its recommendation to the town council for hearing on the application and waiver request. The town council, following a public hearing, shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the application for a site plan and the major waiver request. The notice and hearing procedures for approval of a specific use permit shall be used to process the site plan and major waiver application. 
(6)  The director in making an initial decision on a site plan application, the planning and zoning commission in making recommendations to the town council, or the town council in deciding the application for site plan approval, shall determine whether the plan is consistent with the regulating plan for the property (if there is one), and meets the goals, intent and standards of the Lakefront Code. 
(e)  Waivers of design standards. 
(1)  For the purposes of this district, there shall be two types of waivers of design standards - minor and major. Requests for waivers shall not be subject to review or decision by the board of adjustment. A waiver request may only be made in conjunction with an application for a regulating plan, a site plan or subsequent to approval of a site plan. 
(2)  Minor waivers are those changes to design standards in the Lakefront Code that are determined to meet the goals and intent of this Code as stated in division 1 and throughout this Code. Minor waivers may be approved administratively by the director or his designee. 
(3)  Major waivers are major changes to the design standards in the Lakefront Code or which may appear to be in conflict with the goals and intent of this Code. Major waivers may only be approved by the town council, following a recommendation by the UDO and the planning and zoning commission, in conjunction with a decision on an application for approval of a regulating plan or site plan. In order to approve a major waiver, the town council must find that the waiver: 
a.  Meets the general intent of this district, and 
b.  Is consistent with the overall plan and vision for the district, and 
c.  Will result in an improved project which will be an attractive contribution to the Lakefront District. 
(4)  The town may impose conditions on granting any waiver in order to implement the regulating plan for the property or to mitigate negative impacts to neighboring properties or public streets or open space. 
(f)  Amendments to the regulating plan. 
(1)  Amendments to an approved regulating plan or site plan may be accomplished in the same manner as approval of the original approval, and may be accompanied by a request for major or minor waivers. 
(2)  An amendment to an approved regulating plan or site plan must be made prior to the time for lapse of approval provided in subsection (g) below. In the event an amended plan is approved, the approving authority amending the plan shall specify the time for lapse of such approval, consistent with subsection (g). 
(g)  Lapse of approval. If a building permit has not been obtained within two years following approval of a regulating plan or site plan, such plan shall lapse unless the property owner requests an extension prior to the expiration of the two-year period. The request for extension shall be considered by the original approving authority in the same manner as for approval of the existing plan. The authority may grant an extension of the time for expiration of the plan for a period not to exceed two years from the date of expiration of the original application. 
    Every request for extension shall include a statement of the reasons why the expiration date should be extended. The approving authority may grant a request for extension upon demonstration that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have resulted in the applicant's inability to perform the tasks necessary to prevent the plan from expiring before the lapse date. 
(h)  Graphics incorporated into Code. Any and all graphics from the approved form based codes document not supported by textual technological limitations are hereby codified as supporting material by reference. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.04.03 - Planned development districts. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of a planned development district is to allow and encourage the highest and best use of land, to encourage walkable neighborhoods that include residential, employment and retail opportunities within a relatively compact geographic area, and to allow a mixture of land uses, development standards, innovative techniques and materials that would not be allowed within a single zoning district. 
(b)  Use regulations. The town council, after public hearing and proper notice to all parties affected and after recommendation from the planning and zoning commission, may authorize the creation of the following types of planned development districts for the following: 
(1)  Service, retail, office or residential uses on tracts of three acres or more. 
(2)  Industrial uses on tracts of ten acres or more. 
(3)  Medical center, hospital, or institutional uses of tracts of three acres or more. 
(4)  A combination of any of the above uses. 
(5)  PD Planned Developments can be used as transition districts whereby the provision of off-street parking, screening walls, open space, and planting would create a protective transition between a lesser or a more restrictive district and a more intense use or district. 
(c)  Height and area regulations. In said PD Planned Development District the height of buildings, the minimum dimensions of lots and yards and the minimum lot area per family on any lot shall generally be in conformity to the height and area regulation specified in the various district regulations of the zoning ordinance of the town; however, the commission shall establish specific height and area regulations as may be applicable to implement and adjust the planned development. 
(d)  Connectivity. PD Planned Developments that are all or in part nonresidential shall provide pedestrian and/or bike access to the nearest residential community. 
(e)  Paving regulations. In said PD Planned Development District the minimum off-street parking and loading regulations shall be a concrete paved surface and shall generally be in conformity to parking regulations specified in the various district regulations of the zoning ordinance of the town; however, the planning and zoning commission shall establish reduced parking regulations as may be applicable to implement and adjust the planned development. 
(f)  Application. An application for a PD Planned Development District may be made to the planning and zoning commission in the same manner that an application for a zoning map amendment is made. Applications for approval of a PD Planned Development District shall be processed according to the procedure specified herein and a conceptual plan and related data shall be submitted for approval in accordance with the requirements set out in the development schedule below. 
(g)  Procedure for establishing standards. In approving the ordinance and the associated conceptual site plan establishing the PD Planned Development District, the town council shall, after recommendation by the planning and zoning commission, specify such maximum height, floor-area ratio, density, and minimum off-street parking and loading standards within the limits of those specified in the districts listed for the specific uses involved as is appropriate for the development. The town council shall, after receiving the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission, establish the standards for yards, signs, building spacing, site coverage, access, screening walls or landscaping, building area, open space, pedestrian ways, public or private streets, and alleys to be observed in a PD Planned Development District and such standards shall be specified in the ordinance establishing the district. 
(h)  Standards of the zoning ordinance. Any development standard that is not specifically spelled out in the PD Planned Development ordinance shall revert to the standards of the underlying zoning district, as it exists or may be amended. 
(i)  Innovation. The PD Planned Development process is designed to encourage innovation in design and layout of the proposed development. Creative use of materials, siting, landscaping, and hardscaping will be considered as part of the development regulations. 
(j)  Parking reductions available. Applications for a PD Planned Development District may submit a plan for an up to 20 percent reduction in parking based on shared parking among the expected uses. Sufficient documentation shall be submitted along with the proposed development regulations to justify any reduction in parking off the standards listed in section 106.06.44, "off-street parking standards - nonresidential and multifamily districts" and section 106.06.45, "parking requirements per land use" of the zoning ordinance." The director's decision regarding parking reductions is final. 
(k)  Conceptual plan required. An application for a PD Planned Development District shall include and be accompanied by a conceptual plan which shall become a part of the amending ordinance and shall be referenced on the zoning district map. (See section 106.02.14, "conceptual plan approval," for more information). Changes in the conceptual plan shall be considered the same as changes in the zoning district map and shall be processed as required except that changes of detail which do not alter the basic relationship of the proposed development to adjacent property and which do not alter the uses permitted or increase the density, floor-area ratio, height or coverage of the site, or which do not decrease the off-street parking ratio, or reduce the yards provided at the boundary of the site as indicated on the approved conceptual plan may be authorized by the planning and zoning commission. Any applicant may appeal the decision of the planning and zoning commission to the town council for review and decision as to whether an amendment to the PD Planned Development District ordinance shall be required. 
(l)  Planned development district approval. Every PD Planned Development District approved under the provisions of this chapter shall be considered as an amendment to the official zoning map as applicable to the property involved. In carrying out the development of a PD Planned Development District, the development conditions and the development schedule, if required, shall be complied with and such conditions as are specified for the development of a PD Planned Development District shall not be construed as conditions precedent to the approval of the zoning amendment, but shall be construed as conditions precedent to the granting of a certificate of occupancy and compliance. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.04.04 - Floodplain Overlay District. 
(a)  Floodplain prefix. To provide for the appropriate use of land that has a history of inundation or is determined to be subject to flood hazard, and to promote the general welfare and provide protection from flooding, portions of certain districts are designated with a floodplain prefix, "FP." Areas designated on the zoning district map by an "FP" Prefix shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(b)  Uses permitted. The permitted uses in that portion of any district having a floodplain ("FP") prefix shall be limited to the following: 
(1)  Agricultural activities including the ordinary cultivation or grazing of land and legal types of animal husbandry. 
(2)  A maximum of 50 percent of the required parking for a development may be located at or above the 534-foot elevation line, subject to review and approval by the director. The remainder of the parking must be located above the floodplain line (537-foot elevation). 
(3)  Electrical substations. 
(4)  All types of local utilities including those requiring special use permits when approved as provided in section 106.02.17, "special use permit approval." 
(5)  Parks, community centers, playgrounds, public golf courses. 
(6)  Private open spaces. 
(7)  Heliports when approved by a special use permit as provided in section 106.02.17, "specific use permit approval." 
(c)  Floodplain requirements. In addition to the provisions of this zoning ordinance applicable to the zoning district in which the subject land is located, the use and development of land located within an area of special flood hazard or controlled flood protection shall be subject to the provisions of chapter 54 of the Code of Ordinances, as amended. In the event of any irreconcilable conflict between the provisions of this zoning ordinance and said chapter 54, the provisions of said chapter 54 shall control. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.04.05 - Manufactured Home District. 
(a)  Use regulations. No building, structure, land or premises will be used, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered, except for one or more of the uses specified in section 106.05.01(a), "schedule of use - residential." 
(1)  Permit required. Mobile home parks and recreational vehicle parks shall be permitted with a zoning change as defined in section 106.02.11, "map amendments to the zoning ordinance." 
(2)  Screening from other uses. Each mobile home or recreational vehicle park boundary, except those adjacent to a street or highway right-of-way, shall be provided with a continuous natural or artificial barrier. 
(3)  Water supply. Mobile home parks and recreational vehicle parks shall provide an adequate supply of pure water to all mobile home or recreational vehicle spaces within said parks in accordance with applicable ordinances. Each individual mobile home space shall be provided with a cold water tap not less than four inches above the ground. All plumbing work performed within a mobile home or recreational vehicle park shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the plumbing code, as revised. 
(4)  Sewage disposal. 
a.  Wastewater from showers, bathtubs, flush toilets, lavatories, and laundry facilities within the service and/or other buildings within the mobile home or recreational vehicle park, in addition to dump station facilities, shall be discharged into a public sewer system in compliance with applicable ordinances. 
b.  Each mobile home or recreational vehicle space located within a mobile home or recreational vehicle park facility shall be provided a trapped sewer not less than four inches in diameter. The trapped sewer in each mobile home or recreational vehicle space shall discharge wastewater into a public sewer system in compliance with applicable ordinances. 
(5)  Electrical service. Electrical service to individual mobile home spaces and recreational vehicle spaces, in addition to any service and/or office buildings, shall conform to those requirements specified in the most recently adopted edition of the National Electrical Code. 
(6)  Garbage receptacles. 
a.  Within mobile home or recreational vehicle parks, trash dumpsters and/or garbage cans possessing secure covers shall be provided in quantities adequate to permit disposal of all garbage and rubbish. Such garbage receptacles shall be located not farther than 300 feet from any mobile home or recreational vehicle space. These receptacles shall be maintained in sanitary conditions at all times. Garbage and rubbish shall be collected and disposed of as frequently as may be necessary to ensure that said receptacles shall not overflow. 
b.  Fees for collection and disposal of garbage shall be in accordance with the applicable ordinance governing and regulating residential refuse services. 
(7)  Fire protection. 
a.  Fire extinguishing equipment required. Each mobile home or recreational vehicle park shall be equipped at all times with fire extinguishing equipment in good working order, of such type, size and number located within the park as to satisfy applicable regulation as stated in the fire code. No open fires shall be permitted in any place which may endanger life or property. No open fires shall be unattended at any time. 
b.  Fire hydrants required. Standard fire hydrants, in workable condition, shall be located within 500 feet of each mobile home or recreational vehicle space. All such fire hydrants shall be connected to not less than a six-inch diameter water line. 
c.  Individual mobile home or recreational vehicle space numbering system required. Within all mobile home and recreational vehicle parks, each mobile home or recreational vehicle space shall be assigned a unique letter and/or number description. Such numbering or lettering shall be not less than three inches in size and of a reflective and shall be displayed on the mobile home or recreational vehicle space in a conspicuous location, visible from the internal circulation road which abuts the front yard of the mobile home or recreational vehicle space. 
d.  Park directory required. All mobile home or recreational vehicle parks, as herein defined, shall provide in a conspicuous location at each entrance to a public right-of-way a diagram displaying the location of each mobile home or recreational vehicle space within the park. The location of such diagram shall be identified by a blue light which will be clearly visible to anyone entering the park. The diagram of the park layout shall be enclosed in a weatherproof facility. 
(b)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Licensee means any person licensed to operate and maintain a manufactured home or recreational vehicle park under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Manufactured home park means and includes any area used, owned or operated by any person, association of persons, firm or corporation for the purpose of locating thereon any mobile or HUD-Code manufactured home. 
    Manufactured home space means a plot of land within a manufactured home park designed for the accommodation of one manufactured home in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
    Natural or artificial barrier means any embankment, fence, hedge, or other feature that serves to block direct pedestrian access or visibility. 
    Owner is to include the person in whose name the title to the lot, block, tract, or parcel of land is shown to be. 
    Operator is defined to include the person in charge of operating any manufactured home, either under written or verbal lease, or any other arrangements whereby he exercises control over the premises. 
    Person means any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association, or corporation. 
    Recreational vehicle may be constructed as including any of the following: 
    Camping trailer is a canvas, folding structure mounted on wheels and designed for travel, recreation and vacation use. 
    Motor home is a portable, temporary dwelling to be used for travel, recreation, and vacation, constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle. 
    Pick-up coach is a structure designed to be mounted on a truck chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, and vacation. 
    Recreational vehicle park means any lot or tract of land designed to accommodate two or more recreational vehicles as defined and which exists as a privately owned/operated enterprise for the purpose of realizing a monetary profit. 
    Recreation vehicle space means a plot of land within a recreational vehicle park designed for the accommodation of one recreational vehicle in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
    Travel trailer means a vehicular structure build on a chassis with body width less than eight feet and body length less than 32 feet, said structure designed to be transported and intended for human occupancy as a dwelling for short periods of time and containing limited or no kitchen or bathroom facilities. 
(c)  Mobile home park district regulations. In the Manufactured Home Park District (MH-2) a park storage building, office, caretaker's quarters, laundry house, or other support structure or building for the mobile home park in general shall comply with the minimum setback requirements for the main building. 
(1)  Special permit requirement. 
a.  Application for special permit. In the event that a special permit shall be required, application for said permit shall be made to the council, such application to be filed with a complete plan (in triplicate) of the mobile home or recreational vehicle park facility in conformity with this chapter, development plans and specifications. Plans and specifications of all buildings, improvements, and facilities constructed or to be constructed within the mobile home or recreational vehicle park shall be provided in triplicate. Such application for special permit shall be subject to the review and approval procedure as determined by the town. 
b.  Transfer of special permit. An existing special permit may be transferred from one individual or corporation to another individual or corporation without a public hearing, upon application to the town council. 
(2)  License. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate a mobile home or recreational vehicle park within the limits of the town, unless such person shall first obtain a license as issued by the building official. Such license shall be valid for a period not to exceed one year and is subject to renewal upon expiration. 
(3)  License fees. Refer to the town's schedule of fees for current license fees. 
(4)  Application for license. 
a.  Application for initial license. An application for initial development of a mobile home park or recreational vehicle park shall be filed with and issued by the building official. The application shall be in writing, signed by the applicant, and shall include the following: 
b.  The name and address of the applicant. 
c.  The location and legal description of the mobile home or recreational vehicle park. 
d.  A complete plan of the subject park in conformity with the requirements of this chapter. 
e.  Plans and specifications of all buildings, improvements, and facilities constructed or to be constructed within the mobile home or recreational vehicle park. 
f.  Evidence of special permit approval, if required. 
g.  Such additional information as may be required by the building official to facilitate a determination as to compliance of the proposed park with established legal requirements. The application and all accompanying plans and specifications shall be filed in triplicate. The building official shall inspect the application and the proposed plans and specifications. In the event that the proposed mobile home or recreational vehicle park will, when constructed or altered in accordance with such plans and specifications, be in compliance with all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable ordinances and statutes, the building official shall approve the application, and upon completion of the park according to the plans, shall issue the license. 
h.  In those instances in which a mobile home or recreational vehicle park is proposed for development which fails to reasonably satisfy particular requirements as herein prescribed, a variance to certain of these requirements may be requested of the board of adjustment. Those requirements for which a variance may be granted, in addition to the procedure governing the operation of the board of adjustment are delineated in the board of adjustment, zoning ordinance of the town. 
i.  Application for renewal license. Upon application in writing by a licensee for renewal of a license and upon payment of the annual license fee, the building official, shall conduct an on-site inspection of the subject mobile home or recreational vehicle park to ascertain compliance with the requirements established in this chapter. Subsequent to a determination of compliance, the building official shall issue a certificate renewing such license for another year. 
j.  Transfer of license. Upon application in writing for a transfer of license, the provision of evidence of special permit transfer, if required, and payment of the license transfer fee, the building official shall issue a transfer of license. 
k.  Expiration date of license. All licenses issued under the terms and conditions of this chapter shall expire on December 31 following the issuance date. 
l.  Nonconforming mobile home or recreational vehicle parks. Such mobile home or recreational vehicle parks lawfully in operation on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and not in compliance with those regulations established herein, may, upon application to the building official for license renewal be permitted to continue that operation as a nonconforming mobile home or recreational vehicle park facility. Any expansion and/or extension of said nonconforming mobile home or recreational vehicle park, however, is subject to and shall be in compliance with the regulations established in this chapter. 
m.  Mobile home plats. Mobile home plats shall not be constructed in phases, but shall be completed as one unit. 
(5)  Location. Mobile home parks may be located only in conformity with the comprehensive zoning ordinance of the town and, in addition to the requirements contained herein, each boundary of the park must be at least 200 feet from any permanent residential building located outside the park, unless separated therefrom by a natural or artificial barrier, or unless a majority of the property owners according to area within said 200 feet consent in writing to the establishment of the park, provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to mobile home parks already in existence and operation at the time of the passage of this chapter. 
(6)  Mobile home park regulations. The regulations described herein govern the development, operation, and maintenance of those mobile home parks which exclusively accommodate mobile home uses as previously defined and do not provide facilities to accommodate recreational vehicles, as defined below: 
a.  The park shall be located on a well-drained site, properly graded to ensure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water. 
b.  Mobile home spaces shall be provided consisting of a minimum of 2,500 square feet for each space which shall be at least 40 feet wide and clearly defined; provided, however, that mobile home parks in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived which provide mobile home spaces having a width or area less than that hereinabove prescribed may continue to operate with spaces of the existing width and area, but in no event shall any mobile home space be less than 25 feet wide and have an area of less than 1,250 square feet. 
c.  Mobile homes shall be so harbored on each space that there shall be at least a 25-foot clearance between mobile homes, provided, however, that with respect to mobile homes parked end-to-end, the end-to-end clearance may be less than 15 feet but shall not be less than ten feet. No mobile home shall be located closer than 15 feet from any building within the park or from any property line bounding the park. 
d.  All mobile home spaces shall abut upon a driveway of not less than 20 feet in width, which shall have unobstructed access to a public street, alley or highway. 
e.  Concrete walkways not less than five feet in width shall be provided from the mobile home spaces to the service buildings. 
f.  All driveways and walkways within the park shall be constructed of concrete and be illuminated at night with electric lamps. See article VI, part five, lighting, for more information. 
g.  It shall be unlawful for any person operating a mobile home park or occupying a mobile home to construct or permit to be constructed within such park any site-built addition to a mobile home. Manufactured components and awnings of canvas or metal, suitably constructed, may be attached to a mobile home. 
h.  One accessory building per mobile home space shall be permitted, provided that said building is located within a rear or side yard and is not placed within 20 feet of any mobile home space lot line. 
i.  The distance from any part of a mobile home to an internal road or street shall be at minimum ten feet. 
j.  Not less than eight percent of the gross land area within the mobile home park site is to be utilized for common recreation purposes. No recreation areas shall be comprised of less than 2,500 square feet. 
k.  All site-built structures located within the mobile home park shall be constructed and/or placed in compliance with the building code. 
l.  The mobile home park development plan shall comply with all applicable requirements as stated in the subdivision ordinance. 
m.  Each park shall provide service buildings to house such toilet, bathing and other sanitation facilities and such laundry facilities as are hereinafter more particularly prescribed. 
n.  An electrical outlet supplying at least 110 volts shall be provided for each mobile home space. 
(7)  Service buildings for mobile home parks (laundry and sanitation facilities). 
a.  The provision of common laundry facilities is not required in mobile home parks exclusively serving mobile home uses, as previously defined. In the event that common laundry facilities are to be provided within a mobile home park, toilet and lavatory accommodations are to be afforded in accordance with the building code. 
b.  The provision of sanitation facilities (i.e., showers, dressing accommodations, toilets, lavatories) is not required in mobile home parks exclusively serving mobile home uses as previously defined. 
(8)  Foundation requirements. All mobile home foundations shall be adequately enclosed or skirted and tied down within 60 days of permit date. 
(9)  Completion bonds. Mobile home builders/developers are to post completion bonds equal to 100 percent of the value of the roads for the entire mobile home park. 
(d)  Recreational vehicle (RV) park regulations. The regulations described herein govern the development, operation, and maintenance of recreational vehicle parks, as previously defined. 
(1)  RV park development requirements. Recreational vehicle parks shall be developed to conform to those requirements as herein delineated: 
a.  Recreational vehicle parks shall be designed so as not to exceed a maximum of 20 units per acre. 
b.  No minimum area is established for a recreational vehicle space except that utility hookups shall be located such that a ten-foot clearance shall be maintained between recreational vehicle when parked. 
c.  Not less than eight percent of the gross land area within the park site is to be utilized for common recreational purposes. 
d.  Internal streets shall be paved and shall exhibit the appropriate dimension as required in the following: 
1.  One-way, no parking, 11 feet, (acceptable only if park provides less than 25 spaces); 
2.  One-way, parking on one side only, 18 feet, (acceptable only if park provides less than 50 spaces); 
3.  Two-way, no parking, 24 feet; 
4.  Two-way, parking on one side only, 27 feet; 
5.  Two-way, parking on either side, 34 feet. 
(2)  RV parking. Spaces shall be provided at the park office that will accommodate five recreational vehicles. Each recreational vehicle space shall afford parking and maneuvering space sufficient such that the parking, loading, etc., of recreational vehicles shall not necessitate the use of any public right-of-way or privately owned property, which may abut the park. 
a.  Each recreational vehicle space provided with electrical service shall be so served through an underground distribution system. The park office and/or service building may receive electrical service as provided through overhead facilities. 
b.  Each recreational vehicle park shall provide, at minimum, one sanitary disposal site (i.e. dump station) which discharges into the town sewage system. 
c.  All site-built structures located within the recreational vehicle park shall be constructed and/or placed in compliance with the building code. 
d.  The recreational vehicle park development plan shall comply with all applicable requirements as stated in the subdivision ordinance. 
(3)  Service buildings for RV parks (laundry and sanitation facilities). Each recreational vehicle park shall provide one or more service buildings for the use of park patrons. Said service buildings shall provide for: 
a.  One flush toilet for women; 
b.  One flush toilet for men; 
3.  One lavatory for each sex; 
4.  One shower and dressing accommodation for each sex, provided in an individual compartment or stall; 
5.  One washing machine; 
6.  One slop sink, not less than 14 by 14 inches square and 14 inches deep. 
7.  The aforementioned amenities shall accommodate not more than 12 recreational vehicle spaces. For each additional ten recreational vehicle spaces or fraction thereof, one flush toilet, one shower with individual dressing accommodations, and one lavatory shall be provided for each sex, with laundry and slop sink facilities as described in subsections (e) and (f) of this section to be provided for each additional 12 recreational vehicle spaces. 
(4)  Service buildings providing the afore noted facilities shall satisfy such requirements as include: 
a.  Service buildings housing sanitation and/or laundry facilities shall be permanent structures which comply with all applicable statutes regulating buildings, electrical installation, plumbing, and sanitation systems. 
b.  Service buildings shall afford appropriate illumination, shall be well ventilated with screened openings, shall be constructed of such moisture-proof material, to include painted woodwork, as shall permit frequent cleaning and washing, and shall be maintained at a temperature not less than 68 degrees during the period October 1 through May 1. Floors shall be constructed of concrete or other equally impervious material, easily cleanable, and provided with floor drains which are connected to the sanitary sewer. 
3.  The toilet and other sanitation facilities for males and females shall be either in separate buildings or shall be separated, if in the same building, by a soundproof wall. 
4.  All service buildings and park grounds shall be maintained in a clear, slightly condition and kept free of any condition that will menace the health of any occupant or the public or constitute a nuisance. 
5.  Service buildings housing sanitation facilities shall be located not closer than 15 feet nor farther than 200 feet from any recreational vehicle space within the park. 
(5)  RV combined accommodations. In the event a mobile home park is proposed to provide facilities to accommodate recreational vehicles, the following regulations shall apply: 
a.  Those accommodations serving the recreational vehicles and mobile homes shall be physically separate and distinct, with the recreational vehicle facilities provided separate access to a public right-of-way such that recreational vehicle traffic does not intrude into the residential portion of the park occupied by mobile homes. 
b.  Within those portions of the mobile home park proposed for recreational vehicle use, those requirements as specified in recreational vehicle park regulations, shall apply. 
c.  Within those portions of the mobile home park proposed for mobile home use, those requirements as specified in mobile home park regulations, shall apply. 
(6)  Animals and other pets in RV parks. No owner or person in charge of any dog, cat or other pet animal shall permit such animal to run at large or commit any nuisance within the limits of any mobile home or recreational vehicle park. 
(7)  Registration of occupants in RV parks. It shall be the duty of each licensee to maintain a register containing a record of all mobile home or recreational vehicle owner/occupants located within mobile home or recreational vehicle parks. The register shall contain the following information: 
a.  The name and address of each mobile home or recreational vehicle occupant. 
b.  The name and address of the owner of each mobile home or recreational vehicle within the park. 
c.  The make, model, year, and license number of each mobile home or recreational vehicle located within the park. 
d.  The state, territory, or country issuing such licenses as noted in subsection (c) of this section. 
v.  The date of arrival and of departure of each mobile home or recreational vehicle. 
(8)  RV park registration list inspection. The park shall keep the register available for inspection at all times by law enforcement officers, public health officials, and other officials whose duties necessitate acquisition of the information contained in the register. The register record for each occupant registered shall not be destroyed for a period of three years following the date of departure of the registrant from the park. 
(9)  RV park supervision. The licensee, or duly authorized attendant or caretaker, shall be in charge at all times to maintain the RV park, its facilities, and equipment in a clean, orderly, and sanitary condition. The attendant or caretaker shall be answerable, with the licensee, for the violation of any provision of this chapter to which the licensee is subject. 
(10)  RV park violations. 
a.  Where the building official, or his agent, determines that the operation of a RV park violates some provision of this chapter, or any other provision in the Code of Ordinances of the town, a complaint may be filed in the municipal court for the town against either the owner or the operator of the park or both. 
b.  Where the building official, or his agent, determines that the operation of a RV park violates some provision of this chapter, he may suspend the park's license to operate until such time as the park complies with the ordinance. The licensee may appeal this suspension to the zoning board of adjustment, as provided for in the zoning ordinance of the town as amended. Operation of a park while the license is suspended shall constitute a violation of this chapter for the purposes of subsection (a) of this section. 
(11)  Posting of license. The license certificate shall at all times be conspicuously posted in the office of or on the premises of the RV park. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.04.06. - Lakefront Residential Overlay District. 
DIVISION 1. PURPOSE, GOALS AND INTENT 
(a)  Purpose. The future land use section of 2017 comprehensive plan calls for an objective within the recommendations section of the Lakefront District to plan for redevelopment and expansion of the district. In working with council, staff has identified the residential areas surrounding the Lakefront Zoning District as areas prime for redevelopment. The purpose for the overlay is to establish zoning for residential areas around the existing Lakefront District within the context of redevelopment. The associated standards and visual examples will function to create a residential area that provides flexibility and variety in unique architectural design and high quality alternative materials. 
(b)  Goals. To expand on the town's targeted "lakeside community character" by: 
(1)  Creating flexibility in residential architectural design. 
(2)  Promoting the utilization of a variety of high quality building materials not typically permitted in the town's standard residential zoning districts. 
(3)  Catalyzing and encouraging residential redevelopment within the Overlay District by providing a balance of unique development standards and expeditious administrative approvals for projects which meet the intent of this Code. 
(c)  Intent. The intent of the Overlay District is to expand upon the Lakefront District's desire to provide a comfortable and attractive environment that will provide a unique, yet compatible residential neighborhood by encouraging redevelopment that is distinct from traditional residential subdivisions. 
(d)  Boundary. As identified in exhibit A, including any subsequent modifications as approved by town council. 
(Ord. No. 1437, § 2, 12-19-2017) 
DIVISION 2. INTENT 
    The following definitions shall apply within the Lakefront Residential Overlay District: 
    Building facade. An exposed exterior wall of a building. 
    Center-loaded. A lot where setbacks are regulated so that the two associated side-yard setbacks are equal. 
    District. The entire area contained within the Lakefront Residential Overlay District. 
    Frontage. The width of front portion of a subject lot adjacent to the right-of-way. The frontage width can be established at the build line. 
    Gifts to the street. Building improvements that enhance the feel and experience of the street. Examples include but not limited to, porches, stoops, bay windows, balconies, masonry-clad footed chimneys, sun rooms, attached pergolas and colonnades. 
    Lakefront residential design committee ("LRDC"). The review and decision-making committee for proposed residential redevelopment within the Lakefront Residential Overlay District. 
    Redevelopment. New construction typically after demolishing an existing structure on a subject property. Can also mean additional "add-on" construction to an existing structure. 
(Ord. No. 1437, § 2, 12-19-2017) 
DIVISION 3. BUILDING AND DESIGN STANDARDS 
(a)  Existing zoning. The existing zoning for the residential homes within the Overlay District are made up of Single Family (A1), Single Family (A2), Single Family 4 (SF4). The area, yard, and bulk requirements of the A1, A2, and SF4 zoning districts shall be followed with the following exceptions: 
(b)  Options for redevelopment. 
(1)  Subdividing lots (Only applicable for residential lots in Boundary 2) - residential lots containing 80-foot or greater lot widths may be subdivided into two, 40-foot or greater lots provided the following conditions are satisfied: 
a.  A minimum of 320 feet (or more) of linear frontage must be subdivided at the same time. 
b.  Subdivided, 40-foot frontage lots shall be "center-loaded". 
c.  Subdivided, 40-foot frontage lots shall have a side yard setback of five feet. 
(2)  Front yard setback reduction for "gifts to the street" - gifts to the street may project a maximum of ten feet into the required 25-foot front yard setback. 
(c)  Preferred architectural styles. The visual representations shown in the appendix, as identified in exhibit B, show examples of the following architectural styles: Carpenter (Arts and Craft), Colonial, Classic Revival, Southern Vernacular, Modern, Tudor, Texas, Spanish, and Mediterranean. 
    The styles shown in the appendix shall be used as a guide to follow for redevelopment. The applicant redeveloping the property does not necessarily have to choose an exact style, but shall identify the style(s) being referenced for the intended project. The Lakefront Residential Architectural Design Review Committee will have the authority to determine if the proposed design meets the intent of the Overlay District. 
(d)  Architectural elements. 
(1)  Architectural variety. No facade may be repeated within any five adjacent lots or across the street from those lots. A request to vary from this standard shall be reviewed and approved by the LRDC. 
(2)  Tripartite architecture. The exterior facades of homes shall be broken up into three distinct sections (base, middle, top) utilizing different primary and accent materials, colors, and/or general orientation of materials. 
(3)  Gifts to the street. Homes shall provide a minimum of two gifts to the street. Proposed features not noted in the definition for "gifts to the street" shall be approved at the discretion of the LRDC. 
(4)  Fences. Fences adjacent to public parks, open space, drainage areas or floodplains shall be constructed of black tubular (wrought iron) fencing. All other fencing shall adhere to the residential fences section (section 106.06.32) of the zoning ordinance. 
(5)  Roofs. Roofs shall be constructed with architectural grade shingles, or better. Seamed metal, clay and slate tile roofs (cement based) are permitted. Flat roofs may be utilized so long as they can properly drain which will be determined by the building official. 
(6)  Windows. Openings and panes shall be vertically proportioned or square and be separated with trim. 
(7)  Gutters. Gutters shall be copper, galvanized steel, aluminum or painted if exposed. 
(8)  Chimneys. If chimneys are located on a street-facing wall, they shall extend to the ground. 
(9)  Concealed items. HVAC units, trash storage, and utility meters shall be concealed. 
(e)  Allowed materials. 
(1)  Masonry. Masonry shall include brick, stone, and three step stucco. 
(2)  Other materials . Architectural concrete block with integrated color, engineered wood, cementitious fiberboard. Alternative materials may be considered and approved by the LRDC. 
(3)  One hundred percent usage. With the exception of architectural concrete blocks. Exterior facades can be composed of 100 percent of a specified allowed material. Up to 20 percent of any facade of the residential structure can consist of architectural concrete block. 
(f)  Prohibited materials. 
(1)  EIFS, vinyl. 
(Ord. No. 1437, § 2, 12-19-2017) 
DIVISION 4. PROCEDURES 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of this section to identify the entities involved along with outlining the path towards successful residential redevelopment within the overlay. 
(b)  Review committee. 
(1)  A lakefront residential design committee shall be established to provide guidance of interpretation of the Lakefront Residential Overlay District and make recommendations on proposed redevelopment within the overlay. The committee shall be comprised of the following: 
a.  Director of development services ("director"). 
b.  Building official ("building official"). 
c.  Planning manager ("urban design officer"). 
d.  Representative of the town council ("council liaison"). 
(2)  The urban design officer (UDO) shall serve as a technical advisor to the director and the committee. The UDO shall be the planning manager and a portion of the expense of the UDO's services will be borne by development fees paid to the town for development of land within the Lakefront District. 
(3)  The director shall coordinate with the UDO and committee, and have staff administrative jurisdiction over any processes authorized under the Lakefront Residential Overlay District. The director of development services, the UDO and the committee shall be expeditious in their review and advance the permitting process by undertaking any action consistent with this Code, state law, and the town Charter to facilitate the permitting process. 
(c)  Site plan and elevations. 
(1)  Prior to obtaining a residential building permit, a site plan application and building elevations shall be submitted for review by the LRDC. 
(2)  The site plan may be a property survey showing metes and bounds of the subject lot along with associated setbacks which will identify the proposed "buildable" area. 
(3)  Elevations shall be drawn architecturally showing all facades in architectural-scale. Elevations shall be submitted in color showing proposed colors accurately. A material breakdown shall be provided indicating proposed materials along with the percentage of each material to be used per facade. If alternative materials are being proposed, physical samples shall be submitted for consideration. 
(d)  Application and approval process. 
(1)  An application for residential permit shall be processed in accordance with the town's residential permitting procedures. The site plan and color elevations will accompany the permit application to be reviewed by the LRDC. The LRDC shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the application for residential building permit and shall notify the applicant of the decision. 
(2)  Denial or conditional approval of a residential building permit by the LRDC may be initially appealed to town council. The appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the date of the decision made by the LRDC. 
(3)  The LRDC in making an initial decision on a residential building permit application, along with town council, shall determine whether the proposed residential redevelopment is consistent with the intent, standards and goals of the Lakefront Residential Overlay District. 
(e)  Lapse of approval. If construction has not commenced within one year of residential building permit approval, such permit shall lapse unless the property owner requests an extension prior to the expiration of the one-year period. The request for extension shall be considered by the original approving authority in the same manner as for approval of the existing permit. The authority may grant an extension of the time for expiration of the permit for a period not to exceed one year from the date of expiration of the original application. 
    Every request for extension shall include a statement of the reasons why the expiration date should be extended. The approving authority may grant a request for extension upon demonstration that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have resulted in the applicant's inability to perform the tasks necessary to prevent the permit from expiring before the lapse date. 
(Ord. No. 1437, § 2, 12-19-2017) 
Secs. 106.04.07-106.04.10 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 106.05.01 - Schedule of uses. 
    Land and buildings in each of the following classified districts may be used for any of the following listed uses but no land shall hereafter be used, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, altered or converted which is arranged or designed or used for other than uses specified for the district in which it is located as set forth by the use schedule located in section 106.05.01(a) and (b), "Schedule of uses - residential" and "schedule of uses - nonresidential," respectively. 
(a)  Residential zoning districts uses. P=permitted by right; C=conditional use; S=specific use permit required. A blank space indicates the use is prohibited in that district. 
ARTICLE V, TABLE
A
 Residential
Zoning
DistrictsSF-RE SF-1 SF-2 SF-3 SF-4 A-1 A-2 SF-X TH MH-1 MH-2 D MF Ranchette Estate Single-Family 1Single-Family 2 Single-Family 3 Single-Family 4 Single-Family A1 Single-Family A2 Single-Family Mix Townhome Manufactured
Home District Manufactured
Home Park Duplex Multifamily Primary Residential UsesAmenity center P P P P P P P > P P P P P P Dwelling, accessory P Dwelling, assisted living facility S Dwelling, assisted living home > S Dwelling, boarding house or rooming house P Dwelling, duplex P P P Dwelling, group home P P P P P P P P P P P P P Dwelling, HUD Code man. home P P Dwelling, listed family home P P P P P P P P P P P P P Dwelling, live-work unit See nonresidential uses Dwelling, mobile home P P C C Dwelling, model home C C C C C C C C C C Dwelling, multifamily P Dwelling, single-family detached P P P P P P P P P P P P Dwelling, townhome P P P P Senior living facility S Mixed use building C C C C C Accessory and Incidental UsesAccessory structure C C C C C C C C C C C C C Automated dispenser machine Automated intake machine Automated teller machine (ATM), off-site Caretaker/guard's Residence Construction yard, field office temporary C C C C C C C C C C C C C Farm accessory building C Home occupation C C C C C C C C C C C C C Open storage, permanent Open storage, temporary Seasonal sales Solar panels or devices C C C C C C C C C C C C C Vending kiosk, commercial Vending kiosk, not-for-profit C C C C C C C C C C C C C Wind energy conversion system (WECS) C C C C C C C C C C C C C Institutional and Special UsesAssembly uses S S S S S S S S S S S S S Athletic stadium or field S S S S S S S S S S S Cemetery or mausoleum S S S S S S S S S S S College, university, or trade school S S S S S S S S S S S Farm, ranch, stable, garden, or orchard Fraternal organization, lodge, civic club, fraternity, or sorority Golf course, tennis club, polo club, or country club (private) S S S S S S S S S S S Gun or archery range, indoor Hospital S Municipal uses P P P P P P P P P P P Museum/art gallery Park or playground P P P P P P P P P P P P P Recreation center S S S S S S S S S S S Religious facility P P P P P P P P P P P P P School, private, charter or parochial S S S S S S S S S S S School, public P P P P P P P P P P P Infrastructure Type UsesAirport/landing field/heliport Communication tower S S S S S S S S S S S S S Electric power generating plant Electric substation S S S S S S S S S S S S S Private utility, other than listed P P P P P P P P P P P P P Sewage pumping station P P P P P P P P P P P P P Sewage treatment plant S S S S S S S S S S S S S Telephone exchange S S S S S S S S S S S S S Transit center/bus terminal Utility line S S S S S S S S S S S S S Water reservoir, water pumping station, water well P P P P P P P P P P P P P Water treatment plant S S S S S S S S S S S S S Retail UsesAntique shop and used furniture (inside) Arcade Bakery, candy or ice cream shop Bar/brewpub Building material and hardware sales, major Building material and hardware sales, minor Commercial amusement, 
indoor Commercial amusement, 
outdoor Farmers market Greenhouse or nursery for retail plant sales Heavy machinery sales and storage Portable building sales Private club Restaurant, dine-in Restaurant, drive-in Restaurant, drive-thru Restaurant, with brewpub Restaurant, pick-up only Store, big box Store, convenience Store, discount, variety, or department store Store, drugstore or pharmacy Store, feed Store, florist Store, grocery Store, hardware & home imp. Store, incidental Store, liquor Store, pet shop Store, shopping center Store, other than listed above Theatre, indoor Theatre, drive-in Winery/brewery retail sales Service UsesAlternative financial services Bank, savings and loan, or credit union Bed and breakfast inn S S S S S S S S S S S S S Body art studio Campground or RV park S S Catering service/commissary Child care center S S Child care center, in-home C C C C C C C C C C C C C Clinic/medical lab Clinic, animal, with no outside runs Clinic, animal, with outside runs Contractor's shop with outside storage Contractor's shop inside only Custom personal service Fairgrounds/exhibition area Funeral home/crematorium Funeral home/mortuary Gunsmith Gymnastics/dance studio/ martial arts Health/fitness center Hotel, extended stay Hotel, full service Hotel, limited service Household appliance service Incidental retail and service uses Kennel, no outside runs Kennel, with outside runs Laundry/dry cleaning, commercial Laundry/dry cleaning, pickup station Laundry/dry cleaning, self-service Laundry/dry cleaning, small shop Motel Office, professional and general administrative Personal service (other than listed) Print shop, minor retail shop Sexually oriented businesses Studio, photography, music, artistic, etc. Studio, media Automobile and Related UsesAuto/boat repair, major Auto/boat repair, minor Auto/boat sales, accessories only Auto/boat sales/leasing, new, outside display Auto/boat sales, used, outside display Auto/boat/RV storage Auto parking, lot or garage P Auto wash, automated Auto wash, full-service Auto wash, self-serve Gas pumps/fuel sales Manufactured/mobile home display and sales S Motorcycle sales/service Truck, trailer, heavy equipment, RV and bus, repair Truck, trailer, heavy equipment, RV and bus, sales and leasing Truck terminal IndustriaL and Manufacturing UsesConcrete batch plant, permanent Concrete batch plant, temporary C C C C C C C C C Machine/welding shop Manufacturing or industrial uses, heavy Manufacturing or industrial uses, light Mini-warehouse/self-storage Office/showroom Print shop, industrial plant Research and development center Salvage yard, wrecking yard Warehouse/distribution center Winery/brewery/distillery manufacturing  
(b)  Nonresidential zoning districts uses. P=permitted by right; C=Conditional Use; S=Specific Use Permit required. 
ARTICLE V, TABLE B 
Nonresidential 
Zoning 
Districts AG O NS CF LC HC LF LI HI AgriculturalOfficeNeighborhood
ServicesCommunity
FacilitiesLight
Commercial Heavy
Commercial Lakefront Light
Industrial Heavy
Industrial Primary Residential UsesAmenity center P Dwelling, accessory P Dwelling, assisted living facility S S S Dwelling, assisted living home Dwelling, boarding house or rooming house Dwelling, duplex Dwelling, group home Dwelling, HUD Code man. home Dwelling, listed family home Dwelling, live-work unit P Dwelling, mobile home Dwelling, model home Dwelling, multifamily Dwelling, single-family detached P Dwelling, townhome P S S Senior living facility S S S Mixed use building C C P C C Accessory and Incidental UsesAccessory structure C C C C C C C C Automated dispenser machine P P P P P Automated intake machine S S S S S Automated teller machine, off-site S S S S S Caretaker's/guard's residence C C C Construction yard, field office, temporary C C C C C C C C Farm accessory building C Home occupation C C C C Open storage, permanent/ongoing S S S S S Open storage, temporary C C C C Seasonal sales C C C C C Solar panels, devices, commercial C C C C C C Vending kiosk, commercial C C C C C C Vending kiosk, not-for-profit C C C C C C C C C Wind energy conversion system 
(WECS) C C C C C C C C C Assembly uses S P P P P P P P P Athletic stadium or field S S S P S S S S Cemetery or mausoleum S S S S S S S Institutional and Special Uses College, university, or trade school S P S P P P S P P Farm, ranch, stable, garden, or orchard P Fraternal organization, lodge, civic club, fraternity, or sorority P P P P P P P Golf course, tennis club, polo club, or country club (private) S S S P P P P P Gun or archery range, indoor S S S S S Hospital S S P P P P P Municipal uses operated by the Town of Little Elm P P P P P P P P P Museum/art gallery S S P P P P P P Park or playground P P P P P P P P P Recreation center S P P P P P P P P Religious facility P P P P P P P P P School, private, charter or parochial S S S S S S S S S School, public P P P P P P P P P Infrastructure Type UsesAirport/landing field/heliport C C C C C C C Alternate energy system C C C C C C C C C Communication tower C C C C C C S C C Electric power generating plant S S S S S P Electric substation S S S S S S S S S Helipad Private utility, other than listed P P P P P P P P P Sewage pumping station P P P P P P P P P Sewage treatment plant S S S S S S S S Telephone exchange S S P P P P P P Transit center/bus terminal P P P P P P P Utility distribution/transmission line S S S S S S S S Water Reservoir, water pumping station, water well P P P P P P P P Water treatment plant S S S S S S S Retail UsesAntique shop and used furniture, inside only P P P P P Arcade S S S S S Bakery, candy or ice-cream shop P P P P P P Bar/brewpub S S P S S Building material and hardware sales, major P P P P P Building material and hardware sales, minor P P P P P Commercial amusement, indoor P P P P P Commercial amusement, outdoor S S S P P Farmers market S S S S Florist P P P P P P Greenhouse/nursery for plant sales S P P P P P Heavy machinery sales and storage P P P Portable building sales S P P P Private club S S Restaurant, dine-in S P P P P P P Restaurant, drive-in S P P P P P Restaurant, drive-thru S P P P P P Restaurant, with brewpub P P P P P Restaurant, pick-up only P P P P P Store, big box P P P P P Store, convenience P P P P P P Store, discount, variety, or department store P P P P P Store, drugstore or pharmacy P P P P P Store, feed P P P P Store, florist P P P P P P Store, grocery P P P P P Store, hardware and home imp. P P P P P Store, incidental (within another use) P P P P P Store, liquor S S S S S Store, pet shop P P P P P Store, shopping center P P P P P Store, other than listed above P P P P P Theatre, indoor S P P P P P Theatre, drive-in S P P P Winery/brewery retail sales P P P P P Service UsesAlternative financial services C C C C Bank, savings and loan, or credit union P P P P P P Bed and breakfast inn S P P P P Body art studio S S S S Campground or RV park S Catering service P P P P P Child care center S S S S S S S Child care center, in-home C Cleaning and pressing (small shop/pickup) P P P P P P Clinic/medical lab P P P P P P P Clinic, animal (no outside runs) S P P P P P P Clinic, animal (with outside runs) S S P P P Commissary S S S S Contractor's shop with outside storage P P P Contractor's shop inside only P P P P Custom personal service P P P P P P P Fairgrounds/exhibition area S S P P P Fortune teller/psychic S S S Funeral home/crematorium S S S S S Funeral home/mortuary S P P P P P Gunsmith P P P P P Gymnastics/dance studio/martial arts P P P P P P P Health/fitness center P P P P P P Hotel, extended stay S S S S S Hotel, full service P P P P P Hotel, limited service S S S S S Household appliance service and repair S P P P P P P Incidental retail and service uses P P P P P P Kennel, no outside runs P P P P P Kennel, with outside runs S S S S S Laundry/dry cleaning, commercial P P P Laundry/dry cleaning, pickup station P P P P P P Laundry/dry cleaning, self-service P P P P Motel Office, professional and general administrative P P P P P P P Personal service (other than listed) P P P P P Print shop, minor retail shop P P P P P Sexually oriented businesses C C Studio, photography, music, artistry P P P P P P P Studio, media P P P P P P Automobile and Vehicular UsesAuto/boat repair, major S S S S Auto/boat repair, minor S S S S Auto/boat sales, accessories only P P P P P Auto/boat sales/leasing, new, outdoor display S S P P Auto/boat sales, used, outdoor display S P P Auto/boat/RV storage S P P Auto parking, lot or garage P P P P P P Auto wash, automated S S S S Auto wash, full-service S S S S Auto wash, self-serve S S S Gas pumps/fuel sales S S S S Manufactured/mobile home display and sales S P Motorcycle sales/service P P P P Truck, trailer, heavy equipment, RV, bus repair P P Truck, trailer, heavy equipment, RV and bus sales and leasing P P P Truck terminal P P P Industrial and Manufacturing UsesConcrete batch plant, permanent S Concrete batch plant, temporary C C C C C C C Machine/welding shop P P Manufacturing or industrial uses, heavy C Manufacturing or industrial uses, light C C Mini-warehouse/self-storage S S S Office/showroom P P P Print shop, industrial P P P Research and dev't center P P P Salvage yard, wrecking yard S Warehouse/distribution center P P Winery/brewery/distillery manufacturing S S P P P  
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.05.02 - Special regulations for specific permanent land uses. 
Sec. 106.05.02.1 - Accessory uses. 
(a)  Accessory structures for nonresidential districts/land uses. 
(1)  Application. Commercial accessory structures require a building permit. 
(2)  Definition. An accessory building or structure is a subordinate building/structure, the use of which is secondary to and supportive of the main building or primary use. Accessory buildings or structures shall not be permitted without a main building or primary use in existence and include, but are not limited to, automated intake machines, automated dispenser machine, automatic teller machine (ATM), and storage buildings. 
(3)  Regulations. The following area regulations shall be observed for all accessory buildings and structures in all commercial, retail, office, industrial, and multifamily districts: 
a.  All accessory structures greater than 120 square feet (approximately ten feet by 12 feet) require a building permit and administrative site plan approval. Buildings that are 120 square feet or less in size do not require a building permit. Modular storage units, portable on demand storage containers, donation bins, and drop off bins/trailers are considered accessory structures. 
b.  Non-enclosed accessory structures (non-buildings) shall be screened by a minimum eight-foot-tall masonry wall with solid metal gate, primed and painted. 
c.  Nonresidential accessory structures shall abide by the setbacks of the primary structure and shall not conflict with site features such as fire lanes, landscape buffers, required parking, and other issues deemed pertinent by the director. 
(4)  Architectural requirements. Accessory structures require the following design elements: 
a.  Accessory structures greater than 120 square feet shall abide by all architectural standards in regard to masonry coverage and shall match the exteriors of the primary building. 
b.  Accessory structures with pervious roofs may be constructed with fire-treated and rot-resistant wooden material, provided that the columns are encased in masonry to match the primary building. 
(5)  Approval. Building permits are approved by the building official, following review and approval of the site plan by the director. 
(b)  Accessory structures for single-family, duplex, and manufactured home districts and land uses. 
(1)  Application. Residential accessory structures greater than 120 square feet require a building permit and administrative site plan approval. Buildings that are 120 square feet or less in size do not require a building permit. Accessory structures not requiring a permit must still be in compliance with the building code. 
(2)  Definition. An accessory building or structure is a subordinate building/structure, the use of which is secondary to and supportive of the main residence or primary use. Accessory buildings or structures shall not be permitted without a main building or primary use in existence. 
(3)  Architectural requirements. Accessory structures for residential districts require the following design elements: 
a.  Accessory structures shall abide by all architectural standards in regard to masonry coverage and shall match the exteriors of the primary building. 
b.  Accessory structures with pervious roofs may be constructed with fire-treated and rot-resistant wooden material, provided that the columns are encased in masonry to match the primary building. 
c.  Cementitious fiberboard or engineered wood may be used to fulfill masonry requirements for an accessory building or structure of 200 square feet or less in a single-family or two-family district, and cementitious fiberboard or engineered wood may be used to fulfill masonry requirements for structures accessory to an existing primary structure that is constructed entirely of wood, metal, or vinyl siding. 
d.  Metal or wood may be used as an exterior construction material for an accessory building or structure of 120 square feet or less in a single-family or two-family district. 
(4)  Regulations. The following area regulations shall be observed for all accessory buildings or accessory structures in all single-family, two-family or manufactured home districts: 
a.  Permanent foundation. All accessory structures greater than 200 square feet shall be constructed on a permanent, engineered foundations, per the currently adopted international codes. 
b.  Front yard. Accessory structures shall not be located in the front yard area. This excludes temporary uses such as basketball hoops, bike or skateboard ramps or other moveable recreational devices. However, any such device shall be located entirely within the boundaries of the private property and shall not be placed in the right-of-way, the street, the sidewalk, or the parkway (defined as the area between the sidewalk and the curb). 
c.  Side yard, standard interior lot. Accessory structures side yard setbacks shall be a minimum of three feet. 
d.  Side yard, corner lot. Accessory structures side yard setbacks adjacent to a street right-of-way shall be a minimum of 18 feet from the back of curb. 
e.  Rear yard. Accessory structures rear yard setbacks shall be a minimum of three feet. However, in no case shall an accessory structure encroach into an easement. 
f.  Siting. No minimum separation is required between the primary building and accessory structure. Attached structures must meet the setbacks of the primary structure or five feet, whichever is less. An accessory structure located within 20 feet of a property line shall have at minimum a six-foot-high wooden or masonry fence installed along the property line in compliance with section 106.06.32, "residential fences." Exceptions to this regulation are residential lots that back to scenic views and therefore do not have fences inhibiting said view. These lots include, but are not limited to, lots backing to a park, amenity center, golf course, or lakefront. In these cases, the applicant may (but is not obligated to) install a decorative metal fence to indicate the rear lot line. 
g.  Height. Accessory structures shall have a maximum height of 14 feet except on properties one-half acre and larger in area. In that case, accessory buildings may be greater than 14 feet in height provided that one additional foot for each additional foot of height over 14 feet is maintained at the rear and side yard setback lines. In all cases, the maximum height of a residential accessory structure shall be 20 feet. An accessory structure shall not exceed the height of the primary structure and shall be limited to one story in height. 
h.  Maximum square footage. Accessory buildings shall not exceed the square footage of the primary building and be limited in size of footprint and in number as follows: 
1.  Property or lot less than one-half acre in area = maximum of 750 square feet (measured by total floor area) and one accessory structure. 
2.  Property or lot greater than one-half acre and less than one acre = maximum of 1,000 square feet (measured by total floor area) and two accessory structures. 
3.  Property or lot greater than one acre in area = maximum of 2,500 square feet, cumulatively applied to a maximum of accessory structures 
(5)  Approval. Building permits are approved by the building official, following review and approval of the site plan by the director. 
(c)  Swimming pools and spas/hot tubs. 
(1)  Application. Swimming pools and spas/hot tubs require a building permit. 
(2)  Regulations. The following regulations apply to swimming pools and spas/hot tubs: 
a.  Shall not be located in the front yard area, 
b.  Shall comply with the minimum side yard and corner lot requirements for accessory structures; and 
3.  Be a minimum five-foot setback from an interior side yard or rear yard property line. 
(3)  Approval. Building permits are approved by the building official, following review and approval of the site plan by the director. 
(d)  Detached garages. 
(1)  Application. Detached garage accessory structures require a building permit. 
(2)  Regulations. The following regulations apply to detached garages: 
a.  Rear yard setback for front-loading garages shall be ten feet; 
b.  Rear yard setback for alley access garages shall be 20 feet; 
c.  Side yard setback shall be five feet; 
d.  Side yard at corner setback shall be 20 feet; 
e.  The size (i.e. area), height, and architectural restrictions are the same as for accessory structures, except that a minor height waiver for associated pitched roofs may be discretionarily granted by the building official. 
(3)  Architectural requirements. Accessory structures require the following design elements: 
a.  The exterior facades of a detached garage shall be constructed of a masonry material (brick, stone, or stucco) that matches the main building or structure. 
b.  Cementitious fiberboard or engineered wood may be used to fulfill masonry requirements for an accessory building or structure of 200 square feet or less in a single-family or two-family district, and cementitious fiberboard or engineered wood may be used to fulfill masonry requirements for structures accessory to an existing primary structure that is constructed entirely of wood, metal, or vinyl siding. 
(4)  Approval. Building permits are approved by the building official, following review and approval of the site plan by the director. 
(e)  Carports. 
(1)  Application. Carport accessory structures require a building permit which includes a site plan indicating the proposed placement of the carport. 
(2)  Regulations. The following regulations apply to carports: 
a.  Support poles shall be fully encased in masonry (brick/stone). 
b.  Carports shall have a pitched roof, be attached to the primary residence, and meet the same building setbacks as garages. 
c.  In no case are carports allowed in the front yard. 
d.  Manufactured homes may install a carport, which shall be designed to shelter a maximum of two vehicles, shall not exceed ten feet in height, and shall not be located closer than three feet to any side or rear lot line. 
(3)  Approval. Building permits are approved by the building official, following review and approval of the site plan by the director. 
(f)  Accessory dwelling units. 
(1)  Application. Accessory dwelling units require a building permit which includes a site plan indicating the proposed placement of the accessory dwelling unit. 
(2)  Definition. An accessory dwelling unit is a subordinate building or structure or a portion of a building or structure, intended for habitation. Accessory buildings or structures shall not be permitted without a main building or primary use in existence and are subject to zoning district limitations (see article V, tables A and B). 
(3)  Regulations. The following area regulations shall be observed for all accessory dwelling units whether located on the ground or erected over a private garage: 
a.  Accessory dwelling units may not be sold separately from the sale of the entire property, including the main dwelling unit, and shall be located on the same lot as the primary structure. 
b.  Utility services shall be metered by the same meter as those serving the main structure on the premises. 
c.  Accessory dwelling units shall abide by the same setback, height, and architectural regulations as detached garages, except that the rear yard setback shall be 20 feet. 
d.  The total square footage of an accessory dwelling units is limited to 50 percent of the primary residence, or 1,200 square feet, whichever is smaller, if all other regulations, including appropriate zoning for the accessory dwelling, are met. 
(4)  Architectural requirements. Accessory structures require the following design elements: 
a.  The exterior facades of a detached garage or other accessory building or structure shall be constructed of a masonry material (brick, stone, or stucco) that matches the main building or structure. 
b.  Cementitious fiberboard or engineered wood may be used to fulfill masonry requirements for an accessory building or structure of 200 square feet or less in a single-family or two-family district, and cementitious fiberboard or engineered wood may be used to fulfill masonry requirements for structures accessory to an existing primary structure constructed entirely of wood, metal, or vinyl siding. 
(5)  Approval. Building permits are approved by the building official, following review and approval of the site plan by the director. 
(g)  Patios, covered and/or enclosed. 
(1)  Application. Enclosed or covered patios greater than 120 square feet require a building permit for the above-ground structure (see "patios, flatwork" for the foundation requirements, below). 
(2)  Regulations. The following restrictions shall apply to all covered patios, enclosed patios or partially enclosed patios, and other similar installations. 
a.  No patio is allowed within three feet of any property line, nor in the front yard. 
b.  Covered or partially enclosed patios may be connected to the primary structure. However, should the applicant wish to convert the partially enclosed patio into a fully functioning room, the setbacks for the zoning district in which the residence is located shall apply. 
(3)  Approval. Building permits are approved by the building official, following review and approval of the site plan by the director. 
(h)  Patios, flatwork (concrete or pavers). 
(4)  Application. Patios and other flatwork require a building permit. 
(5)  Regulations. The following restrictions shall apply to all impervious surface, concrete, grading, and other similar installations. 
a.  All new parking and drives must be constructed with concrete to the town's engineering design criteria. 
b.  Any flatwork greater than 200 square feet requires to be drawn to town standards by a licensed engineer and display the engineer's seal. 
c.  No flatwork is allowed within three feet of any property line, nor in the front yard area, unless the flatwork is for a driveway to a front-loading garage. This shall not be interpreted to allow for enlarged driveways, whose width should match the width of the enclosed garage and not be expanded into the side yard setback. 
d.  Nothing within this section allows the creation of a drainage hazard or issue, and all flatwork must be sloped or graded to drain. 
e.  Paving is limited to 20 percent of total lot coverage, including the driveway but not including any patio, walkway, pool deck, sports courts or other interior paved feature. 
f.  A residential property shall continue to maintain the majority of each of its yards in living landscape, as required by the landscape ordinance and administered by the director. Mulch, gravel, rock gardens, decorative stone, and similar material may be used for patterns, beds, erosion control, and in other limited application with adequate associated landscaping; however, their use shall not be the predominant groundcover. (See section 106.06.16(a), "residential landscape requirements") 
(6)  Approval. Building permits are approved by the building official, following review and approval of the site plan by the director. 
(i)  Farm accessory structures. 
(1)  Application. Farm accessory structures require a building permit. 
(2)  Definition. Any accessory structure that is typically used on a farm, orchard, or ranch. 
(3)  Regulations. The following regulations apply to barns, sheds or livestock shelters: 
a.  A barn, shed or shelter for the keeping of livestock, crops or equipment related to the operation of a farm. 
b.  The site must be a minimum of five acres or more and be currently classified and in operation as an agricultural enterprise. 
(6)  Approval. Building permits for farm accessory structures are approved by the building official, following review and approval of the site plan by the director. Accessory buildings or structures shall not be permitted without a main building or primary use in existence and subject to zoning district limitations. 
Sec. 106.05.02.2 - Permanent land uses (other than accessory uses). 
(a)  Airport/helipad/heliport. 
(1)  Application. Approval of an airport, landing field, or heliport requires a special use permit, subject to review and approval by town council. 
(2)  Definitions. 
a.  Airport/heliport. A place where aircraft and/or helicopters can land and take off, usually equipped with hangars, facilities for refueling and repair, and various accommodations for pilots and passengers. 
b.  Helipad. A place, typically on the roof of a hospital or a small ground area where helicopters may land and take off, but without any service or fueling capabilities. 
(3)  Regulations. 
a.  No such use shall be located within 400 feet of any residential structure, and no residential structure shall be located within 400 feet of any such use. 
b.  No such use shall be located within 400 feet of any area zoned residential by the town or shown as residential on the existing Comprehensive Land Use Plan of the town. 
c.  Such distances shall be measured as the shortest possible distance in a straight line from the closest point of the proposed use to the closest point of the residential structure or area. 
d.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, such uses may be located in closer proximity by specific use permit. 
(4)  Approval. Town council through the SUP process. 
(b)  Alternative energy sources-Solar panels/devices. 
(1)  Application. The application to allow a solar device or system requires the approval of a conditional use permit, issued at the discretion of the director. 
(2)  Definition. A solar panel or device is a structure that is intended to capture the light from the sun and transfer that energy to electricity for general use. 
(3)  Regulations for single-family residential use: 
a.  Is in compliance with state law and poses no threat to public health or safety; 
b.  Is located solely on private property; 
c.  Includes approval letter from the HOA with submittal for the CUP, if applicable. 
d.  Installation and maintenance in compliance with manufacturer's recommendations and warranties; 
e.  Roof mounted: 
1.  Panels may not extend beyond the roofline or eave line; 
2.  Panels must conform to the slope of the roof, unless mounted on a roof slope that is not visible from the right-of-way; and 
3.  Roof mounted panels should be designed and installed to reduce excessive glare. 
f.  Ground mounted: 
1.  Prohibited in front yards. 
2.  Ground mounted devices shall follow the setbacks required for accessory structures within the specific zoning district. 
3.  Device shall not be visible from either the public right-of-way or the adjacent properties; 
4.  Device shall be screened by a wooden or masonry fence and no device shall extend above the fence line. 
5.  Where fences are not allowed within the residential subdivision, a solid evergreen hedge which shall be maintained at a minimum of six feet in height within 18 months of planting. 
(4)  Regulations for nonresidential structures: 
a.  Is in compliance with state law and poses no threat to public health or safety; 
b.  Is located solely on private property; 
c.  Installation and maintenance in compliance with manufacturer's recommendation and warranties; 
d.  Is located on the roof; 
e.  Panels located on a sloped roof may not extend beyond the roofline and must conform to the slope of the roof, unless mounted on a roof slope that is not visible from the public right-of-way. 
f.  Panels located on a flat roof must be screened from view from the adjacent roadways. 
g.  No ground mounted solar panels are permitted in nonresidential districts without the approval of a specific use permit, subject to the review and approval of the town council. 
(5)  Approval. Once the director has determined that the conditions listed in (3) above have been met, approval for the conditional use permit may be granted. 
(c)  Alternative energy sources-Wind energy conversion system (WECS). 
(1)  Application. The application to allow a WECS system requires the approval of a conditional use permit, issued at the discretion of the director. 
(2)  Definition. A WECS device is a structure that is intended to capture the wind and transfer that energy to electricity for general use. 
(3)  Regulations for single-family residential use: 
a.  Freestanding WECS are prohibited on residential lots less than one acre in size. 
b.  Shall not be allowed in the front yard. 
c.  The highest point of a roof-mounted WECS shall not project more than five feet above the roof line, excluding the highest point of the blade arc. 
d.  Freestanding WECS shall be of monopole design and shall not be located in any required setback. 
e.  Freestanding WECS shall abide by the height and setback regulations of the specific zoning district and be located at least a distance equal to the height of the pole away from any structure or property line. 
(4)  Regulations for other than single-family residential use: 
a.  WECS may exceed the height limits of the zoning district, up to a maximum of 80 feet, if located at least a distance from any residential district boundary line or residential dwelling equal to the height of the support structure. Height shall not include the highest point of the blade arc and shall refer to the highest point of the pole structure. 
b.  The minimum lot size required for a WECS is one acre. Only one low impact WECS shall be allowed per platted lot. 
c.  The WECS shall not be located within any required setback area for the front, side or rear yards. 
d.  The WECS' freestanding blade arc spheres shall have a minimum 30-foot clearance from any structure, tree or any other impediment. 
e.  All associated wiring shall be buried underground by means of a conduit system, or if ground-mounted equipment is required, then a minimum eight-foot-high masonry wall shall be constructed. 
f.  The WECS shall be constructed in a monopole design of tubular steel and shall be self-supporting without the use of guy wires or other similar features. 
g.  The WECS shall be a neutral or earth tone color. The proposed paint type shall be a dull or matte finish so as to reduce the possibility of any glare or reflection and to minimize the visual obtrusiveness of the WECS. 
h.  All commercial signs, flags, lights and attachments shall be prohibited on the WECS, unless required for structural stability, or as required for flight visibility by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). 
i.  The WECS shall be equipped with both a manual and an automatic braking device capable of stopping the WECS' operation in high winds. 
j.  The WECS shall meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate such systems. 
k.  The WECS shall not be grid-interconnected until and unless evidence has been provided to the town that the appropriate electric power provider has approved the customer's intent to install a grid-connected customer-owned WECS and that the customer's system meets the utility's approved specifications for interconnection. 
l.  The WECS shall be grounded and shielded to protect against natural lightning strikes and stray voltage, including the blades. 
m.  The WECS shall be adequately designed structurally, electrically, and in all other respects to accommodate the safety and general well-being of the public. 
n.  The WECS shall be maintained at all times according to the manufacturer's specifications. 
o.  The WECS shall be filtered, shielded or otherwise designed and constructed so as not to cause electrical, radio frequency, television and other communication signal interference. 
p.  The WECS shall be prohibited from including a tower climbing apparatus within 12 feet of the ground. 
q.  The WECS shall adhere to the performance standards of the zoning ordinance, in regard to maximum sound pressure levels. The noise levels measured at the property line of the property on which the conversion system has been installed shall not exceed 60 decibels and in no event shall the conversion system create a nuisance. 
r.  If the WECS is not in operation for a period of six months, it shall be deemed abandoned and shall be removed at the owner's expense. 
s.  With the approval of a specific use permit, in any district, any one or more of the above development standards may be excused, subject to review and approval by the town council. 
(5)  Approval. Once the director has determined that the conditions listed in (3) or (4) above, as applicable, have been, approval for the conditional use permit may be granted. 
(d)  Alternative financial services. 
(1)  Application. Approval of an alternate financial services facility requires a specific use permit, subject to review and approval by town council. 
(2)  Definition. A check cashing business, payday advance or loan business, money transfer business, car title loan business or pawn shop (see section 106.01.14, "land use definitions" for more detailed definitions of each type of alternative financial services). 
(3)  Regulations. 
a.  Alternative financial services shall be situated only within a freestanding building on a platted lot and shall not be co-located in the same structure as other uses. 
b.  A lot containing an alternative financial service shall be located at least 1,000 feet from any lot containing another alternative financial service, as measured in a straight line between the nearest points of one lot to the other lot. 
c.  A lot containing an alternative financial service shall be located at least 200 feet from any lot zoned or used for residential purposes, as measured in a straight line between the nearest points of one lot to the other lot. 
d.  No lot containing an alternative financial service shall be located within 500 feet of the rights-of-way of Eldorado Parkway, F.M. 720 or F.M. 423. 
e.  No alternative financial services shall be permitted within the Lakefront District. 
(4)  Approval. Town council through the SUP process. 
(e)  Bars/brewpubs (this classification also includes wine tasting bars, growlers, and other similar uses). 
(1)  Application. Approval of a bar or brewpub requires a specific use permit, subject to review and approval by town council, unless located within a zoning district or overlay district that allows these uses by right. 
(2)  Definition. An establishment principally for the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises that derives 75 percent or more of its gross revenue on a quarterly (three-month) basis from the sale or service of alcoholic beverages, as defined in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, for on-premises consumption. 
(3)  Regulations. 
a.  Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the business owner shall provide the town with a copy of its state permit to operate as a bar, brewpub, or similar use. 
b.  All alcohol-related activities must meet all standards found in chapter 10, alcoholic beverages, of the Little Elm Code of Ordinances. 
(4)  Approval. Town council through the SUP process, unless located within a zoning district that allows these uses by right. 
(f)  Bed and breakfast. 
(1)  Application. The application to allow a bed and breakfast within a private residence requires the approval of a conditional use permit, issued at the discretion of the director. 
(2)  Definition. A residential home, occupied by the owner or manager, where the owner or manager rents one or more bedrooms for remuneration and provides a breakfast meal to the guest(s). 
(3)  Regulations. 
a.  Guest parking must be provided on the residential lot and not on the street. 
b.  The owner or manager shall be responsible for any noise or disruption of the neighborhood caused by the guests. 
c.  The owner or manager shall register with the state to pay any applicable taxes and shall pay the hotel occupancy tax to the Town of Little Elm on an quarterly basis. 
(4)  Approval. Once the director has determined that the bed and breakfast is appropriate for the location requested and that the regulations listed in (3), above, have been met and will continue to be met, approval for the conditional use permit may be granted. 
(g)  Caretaker or guard residence. 
(1)  Application. Part of the site plan process. 
(2)  Definition. A residence located on a premises with a main nonresidential use and occupied only by a caretaker or guard, and his/her family, employed on the premises. 
(3)  Regulations-No specific regulations. Approval is subject to the director's discretion. 
(4)  Approval. A caretaker or guard residence shall be approved as part of the site plan process. 
(h)  Communication antennas. 
(1)  Application. Approval of an additional or substitute antennas on an existing communication tower requires a conditional use permit, issued at the discretion of the director. 
(2)  Definition. An antenna is an instrument or device consisting of wires, poles, rods, or reflecting discs, designed for transmitting or receiving any portion of the radio, microwave, or electromagnetic spectrum. 
(3)  Regulations. 
a.  A commercial antenna may be attached to a utility structure (elevated water tank, electric transmission pole, etc.) regardless of the height of said structure, provided that the antenna does not extend more than ten feet above the height of said structure. 
b.  A commercial antenna may be placed wholly within any building permitted in the zoning district. A commercial antenna may be mounted flush to the exterior of a building/structure if it is painted and/or disguised to integrate into the overall architectural design and is not readily visible/identifiable as an antenna from public roadways or neighboring residential properties. 
c.  All commercial signs, flags, lights and attachments shall be prohibited on any antenna or antenna support structure, unless required for communications operations, structural stability, or as required for flight visibility by the FCC and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). 
d.  No communication tower, antenna, antenna support structure, microwave reflector/antenna, or associated foundations or support wires or appurtenances shall be located within any required setback area for the front, side or rear yards. 
e.  At time of application, existing condition coverage maps of the vicinity shall be submitted showing current coverage and coverage after construction. 
6.  Collocation of antennas and antenna support structures shall be required. 
(4)  Approval. Once the director has determined that the location of the antenna or antennas is appropriate for the tower or location requested and that the regulations listed in (3), above, have been met and will continue to be met, approval for the conditional use permit may be granted. 
(i)  Communication support structure/tower. 
(1)  Application. Approval of a communication tower or support structure requires a special use permit, subject to review and approval by town council. 
(2)  Definitions. 
a.  Antenna support structure, commercial. An antenna and its support structure used for commercial broadcasting or telecommunication purposes. This definition shall also include a satellite dish exceeding 12 feet in diameter and a microwave-transmitting tower. All radiating equipment must comply with Federal Communications Commission (FCC), Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Occupational Health and Safety Administration (OSHA), and all other applicable state and federal regulatory agency requirements and guidelines for human safety, as they exist or may be amended. Definition includes ancillary ground equipment. 
b.  Antenna and/or antenna support structure, noncommercial. An instrument or device consisting of wires, poles, rods, or reflecting discs and its support structure not exceeding 40 feet in height above the ground elevation at the base of the support structure, designed for transmitting or receiving any portion of the radio, microwave, or electromagnetic spectrum. This definition shall also include a satellite dish antenna not to exceed 12 feet in diameter. 
c.  Antenna, stealth. A stealth antenna is a commercial antenna that is designed to be non-obtrusive, or virtually transparent or invisible to the surrounding neighborhood. Stealth antennas include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Antennas within a building's attic space, 
2.  Antennas on the roof of a minimum three-story building and not visible from the property line of the lot on which the antenna is located, 
3.  Antennas on a public utility structure, such as a water tower or high transmission line support tower, and painted to match the structure, 
4.  Antennas located within a structure such as a flagpole, church steeple, subdivision monument, clock tower, or similar architectural feature, and antennas located on an athletic field light pole. 
d.  Antenna support structure. Any tower, mast, pole, tripod, box frame, or other structure utilized for the purpose of transmission, retransmission, and/or reception of electromagnetic, radio, television, or microwave signals. 
(3)  Regulations. 
a.  Commercial towers may exceed the height limits of the zoning district, up to a maximum height of 125 feet, if located a distance from any residential district boundary line or residential dwelling at least equal to the height of the support structure. 
b.  Towers shall be of stealth, monopole design with no visible antennas, wires, racks or transmitters. 
c.  Tower sites shall be screened with a minimum eight-foot-high solid masonry wall with a solid metal gate. 
d.  Towers shall be designed structurally, electrically, and in all respects to accommodate both the applicant's antennas and comparable antennas for at least three additional users if the tower is 100 feet or greater in height, or for at least two additional users if the tower is over 50 feet, but less than 100 feet in height. 
e.  Towers shall be a muted and dull shade of grey or blue to match the sky, or if applicable, shall match the background color of the landscape and terrain. 
f.  Towers shall be accessible by a 24-foot-wide concrete fire lane, subject to review and approval by the fire marshal. 
g.  There shall be a minimum of one concrete parking space that is not located in a fire lane. 
h.  A commercial antenna may be attached to a utility structure (elevated water tank, electric transmission pole, etc.) regardless of the height of said structure, provided that the antenna does not extend more than ten feet above the height of said structure. 
i.  A commercial antenna may be placed wholly within any building permitted in the zoning district. A commercial antenna may be mounted flush to the exterior of a building/structure if it is painted and/or disguised to integrate into the overall architectural design and is not readily visible/identifiable as an antenna from public roadways or neighboring residential properties. 
j.  All commercial signs, flags, lights and attachments shall be prohibited on any antenna or antenna support structure, unless required for communications operations, structural stability, or as required for flight visibility by the FCC and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). 
k.  No communication tower, antenna, antenna support structure, microwave reflector/antenna, or associated foundations or support wires or appurtenances shall be located within any required setback area for the front, side or rear yards. 
l.  At time of application, existing condition coverage maps of the vicinity shall be submitted showing current coverage and coverage after construction. Communication towers require site plan approval, prior to making application for a building permit. 
m.  Collocation of antennas and antenna support structures shall be required. No new towers shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the town that no existing antenna support structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any of the following: 
1.  No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area which meet the applicant's engineering requirements; 
2.  Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements; 
3.  Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment; or 
4.  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable. 
n.  A lot containing a communication tower shall be located at least 2,000 feet away from any lot containing another communication tower greater than 50 feet in height, as measured in a straight line between the nearest points of one lot to the other lot. 
o.  With the approval of a specific use permit, any one or more of the above development standards may be excused, subject to review and approval by the town council. 
(4)  Approval. Town council through the SUP process. 
(j)  Home child care. 
(1)  Application-None required from the town . Home child care facilities are regulated by the state. 
(2)  Definition. A home occupation that provides regular child care for compensation in their primary residence for less than 24 hours a day. 
(3)  Regulations. It is considered a violation of this section for a facility to provide care for a number of children that exceeds what is allowed per the classification shown on the state permit to be submitted with the town's home occupation registration. Uses must register with the town annually and show proof of state permit. This use is subject to regulation by the Texas Department of Family and Protective Services and all home occupation regulations of the Town of Little Elm Code of Ordinances. 
(4)  Approval. No approval is needed from the town. 
(k)  Home occupations. 
(1)  Application. None required unless if subsection (3) applies. Home occupations are conducted at the discretion of the property owner. 
(2)  Definition. A home occupation is defined as a business, occupation or profession which is an accessory use of a residential dwelling unit conducted by a resident thereof and which is clearly customary, incidental and a subordinate secondary use of the residential dwelling unit or residential premises by the resident thereof and which does not alter the exterior of the property or affect the residential character of the neighborhood. Home occupations may be permitted in accordance with the use chart in section 106.05.01(a), "schedule of uses - residential." A home-based business is permitted as an incidental use and is secondary to the use of a dwelling. As such, the town council may at any time amend this subsection to terminate any or all home-based business uses without creating nonconforming rights to the continuance of a home-based business. 
(3)  Certificate of occupancy (CO) required in specific cases. No resident shall be allowed to operate a home-based business that employs anyone other than the occupants of the residence unless and until the building official has issued an annual registration certificate and has conducted a certificate of occupancy inspection. The issuance of a certificate requires that a person operating a home occupation affirm knowledge of, and intent to comply with, all ordinances applicable to home occupations. The building official shall establish that the proposed use is allowable under the terms of this chapter. The issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not authorize any violations of any ordinance, rule, code or regulation of the Town of Little Elm. 
(4)  Regulations. Home occupations are subject to the following conditions and requirements: 
a.  No signage associated with the home occupation and visible from outside of the dwelling shall be allowed on the premises, except as may be authorized or permitted by other applicable ordinances of the town. 
b.  Only occupants of the residence may be employed on-site at any time. This shall not include the coordination or supervision of employees who do not regularly visit the house or premises for purposes related to the business. If employees other than the residents of the house are present, then a certificate of occupancy must be obtained from the building official (see 3, above). 
c.  Outdoor activities are not allowed, unless the activities are screened from neighboring property and public rights-of-way. 
d.  Hours of operation shall be limited from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. for outdoor activities. 
e.  There shall be no exterior storage of material, equipment, vehicles and/or supplies used in conjunction with the home occupation. 
f.  A home occupation shall not serve as an office or storage facility for a vehicle fleet operation in which fleet vehicles visit the site. A "fleet" is defined as three or more business vehicles. 
g.  The home occupation shall not produce offensive noises, vibrations, smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare that extend beyond the property lines. 
h.  No major alterations to the property or exterior of the dwelling unit shall be allowed that changes the residential character of the dwelling unit or premises. The occupation use must be clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use of the dwelling and may not alter the existing residential character of the principal dwelling or the garage/accessory building. 
i.  No repair or servicing of vehicles, internal combustion engines, large equipment or large appliances shall be allowed. 
j.  No storing of hazardous materials for business purposes shall be allowed on the premises either inside or outside the structures. 
k.  Merchandise, commodities, goods, wares, materials or products shall not be offered or displayed for sale on the premises, excluding fruits and vegetables grown on-premises. Sales incidental to a service shall be allowed; and orders previously made by telephone or at a sales party may be filled on the premises. 
l.  No traffic shall be generated by a home occupation in greater volumes than normally expected in a residential neighborhood or create unreasonable parking or traffic congestion for the abutting or adjoining neighbors or for the immediate neighborhood, and any need for parking must be accommodated within the off-street parking provided for the residence (i.e. the driveway or garage) and along the street frontage of the lot in question. 
m.  Homeowners/occupants who establish an occupation in their residence must adhere to all of the above conditions. 
(5)  Approval. No approval is needed unless the home based business meets the criteria listed in (3), above. In that case, the building official must determine that the home based business meets all the criteria listed in (4) above and issue a certificate of occupancy (CO) for a period of one year. This CO must be renewed each year. 
(l)  Hotel, extended stay. 
(1)  Application. The application to allow a residence or extended stay hotel requires the approval of a specific use permit, subject to review and approval by town council. 
(2)  Definition. A building or group of buildings used as a temporary dwelling place for individuals in exchange for financial consideration where customary hotel services such as linen, housekeeping service, and telephone are provided. Residence hotel room units are designed to be suitable for long term occupancy with financial consideration typically being calculated on a weekly or monthly basis. Typical residence hotel attributes include, but are not limited to, kitchen facilities and living spaces in addition to a sleeping area. 
(3)  Regulations. Residence or extended stay hotels shall include all of the following amenities: 
a.  A minimum of 80 guest rooms and/or suites; 
b.  Guest room access from an interior hallway; 
c.  Laundry facilities adequate to serve the residents at full capacity; 
d.  Playground equipment and open space as determined by the director; and 
e.  Minimum of 800 square feet of pool surface area; 
(4)  Approval. Following a recommendation from the planning and zoning commission, the town council has the discretion to approve or deny the SUP for an extended stay hotel based on if the regulations listed in (3), above, have been met and that the proposed location is in keeping with the Comprehensive Plan. 
(m)  Hotel, full service. 
(1)  Application. A full service hotel that meets all of the requirements listed in (3) below requires only site plan approval since they are allowed by right in those districts that allow hotels. Any failure to meet one or more of the listed regulations requires an application for a special use permit, which is subject to review and approval by the town council. 
(2)  Definition. A full service hotel is considered a top tier hotel in terms of amenities and service. It includes all of the amenities listed in (3) below and often exceeds these minimum standards. 
(3)  Regulations. Full service hotels shall include all of the following amenities: 
a.  A minimum of 80 guest rooms and/or suites; 
b.  A minimum of 4,000 square feet of meeting room space; 
c.  A minimum of one restaurant that provides three meals per day with on-site preparation and service provided by wait staff, hostesses, etc. and seating for a minimum of 30 customers; 
d.  Guest room access from an interior hallway; 
e.  Minimum of 800 square feet of pool surface area; and 
f.  Attached covered drive-through area adjacent to the hotel lobby or reception area. 
(4)  Approval. Full service hotels that meet all of the amenities listed above may be approved by right in those districts that allow hotels. Any failure to meet one or more of the above list of amenities shall be considered by the town council through the SUP process. 
(n)  Hotel, limited service. 
(1)  Application. The application to allow a limited service hotel requires the approval of a special use permit, subject to review and approval by town council. 
(2)  Definition. A limited service hotel provides travelers an economical choice with fewer amenities than a full service hotel. 
(3)  Regulations. Limited service hotels shall include all of the following amenities: 
a.  A minimum of 700 square feet of meeting room space; 
b.  Limited food and beverage service, but including breakfast buffet service; 
c.  Guest room access from an interior hallway; 
d.  Minimum of 400 square feet of pool surface area; and 
e.  Attached covered drive-through area adjacent to the hotel lobby or reception area. 
(4)  Approval. Following a recommendation from the planning and zoning commission, the town council has the discretion to approve or deny the SUP for a limited service hotel based on if the regulations listed in (3), above, have been met and that the proposed location is in keeping with the comprehensive plan. 
(o)  Liquor stores. 
(1)  Application. The application to allow a liquor store requires the approval of a special use permit, subject to review and approval by town council. 
(2)  Definition. A retail establishment that offers for sale beer, wine and liquor and related accessory items. Subject to the review and approval by TABC. 
(3)  Regulations. 
a.  The lot containing a liquor store shall be located at least 1,000 feet from any lot containing another like use, as measured in a straight line between the nearest points of one lot to the other. 
b.  Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the business owner shall provide the town with a copy of its state permit to operate a liquor store. 
c.  All alcohol-related activities must meet all standards found in chapter 10, alcoholic beverages, of the Little Elm Code of Ordinances 
(4)  Approval . Town council through the SUP process. 
(p)  Manufactured home replacement. 
(1)  Application. The application to allow the one-time replacement of a manufactured home requires the approval of a conditional use permit, issued at the discretion of the director. 
(2)  Definition. The federal government allows a one-time replacement of a manufactured home under certain circumstances. 
(3)  Regulations. 
a.  In the event that a HUD-Code manufactured home occupies a lot within the town, the owner of the HUD-Code manufactured home may remove the HUD-Code manufactured home from its location and place another HUD-Code manufactured home on the same property, provided that the replacement is a newer HUD-Code manufactured home, and is at least as large in living space as the prior HUD-Code manufactured home. Except in the case of a fire or natural disaster, the owner of the HUD-Code manufactured home is limited to a single replacement of the HUD-Code manufactured home on the same property. 
b.  Property owners who have a HUD-Code manufactured home which has been placed on a lot in violation of the terms of this chapter shall not have the right to replace the illegal use. This subsection shall not be interpreted to legitimize an otherwise illegal use. 
c.  Except with regard to the above clause, the replacement provisions of this section shall not apply in the MH-1 and MH-2 zoning districts. 
(4)  Approval. Once the director has determined that the replacement of the manufactured home has met the regulations listed in (3), above, approval for the conditional use permit may be granted. 
(q)  Media studios (radio/television/cable). 
(1)  Application. The application to allow media studios requires the approval of a conditional use permit, issued at the discretion of the director. 
(2)  Definition. A facility where radio, television or similar uses are produced, edited, and broadcast. 
(3)  Regulations. 
a.  Internal noise shall not be audible from the outside of the building. 
b.  All activity must take place within an enclosed building. 
c.  Mass reproduction, duplication or storage of recorded material for distribution, sale or promotion is prohibited. 
d.  Parking requirements shall be the same as for a commercial use. 
(4)  Approval. Once the director has determined that the media studio is appropriate for the location requested and that the regulations listed in (3), above, have been met, approval for the conditional use permit may be granted. 
(r)  Mixed use building. 
(1)  Application. Where allowed by right, a site plan application is used for approval, administratively approved through a conditional use permit. When part of a planned development, the map amendment application is used for approval, subject to review and approval by town council. 
(2)  Regulations. Mixed use buildings shall follow the following regulations: 
a.  The ground floor entry must be located at the approximate elevation of the adjacent sidewalk and should be inset by at least four feet. 
b.  Retail uses at-grade adjacent to the sidewalk shall: 
1.  Be constructed to meet fire code separation from any other uses constructed on upper floors; 
2.  Have a minimum clear height of 16 feet between finished floor and the bottom of the structure above. Mezzanines within the retail space shall be allowed per building code; 
3.  Have an awning or canopy which extends at least six feet over the sidewalk for at least 75 percent of the frontage on any portion of a building. Such awning or canopy shall maintain a minimum eight foot clearance over the sidewalk; and 
4.  Have highly transparent glass windows for at least 60 percent, but no greater than 80 percent, of the ground floor facade. 
c.  Two zones, between back of curb and the building line, shall be created and maintained: 
1.  Streetscape zone. A minimum five-foot-wide area adjacent to the back-of-curb for trees and street furniture, including a one-foot dismount strip. An urban tree in a tree well shall be provided for each 25 linear feet in the streetscape zone. For each three urban trees, a bike rack, trash receptacle, bench, lighted bollard, or other approved street furniture is required. 
2.  Sidewalk zone. A minimum ten-foot-wide sidewalk. The sidewalk zone may be encroached by a three-foot-high fenced patio area for dining, as long as a minimum clearance is maintained for pedestrian traffic. 
d.  Build-to line. At least 70 percent of the building face shall be constructed within a minimum of 15 feet from the back of curb and a maximum of 20 feet. The remainder of the building frontage may be setback further to allow such things as outdoor dining, plazas, entry courts, and pass-throughs to parking. 
(3)  Exceptions. Deviations from the above mixed use building regulations may be granted through the site plan process, subject to review and approval by the planning and zoning commission and town council in public hearings. 
(4)  Approval. Where mixed use buildings are allowed by right, the site plan may be administratively approved through a conditional use permit if all the regulations listed in (2) above are met. If an exception is required, or if the mixed use building is part of a planned development in a zoning district that does not allow a mixed use building by right, then the mixed use building approval will be approved by the town council through a zoning map amendment or the SUP process. 
(s)  Open storage, permanent or ongoing. 
(1)  Application. The application to allow permanent or ongoing open storage shall be considered through the special use permit process or a PD amendment, subject to review and approval by town council. 
(2)  Applicability. This only includes storage in zoning districts where outside storage of equipment, material, goods and supplies is allowed as an accessory use to a primary use on the same lot. The restriction on open storage does not apply to the display of goods for sale incidental to a retail use; plant nursery; sale and rental of motor vehicles, mobile homes, boats, or trailers and utility equipment. Retail use is defined as an establishment engaged in the selling of goods and merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods. 
(3)  Definition. For the purposes of this subsection, the definition of open storage is the keeping of any goods, material, merchandise, vehicles, trailers, modular storage units, or equipment outside a building on a lot. Examples are home and garden supplies, bagged mulch and seed, and automobiles and other vehicles for sale. 
(4)  Prohibited. There shall be no outside storage of tires or readily flammable merchandise of any kind, either for display or storage purposes. Tires and readily flammable merchandise must be housed indoors at all times, on fire department approved storage racks to minimize the fire hazard. 
(5)  Regulations. 
a.  Open storage is only allowed in zoning districts as indicated in section 106.05.01(b), "schedule of uses - nonresidential," of the zoning ordinance. 
b.  The area designated as open storage in LC Light Commercial or related PD Planned Development zoning districts shall not exceed 15 percent of the total gross square foot of the building located on the same lot as the open storage. Permanent open storage shall not be permitted in any portion of the lot between a public street and a lines projected from the faces of the building lot lines, except as described in subsection (5)i, below. 
c.  The square footage of the area designated for open storage in HC Heavy Commercial, LI Light Industrial, HI Heavy Industrial, or related PD-Planned Development zoning districts is not restricted as long as it is located on the same lot. 
d.  The storage area must be attached to a wall of the principal building and enclosed by a solid masonry wall a minimum of eight feet in height abutting the principal building, when a principal building exists. Additional wall height may be constructed of screening material. 
e.  An exception to the location of open storage in subsection (5)(a) above shall be the location of shopping carts, which may utilize designated areas within the store's parking lot, so long as the shopping carts are gathered within steel corrals suitable for retaining carts and preventing carts from interfering with traffic flow or customer parking. (See section 106.05.03(g), "open storage under eave display" for regulations) 
f.  Open storage may not be permanently located in any fire lane, maneuvering aisle, or customer pick-up lane. 
g.  Open storage may not be located in any required front, side, or rear setback. 
h.  Open storage may not be located in any parking space (except as described in (5)i below). 
i.  "Big box" stores (i.e. stores greater than 50,000 square feet in size) may display garden merchandise for sale within excess parking spaces on a temporary basis. Examples of appropriate merchandise for this type of parking lot storage include, but is not limited to, mulch or soil bags, bedding plants, saplings, and storage sheds. Approval of any parking lot open storage or display shall require a revised site plan showing the location of the open storage or display, indicating the number of parking spaces required to ensure that the storage or display is located in spaces in excess of those required, and the type of merchandise to be displayed or stored. The director shall approve or disapprove any parking lot storage or display. 
j.  Open storage may not obstruct visibility or interfere with pedestrian or vehicular circulation. If items are placed on a sidewalk or other pedestrian area, a six-foot-wide pedestrian path shall be maintained through or adjacent to the outside display area. The pedestrian path must be concrete or asphalt and may not be located within off-street parking areas, including parking spaces, fire lanes, maneuvering aisles, and customer pick-up lanes. 
k.  Nothing in this article shall prohibit temporary open storage of merchandise for display and sale during a sidewalk sale (considered "under eave" storage - See section 106.05.03(g), "open storage - under eave display" for regulations). 
l.  Special standards for businesses in operation prior to the adoption date of this ordinance [from which this chapter is derived] (date of ordinance): 
1.  Businesses existing prior to the adoption of this ordinance have until (one year from passage) to come into compliance with these standards. 
2.  If the facility's primary structure is a nonconforming structure in regard to the town's existing masonry requirements and has less than 75 percent masonry content, the owner may apply for administrative approval for a wooden screening fence built to the town standards with the following additional standard: When the storage is located adjacent to public streets, a minimum seven and one-half-foot and maximum eight-foot tall wood privacy fence with masonry columns located at a minimum of every 40 feet is required. 
(6)  Screening of open storage. 
a.  All open storage and outside display shall be screened from the view of adjacent streets and adjacent properties unless located in an LI Light Industrial or HI Heavy Industrial zoning district, where open storage is required to be screened only from the street right-of-way. 
b.  Screening shall be a minimum of eight feet in height; and 
1.  Be of masonry construction; or 
2.  Be constructed of metal ornamental fencing in combination with a landscape screen; or 
3.  Be constructed of a solid, evergreen shrub landscape screen without a fence or wall. 
4.  Evergreen shrubs used for a landscape screen shall be placed so as to create at least a six foot tall solid screen within two years of their planting. All landscaping shall be irrigated with an automatic sprinkler system and maintained in a healthy and growing condition. 
c.  Screening may not be constructed of wood fencing or chain link with slats. No screening fence may exceed eight feet, six inches in height. 
d.  Open storage may not exceed the height of screening, unless evergreen shrubs used for a landscape screen are placed so as to create at least a six-foot tall solid screen within two years of their installation along the length of the stored material. The open storage of living plants and trees as inventory for freestanding garden center uses may exceed the height of screening, when the garden center is developed as the primary use of the lot. 
e.  No materials stored shall be stacked in such a manner as to be visible above the top of the screening device. Individual items that exceed the height of the screening device are permitted provided they are not stacked. 
f.  Vehicles kept overnight which are under or awaiting repair shall be screened from public view or stored inside the building. 
g.  All storage areas, including modular storage units, not screened by an intervening building shall be screened from view from any public street right-of-way and from residential uses or districts, unless located in a LI Light Industrial or HI Heavy Industrial zoning district. 
h.  Utilities or accessory facilities, such as storage tank towers that cannot feasibly be completely screened by a masonry wall shall be located and designed so as to "blend in" and to minimize visual impact from public rights-of-way and adjacent properties. Architectural design and landscaping materials shall be used in order to lessen any negative visual impact. 
i.  If the standards required for screening of open storage cannot be met due to site-specific issues the property owner or developer may petition the planning and zoning commission to approve alternative screening methods that meet the purpose and intent of the ordinance. 
j.  All screening shall be accomplished by an opaque screen built according to the standards outlined in section 106.06.31, "screening." 
(7)  Exceptions to screening requirements. 
a.  No screening is required for open storage and outside display of goods, materials, merchandise, or equipment as an accessory use if generally placed "under eaves." This area is defined as the area not more than ten feet from the front building face, as designated by the main entrance and not stacked to exceed four feet in height. (See section 106.05.03(g), "open storage, under eave display" for regulations) 
b.  Screening is not required for items placed adjacent to a gasoline pump island that do not exceed three feet in height, except for those items expressly prohibited in subsection (4) above. 
c.  Parked self-propelled vehicles or trailers shall not constitute open storage or outside display, except when staged, parked, or stored at collision, towing, auto storage, mini-warehouse, auto repair, or wrecker service. 
d.  Temporary outdoor storage may be allowed under certain circumstances. Please see sections 106.05.03(f), "open storage, temporary" and 106.05.03(g), "open storage, under eave display" for regulations. 
e.  The town council may waive these requirements if no public purpose would be served by the construction of a required screen, or if natural features exist that sufficiently screen the open storage. 
(8)  Approval. Town council through the SUP or PD process. 
(t)  Private street developments/gated communities-Existing subdivisions. 
(1)  Application. Private street developments for existing residential tracts shall be considered through the specific use permit process, subject to review and approval by town council. 
(2)  Definition. To convert public streets to private streets, the ownership and maintenance of said streets shall be transferred to the homeowners association (HOA) and that association may be restrict public access on them to residents and emergency vehicles only. 
(3)  Regulations. 
a.  Thoroughfare plan. Private street developments are subject to provisions of the master thoroughfare plan and the subdivision ordinance, as it exists or may be amended. Private street developments may not cross an existing or proposed thoroughfare as shown on the town's adopted thoroughfare plan nor shall a private street development disrupt an existing or proposed hike and bike route. 
b.  Locations. Private street developments shall be located in an area that is surrounded on at least three sides, and in any event no less than approximately 75 percent of the perimeter, by natural barriers or similar physical barriers created by man. Examples of natural barriers would be creeks and floodplains. Examples of similar barriers created by man would be a golf course, school location, park, railroad tracks or a limited access roadway. Non-qualifying manmade barriers include screening walls, local roadways, manmade drainage ditches, detention ponds, landscape buffers, earthen berms, utility easements and right-of-way. 
c.  Connectivity. The comprehensive plan calls for all plans for development in the town to include a high degree of connectivity within developments and between one development and another. Any proposed private street development adjacent to an existing public street subdivision that can be reasonably connected, including by constructing a bridge or culvert, for example, should not be approved as a private street development. The two adjacent subdivisions should allow cross-connectivity using public streets. This is especially critical when one of the two adjacent subdivisions has a school site within one of the developments. 
d.  Established escrow account. Any private street development proposed for an existing subdivision must show that the home owners association has established an escrow account to be kept for the purposes of street repair and replacement. 
(4)  Considerations for approval. The planning and zoning commission and town council shall use the criteria listed within the subsection for approval for private streets within new subdivisions, when considering a private street development plus: 
a.  Submittal of a petition signed by 100 percent of the property owners in the existing subdivision requesting conversion to private streets; 
b.  Existence of a home owners association (HOA) that is financially able and willing be responsible for owning and maintaining the converted streets and rights-of-way; 
c.  Applicants must agree to contract with the town for the purchase of the installed infrastructure and rights-of-way from the town at fair market appraised value for cash in full payment, and agree to maintain the infrastructure and rights-of-way at town standards thereafter prior to the approval of the special use permit; 
d.  All documents are subject to the review and approval of the town attorney; and/or 
e.  Subsequent to the approval of the private street designation, the entire subdivision affected shall be replatted to reflect the ownership changes and remove the town's ownership and maintenance obligation from the streets and rights-of-way. 
(5)  Approval. Town council through the SUP or PD process. 
(u)  Private street developments/gated communities-New subdivisions. 
(1)  Application. Private street developments for new residential tracts shall be considered through the specific use permit process or through the approval of a planned development district, subject to review and approval by town council. 
(2)  Definition. Private streets are constructed and maintained by the (HOA) and may be restrict public access on them to residents and emergency vehicles only. 
(3)  Regulations. 
a.  Thoroughfare plan. Private street developments are subject to provisions of the master thoroughfare plan and the subdivision ordinance, as it exists or may be amended. Private street developments may not cross an existing or proposed thoroughfare as shown on the town's adopted thoroughfare plan nor shall a private street development disrupt an existing or proposed hike and bike route. 
b.  Locations. Private street developments shall be located in an area that is surrounded on at least three sides, and in any event no less than approximately 75 percent of the perimeter, by natural barriers or similar physical barriers created by man. Examples of natural barriers would be creeks and floodplains. Examples of similar barriers created by man would be a golf course, school location, park, railroad tracks or a limited access roadway. Non-qualifying manmade barriers include screening walls, local roadways, manmade drainage ditches, detention ponds, landscape buffers, earthen berms, utility easements and right-of-way. 
c.  Connectivity. The comprehensive plan calls for all plans for development in the town to include a high degree of connectivity within developments and between one development and another. Any proposed private street development adjacent to an existing public street subdivision that can be reasonably connected, including by constructing a bridge or culvert, for example, should not be approved as a private street development. The two adjacent subdivisions should allow cross-connectivity using public streets. This is especially critical when one of the two adjacent subdivisions has a school site within one of the developments. 
d.  Established escrow account. Any private street development proposed for a new subdivision must show that the home owners association has established an escrow account to be kept for the purposes of street repair and replacement. 
(4)  Considerations for approval. 
a.  No disruption of planned public roadways or facilities/projects (thoroughfares, parks, park trails, public pedestrian pathways, etc.); 
b.  No disruption to and from properties of future developments either on site or off site to the proposed subdivision; 
c.  No negative effect on traffic circulation on nearby public streets; 
d.  Not less than 100 feet of street frontage on which to locate the main entrance gate; 
e.  No more than two gated street entrances, subject to approval by the city engineer, may face a designated thoroughfare within a one-mile segment of that thoroughfare; 
f.  No impairment of access to and from public facilities including schools or public parks; 
g.  No impairment of the adequate and timely provision of essential municipal services (emergency services, water/sewer improvements or maintenance, etc.); 
h.  The main entrance to the private street development shall have adequate throat depth to provide for residents, their guests and any accidental access and have an escape aisle for those vehicles not admitted into the subdivision; 
i.  Existence of natural and/or qualifying manmade boundaries around 75 percent of the development; 
j.  Absence of a concentration of private street developments in the vicinity of the requested private street development; and 
k.  Developers who wish to develop as a private street/gated community shall agree to maintain the infrastructure and rights-of-way at town standards. 
(5)  Approval. Town council through the SUP or PD process. 
(v)  Sexually oriented businesses. Sexually oriented businesses are governed by chapter 82 of the Little Elm Code of Ordinances. 
(w)  Vending kiosk, commercial. 
(1)  Application. Approval of a commercial vending kiosk greater than 120 square feet in size requires a conditional use permit, issued at the discretion of the director. 
(2)  Definition. An unmanned structure that provides a product for remuneration. Examples are ice machines, video vending machines. 
(3)  Regulations. 
a.  A permanent structure with a permanent foundation is required. 
b.  The structure should have a primarily brick/stone veneer that matches adjacent development. 
c.  All utility service lines shall be buried. 
d.  No commercial kiosk 120 square feet or greater shall be installed within two miles of another such structure. 
e.  Site location should not provide a strong visual presence on a major thoroughfare, nor impede fire lanes or cause other traffic flow problems, subject to review and approval by staff. 
f.  Lighting and signage shall be minimal, per existing regulations. 
g.  Concrete parking shall be available, and a restroom agreement or other accommodation with a public store within 100 feet is required if manned. 
h.  Permits are required, as is property owner authorization, and installation shall abide by all applicable building, fire, health, subdivision, engineering design, and zoning codes. 
i.  The site location shall be a part of a platted lot. 
j.  Structures shall be removed with a valid demolition permit by the property owner if inoperable or abandoned for more than six months. Seasonal sales are not allowed per this use. 
k.  The planning and zoning commission has jurisdiction over any appeals to staff determination. 
l.  A development agreement between the town and the conditional use applicant regarding the commercial vending kiosk shall be required prior to issuance of a conditional use permit for the commercial vending kiosk. The development agreement shall contain, at a minimum, the conditions and standards required by the town for a commercial vending kiosk. 
(4)  Approval. Once the director has determined that the commercial vending kiosk is appropriate for the location requested and that the regulations listed in (3), above, have been met, approval for the conditional use permit may be granted. 
(x)  Vending kiosk, not-for-profit. 
(1)  Application. Approval of a not-for-profit vending kiosks requires a conditional use permit, issued at the discretion of the director. 
(2)  Definition. An unmanned structure that provides a product. The fee for such product may be reduced or waived. 
(3)  Regulations. 
a.  If the kiosk is greater than 120 square feet in size, a structure with a permanent foundation is required. 
b.  The structure should have a primarily brick/stone veneer that blends with adjacent development. 
c.  All utility service lines shall be buried. 
d.  Not-for-profit kiosks greater than 120 square feet in size shall not be installed within two miles of another such structure. 
e.  Site locations should not provide a visual distraction for drivers along major thoroughfares, nor impede fire lanes or cause other traffic flow problems, subject to review and approval by staff. 
f.  The site location should be a part of a platted lot and written permission for placement from the owner of the property shall be included in the permit application. 
g.  Lighting and signage shall be minimal, per existing regulations. 
h.  Structures shall be removed with a valid demolition permit by the property owner if inoperable or abandoned for more than six months. 
i.  The planning and zoning commission has jurisdiction over any appeals to staff determination. 
j.  A development agreement between the town and the applicant regarding not-for-profit vending kiosks shall be required prior to issuance of a conditional use permit for the not-for-profit vending kiosk. The development agreement shall contain, at a minimum, the conditions and standards required by the town for a not-for-profit vending kiosk. 
(4)  Approval. Once the director has determined that the not-for-profit vending kiosk is appropriate for the location requested and that the regulations listed in (3), above, have been met, approval for the conditional use permit may be granted. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.05.03 - Special regulations for specific temporary land uses. 
(a)  Batch plants, temporary. 
(1)  Application. The application for a temporary batch plant requires the approval of a conditional use permit, issued at the discretion of the director. 
(2)  Definition. A temporary manufacturing facility for the on-site production of concrete or asphalt during construction of a project, and to be removed when the project is completed. Following removal, the tract shall be returned to its previous condition. 
(3)  Regulations. 
a.  Applicants for a permit to operate a temporary concrete or asphalt batching plant must submit a letter from the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) indicating that the proposed facility is exempt from the permitting procedures under the standard exemption, as adopted and amended from time to time. 
b.  All stockpiles shall be sprinkled with water or dust suppressant chemicals, or both, as necessary to achieve maximum control of dust emissions. The stockpile sprinkler system shall be operable at all times. 
c.  The facility shall be operated in a manner which mitigates the effect of dust, noise and odor (including covering trucks, hoppers and chutes, loading and unloading devices, mixing operation and maintaining driveways and parking areas free of dust). 
d.  The facility must produce concrete or asphalt for the specific subdivision or project site upon which it is located, and may not produce concrete or asphalt for any other unrelated subdivision or project. 
e.  Spilled cement and fly ash used in the batch shall be cleaned up immediately and contained or dampened to minimize dust emissions due to wind erosion and vehicle traffic. 
f.  All open-bodied vehicles transporting material from a dry batch plant to the paving mixer shall be loaded with a layer of sand on top, and the truck shall be covered with a tarp to minimize the emission of dust under existing conditions. 
g.  Temporary concrete batching plants (including associated stationary equipment and stockpiles) shall be located at least 500 feet from any recreational area, school, or residence. This distance limitation does not apply to structures within the boundaries of the project for which the facility is to pour concrete, provided that the facility is located on or contiguous to the project. 
h.  Temporary asphalt batching plants shall be located at least one-half mile from any recreational area, school, or residence. 
i.  The temporary batch plant shall only furnish concrete, asphalt, or both, to the specific project for which the temporary permit is issued. 
j.  The applicant shall clear the site of all equipment, material and debris upon completion of the project, and return the area as close to its original state as reasonably possible. 
k.  The facility may operate only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. and 8:30 p.m. on Saturdays; and 1:00 p.m. and 8:30 p.m. on Sundays. 
l.  The permit for temporary concrete and asphalt batching plants shall contain an expiration date not to exceed 180 days, and shall not be transferable to any other construction company or individual. Further, the permit shall be limited to a specific construction project and shall not be transferable to any other construction project. 
(4)  Approval. Once the director has determined that the temporary batch plant is appropriate for the location requested and that the regulations listed in (3), above, have been met and will continue to be met, approval for the conditional use permit may be granted. 
(5)  Revocation of permit. The following shall be grounds for the revocation of an issued permit: 
a.  The facility fails to comply with any of the requirements as listed in this section; or 
b.  The facility violates any of the standards as listed on the standard exemption list adopted by the Texas Natural Resources Conservation Commission as amended from time to time. 
c.  The facility fails to comply with any of the requirements set forth in its conditional use permit. 
(b)  Construction yard, temporary. 
(1)  Application. The application for a temporary construction yard requires the approval of a conditional use permit, issued at the discretion of the director. 
(2)  Definition. An open storage yard for supplies and operational equipment, but not constituting a junk or salvage yard. 
(3)  Regulations-No specific regulations. Approval is subject to the director's discretion. 
(4)  Approval. Temporary construction yards may be approved during the site plan process or as a separate conditional use permit. 
(c)  Farmers market, temporary. 
(1)  Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of this section to establish a farmers market ordinance for the Town of Little Elm in order to: 
a.  To give Denton County and North Texas farmers alternative marketing opportunities. 
b.  To promote the sale of Texas-grown farm products. 
c.  To improve the variety and freshness of produce and related products available in Little Elm. 
d.  To enhance the quality of life in Little Elm by providing community activities which foster social gathering and interaction. 
(2)  Application. The application for a conditional use permit for a farmers market must meet all the requirements listed in subsection (4) and (5), below, and include a detailed site plan showing the location of vendors, bathroom facilities, and any closed streets or alleys. In addition, the following information is required: 
a.  The applicant's full name, street address, phone number, e-mail address, and farm/organization name; 
b.  Copy of the valid driver's license or other state identification of the applicant or the applicant's agent; 
c.  A comprehensive list of products to be sold; 
d.  The signature of the applicant or applicants, or agents; and 
e.  Such other information as the town council deems necessary. 
(3)  Definitions. The following terms, wherever used or referred to in this chapter, shall have the following respective meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: 
Farmers market means an area containing individual vendors who offer fruits, vegetables, herbs, spices, edible seeds, nuts, live plants, flowers, and honey for sale. This definition does include the sale of meat, fish, poultry, eggs, refrigerated dairy products, or home canned or packaged items when the proper health rules and regulations are followed and/or health permit obtained. 
Food manager means a person who has shown proficiency of required information through passing a test that is part of a food protection management program accredited by the exas Department of State Health Services, pursuant to Chapter 25 Texas Administrative Code § 229.172, and has responded correctly to questions as they relate to specific food operations. 
Health Code refers to the Texas Food Establishments, 25 Texas Administrative Code, Sections 229.161-229.171, and 229.173-229.175, as amended. 
Horticultural goods means seeds, seedlings, shrubs, trees or other nursery stock. 
Locally grown goods or locally produced goods means goods or products grown in Denton County or surrounding counties, which goods are sold at the farmers market by those persons or any member of the family of those persons who are substantially responsible for growing or producing said goods or products. 
Permit means the document, issued by the regulatory authority, which authorizes a person to operate at a farmers market. 
Potentially hazardous food means a food that is natural or synthetic and that requires temperature control because it is in a form capable of supporting the rapid and progressive growth of infectious or toxigenic microorganisms; the growth and toxin production of clostridium botulinum; or, in raw shell eggs, the growth of salmonella enteritidis. 
Vendor means any person who participates in a farmers market by the selling of goods or products therein. 
(4)  Regulations. 
a.  Location. A farmers market may be permitted in the town limits, within the following zoning districts; LC Light Commercial, LI Light Industrial, or in a specifically designed or designated town park. 
b.  Eligibility. Applicants who already maintain food, or agricultural retail operations or retail stores in the Town of Little Elm are not be eligible to sell at a Little Elm Farmers Market. All foods must be sold retail only. 
c.  Dates of operation. A farmers market may be open daily year round or as otherwise designated by the town council. 
d.  Setup and maintenance. Vendors may set up on a table or sell from a truck no larger than one ton (2,000 pounds). Each vendor shall be responsible for maintaining his or her space in a clean and orderly manner and shall leave the space clean and free of debris during sale hours and prior to departing after sale hours. Failure to properly maintain a market space may result in suspension of such vendor's license to do business in the farmers market. 
e.  Site design criteria. Each vendor space must meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  A standard vendor space is ten feet by ten feet, and may include electricity. 
2.  Vendor spaces shall have a concrete pad. 
3.  All vendors shall have a sign on their space with their name and name of business/organization. 
f.  Parking-All parking must be concrete. One space for each vendor stall and one and one-half spaces for each 200 square feet of designated market area is required. Shared parking can be approved through the SUP. Parking lots must meet the landscape requirements for a parking lot. 
g.  Fire lanes. Fire lanes must be approved by the Town of Little Elm Fire Marshal. 
h.  Health regulations. Each farmers market and each individual stand or booth selling produce, baked goods or other products that may be a health concern shall operate according to the town's health code. 
1.  The operator or an employee of the farmers market shall be a certified food manager. 
2.  All items intended for human consumption must be kept off the ground above six inches, at all times and be in safe and sound condition. The vendor is solely responsible for damages resulting from the sale of unsafe, unapproved or unsound goods. 
3.  A minimum five-gallon capacity hand washing station is required. A hand washing station consists of: 
 A container with a hands free dispensing valve; 
 A five-gallon catch basin; 
 Potable water, approximately at 100 degrees Fahrenheit; 
 Liquid hand washing soap in pump or squeeze bottle; and 
 Paper towel supply for the entire day. 
4.  A conveniently located permanent toilet facility, located within 300 feet, shall be available. A letter from the business owner granting the market vendors access to toilet facilities during all hours of the farmers market operation shall be submitted with the permit application. If a permanent toilet facility is not available within 300 feet of the farmers market, then a permanent toilet facility must be located on site pursuant the following guidelines: 
 Fifty vendor stalls or fewer = one permanent toilet facility 
 Over 50 vendor stalls = one men's and one women's toilet facility 
5.  The premises occupied by the farmers market shall be kept clean and free of accumulated trash, refuse or garbage during and after the hours of operation. All discarded fresh fruits, vegetables or other products shall be placed in a plastic bag and disposed of in onsite waste containers or dumpster. All dumpsters must follow the town ordinances regarding screening and other specifications unless approved otherwise through the SUP. 
6.  No potentially hazardous, pre-packaged or whole produce or products are permitted for sale, unless the following standards have been met: 
  Prepackaged foods. All prepackaged foods must be properly labeled. 
  Egg products. An egg producer that sells only ungraded eggs from their own flock may be exempt from licensing from the Texas Department of Agriculture, but must be permitted by the department of state health services or the health inspector. 
  Meat products. Only meat products that do not require refrigeration such as dried or salt cured meat or jerky will be allowed to be sold. 
  Milk products. Fluid milk, dry milks and milk products complying with Grade A standards shall be pasteurized. 
  Refrigerated foods. All refrigerated foods must be maintained below 41 degrees using mechanical refrigeration that complies with standards that meet or exceed NSF and used as manufacturer intended. 
7.  Fruits, vegetables, salsas, chips, jerky and honey may be displayed for samples if the following guidelines are practiced: 
 All fruits and vegetables must be rinsed thoroughly in clean water. 
 Sample servings must be protected from contamination at all times (such as with a hinged cover or cake-type cover). 
 Serving must be done in a manner that protects the sample from any bare hand contact by employees. The use of gloves, single service utensils, napkins or tissues, or toothpicks may be used to sample. 
 A vendor who offers food samples will be required to obtain a health permit. 
8.  Scales and weights. Every person who shall offer for sale, at a farmers market, any article by weight or measure shall have all scales, weights and measures properly examined, tested, stamped, and sealed. 
(5)  Vendors. 
a.  Application. Each vendor shall be required to obtain a permit issued by the Town of Little Elm at a cost of $25.00 for each 30-day permit issued. Each vendor shall be required to display his or her license in a prominent position while such vendor is doing business at a farmers market. 
b.  Vendors' goods and products. Vendors shall only sell items that have been approved. All goods and products sold at a farmers market must be locally grown or locally produced goods. 
1.  Each participating vendor, upon making application for a vendor's license shall sign a statement affirming that all goods or products which vendor intends to sell are locally grown or locally produced goods as defined in this chapter. 
2.  Fruits and nuts, vegetable and horticultural goods may be offered for sale at the market without any special permits. 
3.  Canned, preserved and baked items must be prepared in a certified commercial kitchen and labeled according to regulatory requirements of the State of Texas. 
4.  Meat, poultry, eggs, cheeses and exotic animal products require a health permit from the Town of Little Elm if they are to be sold at a farmers market. 
5.  Other items such as crafts and personal care items shall be allowed for sale at a farmers market without permission, but with a permit, and may not constitute more than 20 percent of the occupied vendor spaces. 
c.  Liability. The town shall have no liability for any injury to the person or property of any vendor, member of a vendor's family, customer, or any other person, arising from the operation of the farmers market. 
d.  Vendor permit requirements. All persons wanting to sell at a farmers market must agree to the terms of this chapter and show their agreement to this chapter by signing the application and other documents that accompany these rules. These forms must be returned to the Town of Little Elm and must be on file before set-up or any participation. 
e.  Day-of applications. Vendors submitting the application and other forms, and fees, the day of the market, will be permitted to sell at the market. 
(6)  Approval. Once the director has determined that all the regulations listed in subsections (4) and (5), above, have been met and will continue to be met, approval for the conditional use permit may be granted. 
(d)  Field office, temporary. 
(1)  Application. Temporary field offices require the approval of a conditional use permit, issued at the discretion of the director. 
(2)  Definition. A temporary building or structure, used in connection with a development or construction project. Temporary permits for "temporary buildings" shall be issued for a period of time not to exceed 18 months. Extensions may be granted only by the town council. Upon due notice and hearing by and before the town council, any such permits granted may be revoked if the town council finds the use of the building or structure is contrary to the intent of this section or results in increased noise, traffic or other conditions considered to be a nuisance or hazard. Subject to temporary permit and removal at completion of project. 
(3)  Approval. Once the director has determined that the temporary field office is appropriate for the time limit requested, approval for the conditional use permit may be granted. 
(e)  Model home, temporary. 
(1)  Application. Temporary use of a new residential home as part of a sales office requires the approval of a conditional use permit, issued at the discretion of the director and an approved final plat. 
(2)  Definition. Use of a new residential home to display the construction, design, exterior and interior finishes, and provide a temporary sales office for the home builder and/or real estate agents to sell similar homes within the subdivision. 
(3)  Approval. 
a.  Approval of a final plat by the planning and zoning commission is required prior to the temporary occupancy of the model home. The plat need not be filed, but must be filed prior to the sale of the model home to the individual owner. 
b.  Approval of a temporary certificate of occupancy as required by the chief building official. 
c.  Once the director has determined that the temporary certificate of occupancy has been obtained and the plat has been approved by the planning and zoning commission, approval for the conditional use permit for temporary use as a model home may be granted. 
(f)  Open storage, temporary. 
(1)  Application. Temporary outside display or storage requires the approval of a conditional use permit with a revised site plan indicating the location of the proposed open storage or display. 
(2)  Definition. Temporary outdoor storage and display of merchandise is not permitted to exceed a 90-day duration, unless specifically allowed by the underlying zoning district or by the approval by the director. Seasonal display of merchandise may be displayed for the normal duration of the season, so long as the display does not utilize required parking spaces or impede normal traffic patterns. 
(3)  Location of temporary open storage or display. Open storage may not be located in any required front, side, or rear setback and must not impede vehicle, emergency fire lanes, or pedestrian movement on the site. 
(4)  Storage or display in parking lots. Open storage may not be located in any parking spaces, except "big box" stores (i.e. stores greater than 50,000 square feet in size) may display garden merchandise for sale within excess parking spaces on a temporary basis. Examples of appropriate merchandise for this type of parking lot storage includes, but is not limited to, mulch or garden soil bags, bedding plants, saplings, and storage sheds. Approval of any parking lot open storage or display shall require a revised site plan showing the location of the open storage or display, indicating the number of parking spaces required to ensure that the storage is located in spaces in excess of those required, the type of merchandise to be displayed or stored, and the duration of the sale. 
(5)  Approval. Once the director has reviewed the revised site plan and has determined that the temporary open storage or display is located so that it will not impede vehicle or pedestrian movement, conflict with fire lanes or emergency vehicle movement, and is appropriate for the time limit requested, approval for the conditional use permit may be granted. 
(g)  Open storage, temporary, under eave display. 
(1)  Application. Temporary outside display or storage that is located near the main entrance to the facility and generally located under the front or side eaves requires a revised site plan indicating the location of the proposed open storage or display with the approval of a conditional use permit, issued at the discretion of the director. 
(2)  Definition. This definition includes, but is not limited to, seasonal merchandise that may be placed outside the main entrance to a facility that is on sale or featured, such as pumpkins, cords of wood, lawn mowers, barbeque grills, bedding plants, etc. This definition also includes the outdoor, under eave storage of shopping carts. This definition may also be used for the temporary use of food purveyors, such as hot dog or lemonade stands used as part of a sales promotion. 
(3)  Timing. Such merchandise may be displayed or sold for the normal duration of the season, so long as the display is limited to the under eave area. 
(4)  Regulations. 
a.  Limited to within ten feet from the front facade of the building) so long as pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic patterns are not impeded. 
b.  A four-foot-wide clearance shall be provided for a walkway within the display, if needed, and 
c.  A six-foot-wide clearance shall be provided on the sidewalk leading to the entrance of the building. 
(5)  Approval. Once the director has determined that the temporary under eave storage or display is appropriate for the location and time limit requested, approval for the conditional use permit may be granted. 
(h)  Seasonal sales. 
(1)  Application. Any application for a conditional use permit for seasonal sales shall include the following: 
a.  A letter from the property owner, allowing the temporary use. 
b.  A tax certificate from the state is required prior to approval of a permit. 
c.  A site plan drawn to scale must be submitted with the application showing property boundaries, fencing, signage, display and sales areas, existing and temporary structures, ingress and egress locations, parking and delivery areas (with surface material indicated), and location of available restroom facilities. 
d.  The conditional use is allowed only during the timeframes listed in subsection (2), below. 
(2)  Definitions. The applicant shall choose one of the following four seasonal sales categories: 
a.  Holiday items. Temporary display and sale of cut holiday trees with incidental sales of holiday decorations and firewood for a maximum 60 days; or 
b.  Fall items. Temporary display and sale of pumpkins with the incidental sale of fall decorations for a maximum of 60 days; 
c.  Winter items. Temporary display and sale of firewood with the incidental sale of firewood accessories between October 1 and March 1; or 
d.  Summer items. Temporary display and sale of snow-cones or ice-cream products between June 1 and October 1. 
(3)  Regulations. A permit is required for any seasonal sales operation, as defined in section 106.01.14, "land use definitions" of the Code of Ordinances; is only allowed during normal and generally accepted seasonal periods; and shall encompass all proposed signage, structures, uses, fencing, and other site alterations and scope of business activities. Seasonal sales are also subject to the following regulations: 
a.  Only one seasonal sales permit is allowed per applicant, per lot, or per calendar year. 
b.  Temporary use of tents, portable buildings (maximum 200 square feet), or other existing nonconforming structures located on the subject property is allowed for temporary offices, but is required to meet setbacks and be reviewed and approved by the fire marshal prior to issuance of a permit. 
c.  One sign is allowed and shall be reviewed and approved prior to issuance of a permit. If a banner, it shall be no larger than 48 square feet, and it may be attached to the building or be freestanding if not higher than six feet off the ground. If a freestanding sign (non-banner), it shall be no larger than 40 square feet with a two-foot clear space and be no taller than eight feet in height. Any sign shall be set back a minimum 20 feet from the front property line, have no electric or illuminated components, and shall abide by all other provisions of chapter 86, signs, of the Code of Ordinances. 
d.  Any temporary fencing shall be reviewed and approved prior to issuance of a permit. 
e.  Restroom facilities for employees must be provided either on-site (e.g. portable toilet), or off-site if within 300 feet of the subject property and accompanied with a letter of permission from the property owner. 
f.  The site shall provide safe vehicular access, off-street parking, and accommodate the delivery of materials. Vehicular use areas shall be an all-weather surface, which can include a maintained gravel surface. 
g.  The scope of the activity cannot encumber required parking spaces of an adjacent business, shall be wholly located on an undeveloped lot of a minimum two acres in size, and be located in a nonresidential zoning district. 
h.  Merchandise shall be neatly organized and not haphazardly piled. Firewood seasonal sales lasting more than 60 days shall be orderly stacked and shall not be sold from a trailer, unless used for customer delivery purposes and parked to mitigate visibility. 
i.  Within ten calendar days following the permit's expiration, the site shall be clear of all structures, fencing, signage, trailers, material, merchandise, and equipment associated with the seasonal sale operation not existing at time of application as well as any trash and debris that may have accumulated. 
(4)  Approval. Once the director has determined that the temporary seasonal sales operation is appropriate for the location and time limit requested, and that all the regulations listed in (3), above, have been met and will continue to be met, approval for the conditional use permit may be granted. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.05.04 - New and unlisted uses. 
    It is recognized that new types of land use will develop and forms of land use not anticipated may seek to locate in the town. In order to provide for such changes and contingencies, a determination as to the appropriate classification of any new or unlisted form of land use shall be made as follows: 
(a)  The director shall consider any new or unlisted use and make an interpretation as to the zoning classification into which such use should be placed. The referral of the use interpretation question shall be accompanied by a statement of facts listing the nature of the use and whether it involves dwelling activity, sales, processing, type of product, storage and amount, and nature of noise, odor, fumes, dust, toxic material, and vibration likely to be generated and the general requirements for public utilities such as water and sanitary sewer. 
(b)  The director shall consider the nature and described performance of the proposed use and its compatibility with the uses permitted in the various districts and determine the zoning district within which use should be permitted. 
(c)  Appeals can be made to the planning and zoning commission. The commission shall approve the director's recommendation or may make its own determination concerning the classification of such use as is determined appropriate based upon its findings. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.05.05 - Nonconforming uses and structures. 
(a)  Intent. Within the districts established by this chapter or amendments that may later be adopted, there exist lots, structures, and uses of land and structures which were lawful before this chapter was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this chapter or future amendments. 
(1)  It is the intent of this chapter to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. Such uses are declared by this chapter to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. It is further the intent of this chapter that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded, or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
(2)  A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of a structure and land shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of this chapter by attachment on a building or premises of additional signs intended to be seen from the street or off the premises, or by the addition of other uses of a nature which would be prohibited generally in the district involved. 
(3)  To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter and upon which actual building construction has been diligently carried on. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner; except that where demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun in preparation for rebuilding, such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be diligently carried on until completion of the building involved. 
(b)  Nonconforming lots of record. 
(1)  In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter. Such lot must be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width standards, or both, that are generally applicable in the district, provided that yard dimensions and other requirements not involving area or width, or both, of the lot must conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Variance of area, width, and yard requirements may be obtained only through action of the board of adjustment (see section 106.02.02(a)(3) for more information). 
(2)  If two or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage or amendment of this chapter, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements for lot width and area as established by this chapter, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this chapter, and no portion of said parcel shall be used which does not meet lot width and are requirements established by this chapter, nor shall any division of the parcel be made which leaves remaining any with width or area below the requirements stated in this chapter. 
(c)  Nonconforming uses of land. Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, lawful use of land exists that is made no longer permissible under the terms of this chapter as enacted or amended, such use may be continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter; 
(2)  No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter; 
(3)  If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than 30 days, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such land is located. 
(d)  Nonconforming uses of structures. If a lawful use of a structure, or of structure and premises in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this chapter, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it located. 
(2)  Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment for this chapter, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building. 
(3)  Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which such structure is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed. 
(4)  When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six consecutive months or for 18 months during any three-year period, the structure thereafter shall not be used except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(5)  Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. 
(6)  Where nonconforming use status applies to a conforming structure, such use shall be immediately terminated upon transfer to another ownership or lease. 
(e)  Changing uses and nonconforming rights. 
(1)  Nonconforming use to conforming use. Any nonconforming use may be changed to a conforming use, and once such change is made, the use shall not be changed back to any nonconforming use. 
(2)  Nonconforming use to another nonconforming use. A nonconforming use may not be changed to another nonconforming use. 
(3)  Conforming use in a nonconforming structure. Where a conforming use is located in a nonconforming structure, the use may be changed to another conforming use by the process outlined in section 106.05.05(f), expansion of nonconforming uses and structures. 
(f)  Expansion of nonconforming uses and structures. An expansion of a nonconforming use or structure is allowed in accordance with the following. 
(1)  Nonconforming use expansion in existing building. A nonconforming use located within a building may be extended throughout the existing building, provided. 
a.  No structural alteration, except as provided in section 106.05.05(f)(5) below, may be made on or in the building except those required by law to preserve such building in a structurally sound condition. 
b.  The number of dwelling units or rooms in a nonconforming residential use must not be increased so as to exceed the number of dwelling units or rooms existing at the time said use became a nonconforming use. 
(2)  Nonconforming use prohibited from expansion beyond existing building. Nonconforming use within a building shall not be extended to occupy any land outside the building. 
(3)  Off-street loading and parking. Nonconforming use of land or building shall not be enlarged, increased, or extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the time the land became a nonconforming use, except to provide off-street loading or off-street parking space. 
(4)  Residential lot exemption. The minimum residential lot areas for the various zoning districts shall be in accordance with their respective districts except that a lot having less area than herein required which was an official "lot of record" prior to [date of adoption of ordinance], may be used for a single-family dwelling. 
(5)  Expansion of nonconforming buildings with conforming uses. Buildings or structures which do not conform to the area regulations or development standards in this chapter but where the uses are deemed conforming shall not increase the gross floor area greater than ten percent from the date when the building became nonconforming. 
(6)  Reuse of abandoned or vacant buildings by conforming uses allowed. Buildings or structures which have been vacant or abandoned for more than six months and do not meet the current area regulations or development standards shall be allowed to be reoccupied by a conforming use. 
(g)  Restoration of nonconforming structures. 
(1)  Total destruction. If a nonconforming structure is destroyed by fire, the elements, or other cause, it may not be rebuilt except to conform to the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Partial destruction. In the case of partial destruction of a nonconforming structure not exceeding 51 percent of its total appraised value as determined by the Appraisal District, reconstruction will be permitted, but the existing square footage or function of the nonconforming structure cannot be expanded. 
(h)  Movement of nonconforming structures. 
(1)  Relocation of a nonconforming structure within a platted lot. Nonconforming structures may be relocated within the same platted lot. 
(2)  Compliance. Nonconforming structures shall comply with all setback and screening requirements. 
(i)  Repairs and maintenance. On any building devoted in whole or in part to an nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixture, wiring or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding ten percent of the current replacement value of the building, provided that the cubic content of the building as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of this chapter shall be not increased. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. 
(j)  Uses under exception provisions not nonconforming uses. Any use for which a special exception is permitted as provided in this chapter shall not be deemed a nonconforming use, but shall without further action be deemed a conforming use in such district only for the single property granted such exception. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Secs. 106.05.06-106.05.10 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
DIVISION 1. - EXTERIOR CONSTRUCTION AND ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 106.06.01 - Limitations to development. 
(a)  Residential development. 
(1)  One unit per lot. Only one residential unit is allowed per lot in single-family residential districts, except SF-RE Single-Family Residential Estate, which may have one accessory dwelling unit (such as a mother-in-law unit). 
(2)  One meter per lot. Only one utility meter per lot is allowed. 
(3)  Conformance status of lots previously platted. Lots in a subdivision or shown on a plat legally approved and properly recorded in Denton County prior to the effective date of Ordinance No. 427 which do not meet the minimum lot sizes and area requirements set forth in this chapter shall not be considered to be in violation of said requirements and, for purposes of this section, shall be deemed to conform to the requirements set forth in this section. 
(4)  Occupation of an RV prohibited. Occupying or otherwise residing in a recreational vehicle (RV), camp trailer, or other wheeled vehicles parked on a single-family lot or within the public right-of-way is prohibited. This is waived for visitors occupying said vehicle for a period of seven days or less. 
(5)  Foundation requirements. All residential structures within the town, except for manufactured homes in the MH-2 District, shall be built upon engineered foundations, subject to review and approval by the building official. 
(b)  Senior living. Multiple-family dwelling, senior (senior apartment) means any building or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented, leased or let to contain three or more dwelling units or apartments on a single lot, or which is occupied as a home or place of residence by three or more age-restricted (55 years of age or older) families living in independent dwelling units on a single lot. This use shall also be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Minimum number of seniors in residence. At least one person 55 years of age or older shall reside in at least 80 percent of the senior multifamily residential development's dwelling units; 
(2)  Deed restrictions and covenants . Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, each senior multifamily residential development shall adopt a series of deed restrictions and covenants, subject to review and approval by the town attorney, establishing the development's intent to operate as a senior multifamily residential development in accordance with the requirements established herein and any other applicable laws or regulations. 
(3)  Reporting. At least once every two years, each senior multifamily residential development shall provide to the town's development services department a certified affidavit demonstrating that the requirements established herein as well as the requirements of the Fair Housing Act continue to be satisfied. 
(4)  Revocation of CO. Failure to completely adhere to the requirements herein shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and may result in the revocation of the development's certificate of occupancy or other penalties as detailed in section 106.01.11, "penalties and enforcement" of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.06.02 - Architectural design standards, generally. 
(a)  Applicability and process. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of architectural standards is to set minimum requirements for the appearance and quality of buildings and corresponding site elements which are recognized as factors that enhance property values and are in the interest of the general welfare of the Town of Little Elm. 
(2)  Applicability. The regulations provided in this subsection shall apply to all structures within all zoning districts. Where the regulations of this subsection conflict with other sections or provisions of this chapter, the regulations of this subsection shall apply. 
(3)  Submittal information. Sufficient information shall be submitted to evaluate the architectural standards criteria outlined herein as part of the site plan submittal. 
(4)  Color elevations and/or samples. Color elevations of all four facades shall be submitted for each building, listing each proposed exterior material, with a percentage breakdown of each material used, exclusive of windows and doors. A listing of the selected auxiliary design standards, described herein, should also be included to ensure compliance. 
(5)  Streetscape elements. For any proposed streetscape elements (such as bike racks, trash receptacles, lampposts, tree grates, bollards, outdoor seating, and/or other street furniture) or screening devices (masonry walls screening dumpsters, mechanical equipment, residential subdivision, etc.), graphics should also be submitted showing the material, color, height, and any other pertinent details. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.06.03 - Architectural standards for residential structures. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this subsection is to create residential neighborhoods which reflect the character of Little Elm, preserve and enhance property values, and contribute to the tax base of the town. It is not the intent of this section to discourage innovation. The use of exceptional design features, such as alternate exterior materials or design features, or other unique and outstanding architectural ornamentation worthy of merit that make a positive contribution to the surrounding visual environment is encouraged. If the alternate design does not meet the letter of the ordinance, but is deemed to meet the intent of the ordinance, the director shall have the discretion to allow the alternate design. 
(b)  Compulsory design standards for residential development. All new residences within the Town of Little Elm shall conform to the following design standards: 
(1)  Minimum masonry requirement. The front facing exterior facades of the main building or structure shall be constructed of 100 percent masonry finishing material that is comprised of brick, stone, cast stone, or a combination thereof. The overall minimum masonry content of all facades shall be 85 percent. Stucco may be used as a design feature with no more than 15 percent of any facade other than those facing a right-of-way being made up of this material. Other materials of equal or similar characteristics may be allowed at the discretion of the director. 
(2)  Alternate stucco architecture. If a home is designed with a specific architectural style that warrants the use of stucco as the primary exterior material, including but not limited to Mediterranean, Spanish, southwest or modern, then the use of stucco as a primary material may be approved by the director. All elements of the architectural style must be consistently incorporated, including but not limited to clay roof tiles, typical of the style. Residences with primarily stucco finishes shall be accented with heavy wood beams, stonework or other features to enhance the style. Elevations with no discernable style that simply disregard the required masonry requirement will not be considered. 
(3)  Cementitious fiberboard and engineered wood . Cementitious fiberboard or engineered wood may constitute up to 50 percent of the exterior facades of stories other than the first floor if the 85 percent masonry finishing materials is maintained overall. Cementitious fiberboard or engineered wood may also be used for architectural features, including window box-outs, bay windows, roof dormers, columns, chimneys not part of an exterior wall, or other architectural features approved by the director. 
(4)  Elevation repetition. Each unique house elevation shall not be repeated on the lot most directly across the street, nor shall it be repeated on two lots in either direction on the same side of the street. A wide variety of elevations is desired as it augments the character of the subdivision and reduces monotony of design. Houses that have a primarily stucco exterior shall be limited to one per block face. 
(5)  Elevation masonry mix and pattern. Front elevations should use more than one type of masonry construction in a variety of patterns to vary the architectural appeal of the streetscape. Regardless of the 85 percent minimum Category A masonry requirements, every facade shall be a mixture of materials and no one facade may be constructed of cementitious fiberboard or engineered wood or a combination of these products. 
(6)  Doors. Garage doors and front entry doors visible from the right-of-way shall consist of stained cedar, redwood, spruce, fir or other hardwood, or other products, including products that are not wood but have a wood appearance and approved by the director. 
(7)  Roof pitch. Minimum roof pitch of residential structures is 6:12. 
(8)  Roof materials. All roof materials shall meet the minimum standards as listed in the adopted International Building Code, which includes the use of solid solar shingles. 
(9)  Screening of utility units. HVAC units shall be screened from view from streets with shrubs or a stained wood fence. 
(10)  Mailboxes, individual. Individual mailboxes shall be brick or stone to match the residence and, where practical, be clustered in pairs. Sufficient structural support to keep the mailbox strictly upright is required. 
(11)  Mailboxes, grouped. When mailboxes are grouped, the exterior of the structure shall be masonry, the roof made of metal materials, and maintained by the home owners association (HOA). 
(12)  Driveways. All driveways shall be concrete and have a minimum width of ten feet and a maximum width of 24 feet, unless the drive is accommodating more than a two-car garage. Greater drive widths shall be approved on a case-by-case basis by of the director. 
(c)  Architectural design features . All new residential structures must include at least four of the following design features on the front facade or visible from the front or side street: 
(1)  Carriage style garage door(s) with hardware; 
(2)  Architectural pillars or posts; 
(3)  Bay window(s); 
(4)  Brick chimney on exterior wall; 
(5)  Cast stone accents; 
(6)  Covered front porches (minimum of 60 square feet covered by main roof or an architectural extension); 
(7)  Cupulas or turrets; 
(8)  Dormers or gables; 
(9)  Garage door not facing the street (J-swing garage style); 
(10)  Roof accent upgrades (e.g. metal, tile, slate, solar tiles); 
(11)  Recessed entries a minimum of three feet deeper than main front facade; 
(12)  Greater than 6:12 primary roof pitch, or variable roof pitches; 
(13)  Transom windows; 
(14)  Shutters; 
(15)  Masonry arches; 
(16)  Mixed masonry patterns (over and above what is required by section 106.06.02(b)(5), above); 
(17)  Coach lights at entrances; 
(18)  Decorative attic or gable feature, minimum two square feet in size (e.g. vent, window, brick detail); 
(19)  Decorative driveway paving (e.g. salt finish, exposed aggregate, or other treatments approved by the town's building official). 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.06.04 - Architectural standards for multifamily structures (including townhomes and patio homes). 
(a)  Intent. The following goals apply to multifamily and townhome development: 
(1)  The intent of this subsection is to create buildings which reflect the lakefront character of Little Elm. The size, disposition and design of buildings play an important role in achieving that goal. 
(2)  Multifamily buildings should be constructed in a manner that contributes to the attractiveness of the town. 
(3)  Buildings should be constructed in a manner, and with materials, that are highly durable and will continue to endure and be attractive over a long time, especially when adjacent to public and pedestrian areas. 
(4)  It is not the intent of this section to discourage innovation. The use of exceptional design features, such as tower elements, exposed beams, or other unique and outstanding architectural ornamentation worthy of merit that make a positive contribution to the surrounding visual environment is encouraged and will be considered on a case-by-case basis. 
(b)  Exterior materials for multifamily construction. 
(1)  Categories of exterior materials. The Town of Little Elm has categorized exterior building materials into three categories, as described below and in table A: 
a.  Category A materials are defined as the superior masonry products from which the town prefers buildings to be predominantly constructed. Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, acceptable Category A masonry finishing materials are brick, natural stone, and manufactured stone. 
b.  Category B materials are the secondary products that the town recognizes as masonry materials acceptable for use, but also as products that are less desirable and therefore should not be the predominant material. Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, acceptable Category B masonry finishing materials include three-step stucco, architectural concrete block with integrated color (i.e. split-face CMU), engineered wood, and cementitious fiberboard with integrated color (in the form of lap siding or board and batten). 
c.  Category C materials are accent products acceptable in limited application for architectural accents and features and for walls on upper stories of multiple story buildings. Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, acceptable Category C materials include metal, tile, glass block, exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS), and wood. 
ARTICLE VI, TABLE A EXTERIOR CATEGORIES & MATERIALS
FOR MULTIFAMILY DEVELOPMENTS Categories Materials A Brick, stone, or manufactured stone B Split-face cmu, stucco, cementitious fiber board, engineered wood C Metal, wood, tile, glass, EIFS Prohibited Plain concrete block, aggregate, vinyl, plastic, tilt wall  
(2)  Roof designs and materials. For buildings with a visible hip, gable or mansard roof, allowed materials include metal (standing seam), slate or tile (clay or cement, barrel or Roman-shaped). 
3)  Prohibited materials. Prohibited exterior surface materials for multifamily developments include plain concrete block, concrete tilt wall, vinyl, plastic, and aggregate pea-gravel finished surfaces. 
(c)  Design standards. 
(1)  Uniform architectural style. All buildings within a common development, as shown on a development plan, conceptual plan, or site plan, shall have similar architectural styles, materials, colors and detailing. 
(2)  Exterior materials. All structures shall be architecturally finished on all four sides (exclusive of doors and windows) with a minimum of 85 percent Category A materials on the first floor with the remainder being comprised of Category B materials; a minimum of 50 percent Category A and on the second and third floors with the remainder being comprised of Category B materials; and with subsequent floors being comprised of either Category A or Category B materials in any percentage desired. Use of Category C materials shall be limited to decorative accents. The use of materials will create a tri-partite architecture façade that has a distinct base, middle and top, separated by horizontal elements. (See table B, below) 
(3)  Two masonry materials required. At least two masonry materials shall be used on all exterior facades. 
(4)  Interior courtyard materials. Interior courtyards may be constructed of a minimum of 50 percent Category A with the remainder being comprised of Category B materials. Accents made up of Category C materials may be used within courtyard areas. 
(5)  Facades parallel to street. Facades shall generally be built parallel to the street frontage. 
(6)  Accessory building materials. Amenity centers, covered garages, and other accessory buildings shall meet the exterior material requirements of the first floor of the multifamily architecture. Carports shall meet the exterior material requirements of the first floor of the multifamily architecture with the exception of the support poles, which may be constructed of painted metal. 
(7)  Amenities/hardscape. All streetscape elements and site amenities, such as bike racks, trash receptacles, lampposts, and tree grates shall be metal, rust and flake/chip resistant, and generally be black "storm cloud" in color. Bollards may be concrete or cast metal and shall be of decorative design. 
(8)  Roof design. Roofs shall be peaked with either hip, gable or mansard design with a minimum one-to-four (1:4) pitch, or a parapet wall or false mansard design with a minimum one-to-two (1:2) pitch is acceptable only if constructed around the entire perimeter of a building so that no flat roof shall be visible from a public street or along an active storefront. 
(9)  Building color. 
a.  The dominant color of all buildings shall be muted, natural or earth-tone shades of color. Black and stark white shall not be used except as an accent color. 
b.  Accent colors which comprise less than one percent of the building face may use a wider spectrum of colors than those allowed as the dominant color, except that no high intensity colors, neon colors or fluorescent colors shall be used on exterior surfaces of the building. 
c.  Bright, reflective, pure tone primary or secondary colors are permissible only in limited application as accent colors on door and window frames, moldings, cornices, canopies, awnings, signs, etc. This provision shall not be construed as a license to employ corporate imaging or logos on the primary building facade. 
d.  No more than one color shall be used for visible roof surfaces; however, if more than one type of roofing material is used, the materials shall be varying hues of the same color. 
(10)  Auxiliary design standards. All multifamily and townhome primary buildings shall be designed to incorporate no less than four of the architectural elements from the list below: 
a.  Canopies, awnings, porticos with colonnade or arcades; raised pilaster cornices (end columns at corners), or quoined corners (any of various bricks of standard shape for forming corners of brick walls or a wedge-shaped piece of wood, stone, or other material, used for various ornamental purposes at corners). 
b.  Vertical elements (tower, cupola, lighthouse, turret, arches, etc.); 
c.  Accented windows and doors framed with smooth cobble, cast stone, limestone or other decorative masonry headers and sills; or dormer windows; 
d.  Outdoor patios and/or courtyards (landscaped and furnished); 
e.  Decorative ornamentation integrated into the building facade, such as corbels, medallions (non-signage), functioning clocks, niches, wrought iron, balconettes, gargoyles, or horizontal and rhythm patterned brickwork; 
f.  Other similar architectural features, as approved by the director. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.06.05 - Architectural standards for commercial structures (includes office, retail, commercial, mixed use, etc.). 
(a)  Intent. The following apply to nonresidential developments, including institutional buildings: 
(1)  The intent of this subsection is to create buildings which reflect the lakefront character of Little Elm. The size, disposition and design of buildings play an important role in achieving that goal. 
(2)  Buildings should be constructed in a manner that allows flexibility to accommodate a range of uses over time in order to avoid the need to demolish and rebuild for successive uses. 
(3)  Buildings should directly contribute to the attractiveness, safety and function of the street and public areas. 
(4)  Buildings should be constructed in a manner, and with materials, that are highly durable and will continue to endure and be attractive over a long time, especially adjacent to public and pedestrian areas. 
(5)  It is not the intent of this section to discourage innovation. The use of exceptional design features, such as tower elements, exposed beams, or other unique and outstanding architectural ornamentation worthy of merit that make a positive contribution to the surrounding visual environment is encouraged. 
(b)  Design standards. 
(1)  All buildings within a common development, as shown on a development plan, concept plan, or preliminary site plan, shall have similar architectural styles, materials, colors and detailing. 
(2)  All structures shall be architecturally finished on all sides that can be seen from a public right-of-way with similar styles, materials, colors and detailing. 
(3)  Facades shall generally be built parallel to the street frontage, except at street intersections, where a facade containing a primary building entrance should be curved or angled toward an intersection. 
(4)  All buildings shall be designed and constructed in tri-partite architecture so that they have a distinct base, middle and top, separated by horizontal elements (see examples next page). 
(5)  All buildings shall be constructed of 100 percent masonry finishing material, as outlined in table B and in the proportions illustrated in table C. 
(6)  All streetscape elements and site amenities, such as bike racks, trash receptacles, lampposts, and tree grates shall be metal, rust and flake/chip resistant, and generally be black "storm cloud" in color. Bollards can be concrete or cast metal and shall be of decorative design. 

Examples of Tri-partite Construction
(c)  Exterior materials for all commercial development. 
(1)  Categories of exterior materials. The Town of Little Elm has categorized exterior building materials for commercial buildings into three categories, as follows: 
(2)  Category A materials are defined as the superior masonry products from which the town prefers buildings to be predominantly constructed. Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, acceptable Category A masonry finishing materials are brick, natural stone, and manufactured stone. 
(3)  Category B materials are the secondary products that the town recognizes as masonry materials acceptable for use, but also as products that are less desirable and therefore should not be the predominant material. Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, acceptable Category B masonry finishing materials include three-step stucco, architectural concrete block with integrated color (i.e. split-face CMU), concrete tilt wall (colored or stamped), engineered wood, and cementitious fiberboard with integrated color (in the form of lap siding or board and batten). 
(4)  Category C materials are accent products acceptable in limited application for architectural accents and features and for walls on upper stories of multiple story buildings. Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, acceptable Category C materials include metal, tile, glass block, exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS), and wood. 
ARTICLE VI, TABLE B EXTERIOR CATEGORIES & MATERIALS
FOR COMMERCIAL Categories Materials A Brick, stone, or manufactured stone B Split-face CMU, stucco, cementitious fiber board, engineered wood, tilt-wall construction C Metal, wood, tile, glass, EIFS Prohibited Plain concrete block, aggregate, vinyl, plastic  
(5)  Windows. Windows and glazing shall be limited to a minimum of 30 percent and maximum of 70 percent of each building elevation facing a street, major access lane, or side yard greater than ten feet. This does not apply to big box buildings (greater than 50,000 square feet in size). Faux (i.e. false) windows are allowed for side yards. 
(6)  Roof designs and materials. For buildings with a visible hip, gable or mansard roof, allowed materials include metal (standing seam), slate or tile (clay or cement, barrel or Roman-shaped). 
(7)  Prohibited materials. Prohibited exterior surface materials include cinder block, vinyl, plastic, and aggregate pea-gravel finished surfaces. 
(d)  Facade design standards for buildings 15,000 square feet or smaller. The following shall apply to all exterior walls of buildings that are 15,000 square feet or smaller and which are clearly visible from a public right-of-way or along an active storefront (see table C): 
(1)  Walls, excluding windows, doors and other openings, shall be constructed of a minimum 80 percent Group A materials and a maximum of 20 percent Group B materials. However, accent materials from Group C may be allowed in limited application for architectural accents or features. 
(2)  A big box may use split-face CMU (architectural block) for up to 20 percent of the primary facade, in addition to the 20 percent of other Group B materials. 
(3)  All exterior walls of buildings less than 15,000 square feet are considered primary facades, regardless of orientation. 
(e)  Facade design standards for buildings larger than 15,000 square feet. The following shall apply to all exterior walls of buildings 15,000 square feet or larger and which are not clearly visible from a public street or along an active storefront, or are constructed on a property line as one of a series of in-line buildings where the wall will become part of a common wall (see table C): 
(1)  Primary facades. Allowed materials. Walls, excluding windows, doors, and other openings, shall be constructed of a minimum 20 percent Group A materials and a maximum of 80 percent Group B materials. In any case, the color of the walls shall match the primary facades. 
(2)  Secondary facades. Secondary facades which are adjacent to the primary facade shall continue the primary facade treatment by wrapping the corner. This may be achieved with elements such as cornices, bases and vertical elements. In all cases, however, wall surface materials shall wrap the corner. 
ARTICLE VI, TABLE C Required Percentages of Exterior Materials For Commercial Facades Percentage Breakdown Definition Buildings 
15,000 
square feet 
or less Primary Min. 80% Group A 
Max. 20% Group B Exterior walls on public street or along an active storefront Secondary Min. 20% Group A 
Max. 80% Group B Exterior walls NOT clearly visible from a public street or along an active storefront Buildings 
greater 
than 
15,000 
square feet Primary Min. 20% Group A 
Max. 80% Group B Exterior walls on public street or along an active storefront Secondary Min. 80% Group A 
Max. 20% Group B Exterior walls NOT clearly visible from a public street or along an active storefront  
(f)  Building articulation design standards. Primary facades clearly visible from a public street or along an active storefront shall meet the following minimum standards for articulation: 
(1)  Horizontal articulation. No building wall shall extend for a distance equal to three times the wall's height without having an offset equal to 25 percent of the wall's height, and that new plane shall extend for a distance equal to at least 25 percent of the maximum length of the first plane. 
(2)  Vertical articulation. No wall length shall extend for a distance greater than three times the height of the wall without changing height by a minimum of 25 percent of the wall's height, and that new plane shall extend for a distance equal to at least 25 percent of the maximum length of the first plane. Pitched roofs shall count toward achieving vertical articulation, provided they are 65 degrees or less from horizontal. 


(g)  Design standards. 
(1)  Two masonry materials required. At least two masonry materials shall be used on all exterior facades. 
(2)  Roof design. Roofs shall be peaked with either hip, gable or mansard design with a minimum one-to-four (1:4) pitch, or a parapet wall or false mansard design with a minimum one-to-two (1:2) pitch is acceptable only if constructed around the entire perimeter of a building so that no flat roof shall be visible from a public street or along an active storefront. 
(3)  Landmark buildings. 
a.  Buildings which are located on an axis with a terminating street or major access lane or at the intersection of streets and/or major access lane shall be considered a landmark building. 
b.  Such buildings shall be designed with landmark features which take advantage of that location, such as an accentuated entry and a unique building articulation which is offset from the front wall planes and goes above the main building eave or parapet line. 
c.  Landmark features shall be in proportion to the building and are subject to review and approval by the director. 
(4)  Building color. 
a.  The dominant color of all buildings shall be muted, natural or earth-tone shades of color. Black and stark white shall not be used except as an accent color. 
b.  There are no restrictions on accent colors which comprise less than one percent of the building face including wall signs, except that no high intensity colors, neon colors or fluorescent colors shall be used on exterior surfaces of the building. 
c.  Bright, reflective, pure tone primary or secondary colors are permissible only in limited application as accent colors on door and window frames, moldings, cornices, canopies, awnings, signs, etc. This provision shall not be construed as a license to employ corporate imaging on the primary building facade. 
d.  No more than one color shall be used for visible roof surfaces; however, if more than one type of roofing material is used, the materials shall be varying hues of the same color. 
(5)  Auxiliary design standards. All structures shall be designed to incorporate no less than four of the architectural elements from the list below. Buildings over 50,000 square feet must include a minimum of five of the referenced architectural elements: 
a.  Canopies, awnings, porticos with colonnade or arcades; 
b.  Raised pilaster cornices (end columns at corner), or quoined corners; 
c.  Vertical elements (tower, cupola, lighthouse, turret, arches, etc.); 
d.  Accented windows and doors framed with smooth cobble, cast stone, limestone or other decorative masonry headers and sills; or dormer windows; 
e.  Outdoor patios and/or courtyards (landscaped and furnished); 
f.  Decorative ornamentation integrated into the building facade, such as corbels, medallions (non-signage), functioning clocks, niches, wrought iron, balconettes, gargoyles, or horizontal and rhythm patterned brickwork; 
g.  Other architectural features approved by the director. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.06.06 - Architectural standards for industrial structures. 
    The following apply to structures constructed in an industrial zoning district and proposing an industrial and/or manufacturing use, per the use chart of the zoning ordinance (section 106.05.01(b), "schedule of uses - nonresidential"): 
(1)  The main entry or office area of the building shall be articulated both horizontally and vertically by at least six feet or twenty percent of the adjacent wall length, whichever is greater. Building corners shall also be articulated, as approved by the director. 
(2)  Primary exterior facades which are clearly visible from a public street shall be constructed with a minimum ten percent Group A materials and up to 90 percent Group B materials. Group C materials may be used for accents. The Group A materials noted above shall be applied to corners, entries, and other areas in order to mitigate monotony and increase the aesthetic value. A minimum of two different materials shall be used. 
(3)  Secondary exterior facades NOT facing a public street may be constructed with up to 100 percent Group B materials. 
(4)  A uniform color scheme is required. Colors shall be neutrals, creams, pastels, or deep, rich, non-reflective, natural or earth-tone colors. 
(5)  Structures shall incorporate two of the auxiliary design standards listed in section 106.06.05(g)(5), above. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.06.07 - Architectural standards for specific structures. 
(a)  Gas pumps and fueling stations. 

(1)  Roofs of the associated pump canopy of convenience store buildings shall not be flat or straight-lined, and should be noticeably pitched or otherwise distinguished, subject to review and approval by the director. 
(2)  Canopy columns shall be fully encased with Category A masonry materials that are complimentary to the material and color used on the main building. 
(3)  The canopy band face shall be flat with no projections or stripes, shall not be of plastic and shall be generally a metal or masonry based material, be primarily one earth-tone color that matches or accents the primary building, shall not be backlit or otherwise illuminated or used as signage, and should generally be no greater than four feet in height, except as follows: 
a.  The canopy band face may utilize one small button logo on each face that can be internally illuminated, as long as each button logo does not exceed 15 square feet for bands three feet in height and 20 square feet for bands four feet in height, is generally as tall as it is wide, and does not protrude more than 18 inches from the canopy in any direction. 
b.  The canopy band face may utilize an external LED halo type light, if properly shielded/recessed and oriented downward/upward so that only the "wash" is visible. 
c.  The canopy band face may utilize internally illuminated rings, as long as the source is LED, it is flush with the band face and only protrudes nominally (up to a maximum of six inches), and the size of the ring does not exceed more than 25 percent for single rings and 50 percent for multiple rings of the thickness of the canopy band face. 
(4)  Exhaust valves for underground fuel storage tanks shall be designed to be located against a building, dumpster screening wall, or other structure to mitigate their visual impact and should be an earth-tone color. If impractical, the exhaust valves may be located in an interior landscape area, if properly screened, but should not be located in the exterior landscape buffer adjacent to the public right-of-way. 
(b)  Mechanical/electrical equipment. 
(1)  Exposed conduits, ladders, exhaust valves, utility boxes and drain spouts shall be a color matching the building, an accent color, or earth-tone color. 
(2)  Outside equipment, coolers, and/or other mechanical items shall be screened in accordance with the screening standards of the zoning ordinance, or be 100 percent enclosed with a Category A masonry finishing material matching the primary building. 
(3)  All new utilities shall be underground. 
(c)  Dumpster enclosures. 
(1)  Location. Dumpster enclosures shall be placed away from the public right-of-way to the greatest extent practical, allowing for ease of access and minimum pedestrian and vehicular conflict. Gates to the dumpster enclosure should not face the right-of-way and shall be closed at all times except when accessed. 
(2)  Minimum size. Dumpster enclosure shall be constructed a minimum of 12 feet wide and 14 feet deep for a single container and 25 feet wide and 14 feet deep for a double container - or of a sufficient size to adequately access the containers by the vehicles assigned that task. 
(3)  Landscaping and screening of dumpster enclosure. Screening of the dumpsters shall be of the same masonry material as the primary structure and be a minimum of eight feet in height. Evergreen shrubs, 24 inches in height at the time of planting, shall be planted on the three solid masonry sides of the dumpster enclosure, spaced three feet on center. 
(4)  Recycling encouraged. New developments greater than three acres in size are encouraged to include a recycling container along with the required dumpsters for trash. 
(d)  Buildings that include bay doors. 
(1)  Orientation. Bay doors shall not be oriented toward the right-of-way. 
(2)  Screening of bay doors. If bay doors are located perpendicular to the right-of-way, a screening wall shall be provided along the side of the property that faces the bays. This screening wall shall be of masonry materials to match the primary structure and be a minimum of six feet in height and a maximum of eight feet in height. The location of the screening wall shall extend to the front façade of the primary structure. 
(3)  Exception from screening. Structures that include bay doors located in the LI Light Industrial and HI Heavy Industrial zoning districts are not required to screen the bay doors. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.06.08 - Special area and height regulations. 
(a)  Roof-mounted equipment. Necessary mechanical appurtenances (such as chimneys, cooling towers, vent stacks, etc.), parapet walls, gables, and false mansards shall not extend more than six feet above the height limit established by the zoning district. 
(b)  Special features. Public or semi-public institutional buildings (e.g. schools, churches, government), where permitted, may erect special architectural features (steeples, domes, etc.) to a height not exceeding 75 feet. 
(c)  Designated rights-of-way. Where an official right-of-way line has been established for future widening or opening of a street upon which a lot abuts, then the depth or width of a yard shall be measured from such official line to the nearest line of the building. 
(d)  Unobstructed air space. Every part of a required yard shall be open from its lowest point to the sky unobstructed, except for the ordinary projection of sills, belt courses, cornices, chimneys, buttresses, ornamental features, and eaves; and provided, however, that none of the above projections shall extend from the primary structure into a minimum side or rear yard more than four feet; provided further that a structure attached to the primary structure which is open on at least three sides of 200 square feet or less may project a maximum of ten feet into the required rear yard. For the purposes of this section, insect screening is considered open. However, no part of the open structure may be closer than ten feet to the rear property line. 
(e)  Fire escapes. An open fire escape may project into a required side yard not more than half the width of such yard and not more than four feet from the building. Fire escapes, solid floored balconies and enclosed outside stairways may not project more than four feet into the rear yard. 
(f)  Location of dwellings and buildings. Only one main building for single-family, two-family, or townhouse use with permitted accessory buildings may be located upon a lot of record. Every dwelling shall face a front upon a public street, or approved place, other than an alley. Where a lot is used for retail, commercial, industrial, purposes, or a combination of same, more than one main building may be located upon the lot. 
(g)  Sight triangles. 
(1)  All sight/visibility triangle distances shall be measured from the intersection edges of the curb, or where there is no curb, from the end of the pavement or gravel, unless otherwise specified. 
(2)  Nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially impede vision over a height of two feet above the centerline grades of the intersection streets in the sight triangle. Trees that encroach into the sight triangle must be limbed up to 14 feet to allow the safe passage of emergency vehicles. 
(3)  Street Intersections. Where two streets meet, the intersection shall have a sight triangle of thirty (30) feet on each street from the point of intersection at the curb. 
(4)  Street to alley intersection. Where an alley intersects with a street, the intersection shall have a sight triangle of 15 feet on each leg from the point of intersection at the curb. 
(5)  Driveway to street. Where a driveway intersects with a street, the intersection shall have a sight triangle of 15 feet along the street and 15 feet along the driveway from point of intersection. 
(6)  Driveway to alley. Where a driveway intersects with an alley, the intersection shall have a sight triangle of six feet on each leg from the point of intersection. 
(7)  The director may require additional sight distances to be maintained where specific conditions render such provisions necessary to provide for the public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Secs. 106.06.09, 106.06.10 - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LANDSCAPING AND TREE PRESERVATION 

Sec. 106.06.11 - Landscaping general administration. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of this section to establish certain regulations pertaining to landscaping within the Town of Little Elm. The town recognizes that landscaping can be a significant expense to businesses and residents. At the same time, landscaping improves the livability of residential neighborhoods, enhances the appearance and customer attraction of commercial areas, increases property values, improves the compatibility of adjacent uses, screens undesirable views, and can reduce air and noise pollution. Furthermore, these regulations provide standards and criteria for new landscaping which are intended to promote the value of property, enhance the welfare, and improve the physical appearance of the town. 
(b)  Scope. 
(1)  The standards and criteria contained within this section are deemed to be minimum standards and shall apply to all new development and existing developments that are expanding or redeveloping 30 percent or more of that development. In addition, any project authorized as a planned development (PD) must comply with the standards set forth in the PD. In unique situations, the director shall have the ability to review and modify the applicability of these standards to proposed development. 
(2)  The official tree board for the Town of Little Elm shall be the planning and zoning commission. 
(c)  Enforcement. The provision of this section shall be administered and enforced by the director. If, at any time after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy (CO), the approved landscaping is found to be in nonconformance to the standards and criteria of this section or to the approved landscape plan, the director shall issue notice to the owner, citing the violation and describing what action is required to comply with this section. The owner, tenant or agent shall have 30 days from the date of said notice to restore the landscaping as required. If the landscaping is not restored within the allotted time, such person shall be in violation of the ordinance from which this article derives and is subject to fines and the loss of the CO. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Prior to the issuance of a building, paving or construction permit for any use other than single-family dwellings, a landscape plan shall be submitted to and approved by the community development department. In the event that the proposed development requires an approved site plan or master development plan, final approval shall not be granted until a landscape plan is submitted and approved. 
(2)  Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy (CO) for any building or structure, all screening and landscaping shall be in place in accordance with the landscape plan required this section. 
(3)  In any case in which a CO is sought at a time in which the director determines that it would be impractical to plant trees, shrubs or grass, or to lay turf, a CO may be issued notwithstanding the fact that the landscaping required by the landscape plan has not been completed provided the applicant deposits cash in an escrow account in the amount of the estimated cost of landscaping that complies with this article. Such escrow deposit shall be conditioned upon the installation of all required landscaping within six months of the date of the application and shall give the town the right to draw upon the escrow deposit to complete the said landscaping if the applicant fails to do so. 
(e)  Tree removal/alteration. Prior to the removal or the critical alteration of any protected tree in the town, an application for tree removal permit must be submitted and approved, unless otherwise exempt under a provision of the ordinance from which this section derives. 
(1)  Tree removal permit. Any tree survey proposing the removal of a protected tree or trees shall be accompanied by a tree removal application. The burden shall be upon the applicant to show the necessity for any and all trees proposed for removal. 
(2)  Fees. All tree removal applications shall be accompanied by a check made payable to the Town of Little Elm in the amount specified by town council. 
(3)  Authority for review. The director shall be responsible for the review and approval of all permit applications for tree removal submitted in accordance with the requirements specified herein. 
(4)  Denial. The director shall deny a tree removal application if it is determined that any of the following conditions exist: 
a.  Removal of the tree is not reasonably required in order to conduct anticipated activities or to develop the property; or 
b.  A reasonable accommodation can be made to preserve the tree; or 
c.  The purpose and intent of this chapter is not being met by the applicant. 
(5)  Appeals. Any decision made may be appealed to the planning and zoning commission acting as the tree board. All decisions made by the commission shall be final and binding. 
(6)  Permit expiration. Permits for tree removal issued in connection with a building permit shall be valid for the period of that building permit's term. Permit(s) for tree removal not issued in connection with a building permit shall become void 180 days after the issue date on the permit. 
(f)  Tree survey required. All grading permits, building permits, tree removal permits, and any other development and construction permits shall contain a tree survey of the subject property, or a note on the landscape plan stating that no protected trees are located on-site. 
(1)  Tree survey requirements. Tree surveys shall: 
a.  Include all individual trees which have a DBH of six inches or greater or which are otherwise noteworthy because of species, age, size or rarity. 
b.  Contain a tree location map identifying each tree by its caliper size (at DBH), common name, scientific species categorization, whether the tree is located in a floodplain or not, and whether the tree is proposed to be removed, transplanted/relocated, or preserved. 
c.  Illustrate the location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures, floodplains, pools, and other existing or proposed improvements for the site, including the limits of construction line, if applicable. 
d.  The name and phone number or arborist, licensed surveyor, or landscape architect who prepared the survey. 
e.  These requirements may be modified by the director as needed to administer the ordinance from which this division derives. Upon prior approval by the director, the map exhibit may be limited only to the applicable portion of the site. An aerial photograph may be allowed if it clearly meets these requirements and the intent of the ordinance. 
(g)  Exceptions. 
(1)  No person, directly or indirectly, shall cut down, destroy, remove or move, or effectively destroy through damaging or other means, any protected tree situated on property regulated by this division without first obtaining a tree removal permit unless otherwise specified in this division. 
(2)  A tree removal permit and tree mitigation requirements shall not be required under any of the following circumstances: 
a.  Private property. An individually platted parcel zoned for residential uses and used as a homestead shall be exempt from the tree protection and replacement requirements of this division as it pertains to that residential property, until such time as the property is no longer used as a single-family residence. 
b.  Damaged/diseased trees. The tree is dead, diseased, damaged beyond the point of recovery, in danger of falling, or endangers the public health, welfare or safety, as determined by the director. This would include removal of a diseased tree by the town to reduce the chance of spreading the disease to adjacent healthy trees. This exception does not apply to newly planted trees that have died that are part of landscape plan, nor native trees that have short shelf lives. 
c.  Public infrastructure. Rights-of-way, capital improvement projects, bridges, and other activity conducted by a municipal entity, whether leased or owned, excluding property used for administration offices or functions. 
d.  Utility service interruption. The tree has disrupted a public utility service due to a tornado, storm, flood, or other act of God. Removal shall be limited to the portion of the tree reasonably necessary to reestablish and maintain reliable utility service. 
e.  Business interests. The following business ventures shall be exempt from the requirements specified herein as follows: 
1.  Landscape nursery. All licensed plant or tree nurseries shall be exempt from the tree protection and replacement requirements and from the tree removal permit requirements only in relation to those trees planted and growing on the premises which are so planted and growing for the sale to the general public. 
2.  Golf course . Golf courses shall be exempt from the tree protection and replacement requirements and from the tree removal permit requirements for removal of protected trees within areas designated as tee boxes, fairways or greens. All other areas shall be subject to these requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.06.12 - Landscaping definitions. 
    Berm. An earthen mound designed to provide visual interest, screen undesirable views and/or decrease noise levels. 
    Bubbler. An irrigation type that allows water to gently soak into the ground with minimal erosion or loss of water. 
    Buffer. The use of landscaping (other than grass on flat terrain), either alone or in conjunction with berms, walls or decorative fences that at least partially and periodically obstruct the view from the street, in a continuous manner, of vehicular use areas, parking lots and their parked cars and detention ponds. 
    Caliper. The diameter of a tree trunk measured 12 inches above ground level. The caliper of a multi-trunk tree is determined by the full caliper of the largest trunk, plus half the caliper of the other trunks. This measurement is used for newly planted trees. 
    Critical root zone. The area of undisturbed natural soil around a tree defined by a concentric circle with a radius equal to the distance from the trunk to the outermost portion of the drip line. 
    DBH. Diameter-at-breast-height (caliper) is calculated by measuring the tree trunk diameter in inches at a height of four and one-half feet above the ground. If a tree splits into multiple trunks below four and one-half feet, the tree shall be measured in two places, the narrowest point beneath the split and sum of the calipers of the trunks immediately above the split. Whichever is the greater measurement is to be the measurement applied. This measurement is used for existing trees. 
    Director. The director of development services of the Town of Little Elm and includes his or her designee. 
    Drip line. A vertical line run through the outermost portion of the canopy (leafy portion) of a tree and extending to the ground. 
    Drought tolerant/low water demand plant. The ability of a plant to be drought tolerant is primarily due to the plant's ability to limit water loss through the leaves and acquire more water through the roots. Plants have developed several mechanisms to reduce water loss, many of which can be recognized in native and cultivated plants. Characteristics of drought tolerant plants include: small, narrow, or pinnate leaves; fuzzy surfaces; resinous surfaces; leathery leaves; and/or succulence. 
    Green. An open space, available for unstructured recreation. A green may be spatially defined by streets, landscaping, and/or building frontages. Its landscape shall consist of lawn and trees. 
    Groundcover. Low growing plants, deciduous or evergreen species that cover the ground and used instead of turf. Plants that generally do not exceed 18 inches in height are classified as groundcover. 
    Impervious. A substance that does not allow the passage of water through it. 
    Irrigation system . An automatic watering system designed for watering landscaping and landscaped areas for a specified amount of time at a specified time of day. Irrigation systems are typically used to conserve water and time. All irrigation systems shall be equipped with an approved backflow prevention device to protect the water supply (if connected to Little Elm water supply) and a freeze and rain sensor. 
    Landscaped area. The area within the boundaries of a given lot or, where applicable, the adjoining street right-of-way, which is devoted to and consists of plant material, including, but not limited to, grass, trees, shrubs, flowers, vines and other groundcover, native plant materials, planters, brick, stone, natural forms, water forms, aggregate and other landscape features. 
    Landscaping. Any live plant material such as trees, shrubs, groundcover and grass used in spaces void of any impervious material or building structure and areas left in their natural state. 
    Large canopy tree. Sometimes evergreen, but more commonly deciduous tree planted for its high crown of foliage or overhead canopy, a large woody perennial having one or more self-supporting trunks and numerous branches reaching a mature height of at least 30 feet and a mature spread of at least 25 feet. See the recommended plant materials chart for a listing of acceptable large canopy tree varieties. 
    Low water use irrigation system. The term low water use irrigation system is used to describe any low pressure system that applies water in a controlled area. The most important feature of these systems is that it applies water very slowly and allows the water to be absorbed fully into the soil with minimal evaporation loss. 
    Ornamental grasses. A grass type that is generally considered in the landscaping industry to have ornamental qualities, and which is typically grown in a flower garden. Typically grows to a height of between six inches and 36 inches and does not tolerate being cut below six inches. These said grasses are usually used as an accent grass and not the main coverage of a yard. These grasses are commonly grown for the display of their leaves or flowers and may contain a variety of colors depending on the season. 
    Parkway. The area of public right-of-way located between the curb or edge of pavement and the property line or between the curb or edge of pavement and the sidewalk. 
    Plaza. An open space available for civic purposes and public commercial activities. A plaza is spatially defined by adjacent building frontages. Its landscape shall consist primarily of pavement, but may include shade in the form of planters with small ornamental trees or structure. Plazas frequently utilize fountains or water features. 
    Protective fencing. Snow fencing, chain link fence, orange vinyl construction fencing, or other similar fencing which is approximately four feet in height. This fencing is meant to be of a temporary nature. 
    Screening. A technique used to protect and separate uses and site functions from one another for the purpose of decreasing adverse noise, wind or visual impacts and to provide privacy (e.g., walls, fences, berms, landscaping). 
    Shrub. A self-supporting woody perennial plant of low to medium height characterized by multiple stems and branches continuous from the base, usually not more than ten feet in height at maturity. 
    Sight triangle (visibility triangle). The area of unrestricted visibility required at a corner to allow for the observation of other vehicular movement, pedestrians and cyclists in the proximity of intersecting streets and sidewalks. 
    Small ornamental tree. A relatively low growing tree at least seven feet at planting, that may grow to a mature height of up to 25 feet and a mature spread of up to 25 feet and provide color due to its fruit (berries), flowers or leaves. See the recommended plant materials chart for a listing of acceptable small ornamental tree varieties. 
    Square. An open space available for unstructured recreation and civic purposes. A square is spatially defined by building frontages or streets. Its landscape shall consist of paths, lawns and trees, formally disposed. Squares shall be located at the intersection of important thoroughfares. 
    Topsoil. Topsoil is the surface layer of soil containing partly decomposed organic debris, and which is usually high in nutrients. This term may also apply to good quality soil sold at nurseries and garden centers. 
    Tree, protected. Any tree that has a trunk DBH of six inches or greater at a height of four and one-half feet above the ground or which is otherwise noteworthy because of species, age, size or rarity. 
    Tree valuation. An established value set by the National Arborist Association per the tree valuation schedule, set forth herein to be used for all purposes of this article. See section 106.06.22(h), "tree mitigation." 
    Turf grass. Grass commonly used in regularly cut lawns or play areas, such as, but not limited to: Bermuda, St. Augustine, Fescue and Ryegrass blends. 
    Urban tree. A tree specifically selected for its ability to withstand harsh urban conditions, its relatively low maintenance, its suitability for use in the streetscape through its noninvasive root system and upright branching habit, and its associated imagery and overtones. See the recommended plant materials chart for a listing of acceptable urban tree varieties. 
    Weeds. Vegetation that because of its height and growth pattern is objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary; this term specifically excludes ornamental grasses, shrubs, bushes and trees, cultivated flowers and cultivated crops. 
    Xeriscaping. A method of landscaping that emphasizes water conservation, accomplished by following sound horticultural and landscaping practices, such as planning and design, soil improvement, limited turf areas, use of mulches, use of low water demand plants, efficient irrigation practices and appropriate maintenance. 
    Yard, front. The area extending across the front of a lot between the side lot lines and the minimum horizontal distance between the street, the main building or any projections thereof other than the projections of uncovered steps, balconies or porches. On corner lots, the front yard shall face the street on which the lot has the shortest dimension. 
    Yard, rear. The area extending across the rear of a lot and being the required minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the main building or any projections thereof other than the projections of uncovered steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches. 
    Yard, side. The area between the main building and the side line of the lot, and extending from the required front yard to the required rear yard and being the minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the side of the main buildings or any projections thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.06.13 - Landscaping plans. 
(a)  Landscape plan submittal. Landscape plans shall be submitted to the community development department as a part of the site plan submittal. The director shall review such plans for compliance with the criteria of these regulations. If the plans are not in accord, they shall be disapproved and shall be accompanied by a written statement setting forth the changes necessary for compliance. 
(b)  Landscape plan requirements. Landscape plans must be prepared and sealed by a registered landscape architect and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Minimum scale of one inch equals 50 feet; 
(2)  A symbol indicating north; 
(3)  A tree survey with the location, size and species of all on-site trees; or a note indicating that no protected trees exist on-site; 
(4)  Location of all plant and landscaping material to be used including plants, paving, benches, screens, fountains, statues or other landscape features; 
(5)  The species, size, spacing and quantities of all plant material to be used in a tabular form (shall be from the recommended plant materials list); 
(6)  A list of all plant material proposed to be used that does not come from the recommended plant materials list. This plant material must also be specifically designated on the landscape plan; 
(7)  The date of the landscape plan, including any revision dates; 
(8)  Layout and description of irrigation systems including placement of water sources. A Texas License Irrigation Seal is necessary on all irrigation plans; 
(9)  Description of detention and retention facilities (if applicable); 
(10)  Description of maintenance provision for the landscape plan; 
(11)  Person(s) responsible for the preparation of landscape plan, including the landscape architect's seal; 
(12)  Dimensions of all required landscape setbacks; 
(13)  Description of any hardscape features; 
(14)  Parking lot layout with location of dumpster(s) and dumpster screen(s); 
(15)  An analysis table of ordinance requirements and the associated landscaping (including point requirements, interior and perimeter landscaping); 
(16)  Indication that all landscaped areas, including parkways and medians, will have a minimum of six inches of topsoil; 
(17)  Additional information as deemed necessary to adequately evaluate the landscape plan. 
(18)  Dumpster enclosure(s) shall be shown on the landscape plan. Dumpster enclosures shall not be seen from the public right-of-way. Screening of the dumpsters shall be of the same masonry material as the primary structure and be a minimum of eight feet in height. Evergreen shrubs, 24 inches in height at the time of planting, shall be planted on the three solid masonry sides of the dumpster enclosure, spaced three feet on center. 
(c)  Landscape plan standard notes. The following standard notations shall be placed on all landscape plans: 
(1)  The owner, tenant and their agent, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping. All required landscaping shall be maintained in a neat and orderly manner at all times. This shall include mowing, edging, pruning, fertilizing, watering, weeding and such activities common to the maintenance of landscaping. 
(2)  Landscape areas shall be kept free of trash, litter, weeds and other such material or plants not a part of the landscaping. 
(3)  No substitutions for plant materials are allowed without written approval by the director and acknowledged by an approval stamp on the landscape plan. 
(4)  The right-of-way adjacent to required landscape areas shall be maintained by the adjacent property owner in the same manner as the required landscape area. All driveways will maintain visibility as approved by the director. All plantings intended for erosion control will be maintained. The town may require revegetation to prevent erosion or slippage. 
(5)  All plant material shall be maintained in a healthy and growing condition as is appropriate for the season of the year. Plant materials which die shall be replaced with plant material of similar variety and size, within 30 days or a date approved by the director, based on current seasons and weather conditions (e.g. drought or freeze). 
(6)  When power lines are present, trees shall not be planted underneath and should be oriented in a manner to avoid conflict. Substitution of plant material is not allowed without prior written authorization from the director. 
(7)  All required landscape areas shall be provided with an automatic underground irrigation system with rain and freeze sensors and evapotranspiration (ET) weather-based controllers and said irrigation system shall be designed by a qualified professional and installed by a licensed irrigator. 
(8)  All trees are to be equipped with a bubbler irrigation system. 
(9)  Required landscaped open areas and disturbed soil areas shall be completely covered with living plant material, per the landscape ordinance. 
(10)  All streetscape furniture (benches, bollards, lampposts, trash receptacles, patio furniture, bike racks, etc.) shall be a chip and flake resistant metal, decorative, and generally black "storm cloud" in color. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.06.14 - Landscaping standards. 
(a)  Quality. Plant materials used in conformance with the provisions of this article shall conform to the standards of the American Standard for Nursery Stock, or equal thereto. Grass seed, sod and other material shall be clean and reasonably free of weeds and noxious pests and insects. 
(b)  Quantity. The quantity of plant material required by this article must equal or exceed the minimum number of plants required by this article. Unless otherwise noted on the approved landscape plan, required plant material can be placed in groupings or utilized in appropriate planting designs that are proposed by the landscape architect and approved by the town. All required landscaped open areas shall be completely covered with living plant material. Mulch and rock can be used in conjunction with shrub and tree plantings in smaller areas. 
(c)  Trees. Trees required by this article shall be from the recommended plant materials list or a species recommended by the landscape architect and approved on the landscape plan. All required trees shall be common to this area of Texas, and shall have a single trunk limbed up to six feet. Trees shall be of a minimum of three caliper inches when measured 12 inches above ground at time of planting. When the type of tree required is unclear, it is assumed that a large canopy tree is required, unless otherwise approved by the director. 
(1)  No more than 25 percent of the required trees shall be of the same species for any tree type (large, small, or urban) in order to discourage monocultures and the spread of disease. 
(2)  Three trees from the small ornamental tree list may be substituted for one large canopy tree, not to exceed 25 percent of the required large trees. 
(3)  Large canopy trees must be planted four feet or greater from curbs, sidewalks, utility lines, screening walls and/or other structures. Small trees can be placed closer than four feet, with approval on landscape plan. Utility installation that includes common trench and conduit banks is exempt from the large canopy tree planting distance requirements. 
(4)  Trees and shrubs shall not overhang or encroach upon walkways, drives, parking areas, and traffic signs to the extent that they interfere with the intended use of these facilities. 
(5)  Tree wells shall be a minimum 20 square feet in size with generally similar lengths and widths. 
(6)  No landscaping shall be required for the interior of structured parking facilities. 
(d)  Shrubs and hedges. Evergreen screening plants shall be at least 24 inches high at time of planting and shall be a type and species on the recommended plant list that will attain a minimum height of three feet within 18 months of planting and will form a continuous hedge. Sporadic breaks in the hedge row may be approved to achieve unique designs. 
(e)  Vines. Vines shall be a minimum of two feet in height immediately after planting and may be used in conjunction with fences, screens or walls to meet screening requirements as specified. 
(f)  Groundcover. Groundcovers used in lieu of grass in whole and in part shall be planted in such a manner as to present a finished appearance and reasonably complete coverage within one year of planting. 
(g)  Lawn grass. Grass areas shall be sodded, except that large, expansive lawn areas may be hydromulched, plugged, sprigged or seeded with approval from the director, as long as the edges, adjacent to the curb and within six feet of the sidewalk or curb, are sodded, to reduce water and soil runoff. 
(h)  Hardscape. Horizontal hardscape elements, where required, should utilize smooth cobble river stone, where appropriate. 
(i)  Credit for existing trees. Any protected trees preserved on a site meeting the herein specifications shall be credited toward meeting the tree requirement of landscaping provisions that apply to the area where the tree is preserved. Trees of exceptional quality due to size, large canopy cover, trunk diameter, rareness, age or species may, at the discretion of the director, be credited as two trees under the minimum landscape area requirements. 
(j)  Compliance letter. Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy (CO), a letter must be submitted to the director from the landscape architect indicating the site is in compliance with the approved landscape plan. 
(k)  Detention/retention ponds. Stormwater control devices, such as detention/retention basins and ponds, shall be landscaped to reduce their visual impacts. Such landscaping shall not negatively impact the operation of such devices, but may include suitable planting materials that will control siltation and erosion, and in all cases shall be sodded. Ponds shall be designed in one of the following ways, subject to review and approval by the town engineer: 
(1)  Basic (dry) ponds shall have a decorative retaining wall or slopes no greater than four-to-one (4:1), shall provide a large canopy tree each 30 linear feet of the perimeter, and shall provide a minimum four-inch-high black tubular metal (wrought iron style) fence around the perimeter with evergreen screening. 
(2)  Amenity detention (dry) ponds shall be designed in a manner to be an amenity to the development by providing a gentle six-to-one (6:1) slope (a partial decorative stone retaining wall may be allowed), a large canopy tree for each 30 linear feet of the perimeter (which may be clustered), benches and trash receptacles. 
(3)  Amenity retention (wet) ponds shall be designed in a manner to be an amenity to the development by providing a gentle six-to-one (6:1) slope (a partial decorative stone retaining wall may be allowed), a large canopy tree for each 30 linear feet of the perimeter (which may be clustered), benches and trash receptacles. Such ponds shall include aeration to ensure water quality. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.06.15 - Plant list. 
(a)  Approved list of plant materials. All required plant material, including required residential trees, shall be from the following list unless alternate plant materials are approved through the landscape plan: 
ARTICLE VI, TABLE D - PLANT LIST, APPROVEDLARGE CANOPY TREES Bald Cypress Bigtooth Maple Burr Oak Caddo Maple Cedar Elm Chinquapin Oak Chinese Pistache Dawn Redwood Ginkgo Homestead Elm Italian Stone Pine Lacebark Elm Live Oak Montezuma Cypress Pecan Pond Cypress Red Oak Shantung Maple Southern Magnolia Texas Ash Trident Red Maple Urbanite Ash SMALL ORNAMENTAL TREESAmerican Smoketree Carolina Buckthorn Crepe Myrtle (tree form) Desert Willow Dogwood Eve's Necklace Flameleaf Sumac Golden Raintree Italian Cypress Japanese Maple Lacey Oak Mexican Buckeye Possumhaw Holly Redbud Savannah Holly Teddy Bear Magnolia Viburnum Vitex Wax Myrtle Yaupon Holly URBAN TREESAllee (Lacebark) Elm Chinese Pistache Ginkgo Homestead Elm Lacey Oak Pond Cypress Shantung Maple Teddy Bear Magnolia Urbanite Ash DESERT TREESChinese Windmill Dwarf Palmetto Mexican Blue Palm Mexican Sabal Palm Pindo Palm Washington Fan Palm EVERGREEN SCREENING SHRUBS (low - less than 5 ft.)Agarito Boxwood Dwarf Abelia Dwarf Burford Holly Elaeagnus (Silverberry) Euonymus Grayleaf Cotoneaster Indian Hawthorn Juniper (several varieties) Nandina Texas Sage EVERGREEN SCREENING SHRUBS (high - 5' or greater)Austrian Black Pine Cleyera Eastern Red Cedar Foster Holly Leyland Cypress Little Gem Magnolia Nelly R. Steven's Holly Sweet Viburnum Waxleaf Ligustrum OTHER APPROVED SHRUBSAmerican Beautyberry Apache Plume Aralia Aucuba Autumn Sage Azalea Barberry Black Dalea Burning Bush Chinese Fringe Flower Desert Spoon Dwarf Crepe Myrtle Flowering Quince Holly (multiple varieties) Horizontal Cotoneaster Leatherleaf Mahonia Pampas Grass Red Yucca Rose (shrub form) Spirea Turk's Cap VINESBoston Ivy Carolina Jasmine Confederate Star Jasmine Coral Honeysuckle Crossvine English Ivy Japanese Honeysuckle Rose (climbing variety) Trumpet Vine Virginia Creeper GROUNDCOVERAjuga Asian Jasmine Bermuda Grass Buffalo Grass Creeping Juniper Fountain Grass Liriope (Monkey Grass) Mondo Grass Purple Wintercreeper St. Augustine Tall Fescue Zoysia Article VI, Table D - Plant List, ProhibitedBois D'Arc Bradford Pear Catalpa Cottonwood Hackberry Lombardy Poplar Mesquite Mimosa Mulberry Red Tip Photinia Siberian Elm Silver Maple  
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 10-20-2009) 
Sec. 106.06.16 - Residential landscape requirements. 
(a)  Single-Family requirements. 
(1)  Landscape plans. Landscape plans are not required for detached single-family homes or duplexes; however, the following standards must be met prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  Irrigation required. All front yards must be irrigated with an automatic underground irrigation system with rain and freeze sensors and evapotranspiration (ET) weather-based controllers. 
(3)  Tree bubblers required. All trees are to be equipped with a bubbler irrigation system. 
(4)  Yard. All residential lawns must be covered with vegetation, including grass, living groundcover, mulch, and/or decorative stone, in order to help hold the soil in place and prevent erosion. Mulch, living groundcover, gravel, rock gardens, and decorative stone may be used for patterns, beds, erosion control, and in other limited application; however their use shall not be the predominant groundcover. 
a.  Stone, gravel and rock. If stone, gravel, decorative rock, crushed granite or other non-plant derived materials are used in a residential front yard, no more than 30 percent of the yard area may be made up of these materials. Non-plant derived materials should be used as an accent to the areas of the lawn made up of sod, living ground cover, low bushes or plants, or mulch and shall include vegetative plantings within the stone/rock beds. In no case shall stone, gravel, rock or other non-plant derived materials be installed so that an impermeable surface area is created. 
b.  Artificial or synthetic turf (e.g. AstroTurf(tm)). Artificial or synthetic turf is prohibited in any yard that can be viewed from a public street. 
(5)  Vegetation requirements. Trees shall be planted to meet the total number of caliper inches referenced in the table below. Required large trees shall not be smaller than three caliper inches; required small trees shall not be smaller than two caliper inches in size. All plants shall be selected from the approved plant list. Trees planted in the front yard or side yard on a corner shall be planted in the area between residence and the sidewalk. No trees shall be planted in the area between the sidewalk and the street pavement. 
ARTICLE VI, TABLE EVEGETATION REQUIRED PER RESIDENTIAL LOTWidth of Lot Number of 
Trees in Front 
Yard Number of 
Trees in Rear 
Yard Total Number 
of Shrubs 30-49-foot lot, front or J-swing entry 1 large 1 large/1 small 8 30-49-foot lot, rear entry 1 large 1 large 10 30-49-foot lot, corner lot 1 large/1 small 1 large 10 50-69-foot lot, front or J-swing entry 1 large/1 small 1 large/1 small 12 50-69-foot lot, rear entry 2 large/1 small 1 large 15 50-69-foot lot, corner lot 3 large/1 small 1 large 15 70-89-foot lot, front or J-swing entry 1 large/2 small 2 large/1 small 18 70-89-foot lot, rear entry 2 large, 1 small 1 large/2 small 22 70-89-foot lot, corner lot 3 large, 1 small 1 large/2 small 22 90-foot lot and larger, front or J-swing entry 2 large, 2 small 2 large/2 small 20 90-foot lot and larger, rear entry 2 large, 2 small 2 large/2 small 24 90-foot lot and larger, corner lot 3 large, 2 small 2 large/2 small 24 Cul-de-sac lots 1  
Note 1. On a cul-de-sac lot or a lot with a pronounced curve limiting the area of the front yard, one large tree may be moved from the front to the rear lot but must be replaced with a small tree in the front yard. 
(6)  Hardscape. All residential developments submitted after the adoption of this chapter shall be required to include stained and stamped crosswalks at the entrances to the development. 
(7)  Residential development entries. The landscape island at the main or secondary entrances to the residential development shall be within a platted common area lot to be owned and maintained by the homeowners association (HOA). Landscaped entries shall be a minimum size of six feet by 30 feet and may include a monument entrance sign. Entry designs shall be subject to the approval of any HOA and the director. 
(b)  Townhome requirements. 
(1)  Minimum front yard landscaping. Townhome frontages shall be required to landscape a minimum of six feet between the edges of the sidewalk and the primary building facade, excluding access to sidewalks, stairs, stoops, porches and patios. This area shall be landscaped with groundcover, low shrubs and a small ornamental tree. 
(2)  Minimum open space. Open space and landscaping for townhome developments: 
a.  A minimum open space for a townhome development shall be an area equal to 15 percent of the building's footprint. 
b.  A minimum of three large canopy trees and six small ornamental trees shall be provided for every 1,600 square feet of open space area. Four hundred square feet of shade structure may replace the requirement for one shade tree. 
(3)  Hardscape. All townhome developments submitted after the adoption of this ordinance shall be required to include stained and stamped crosswalks from parking lots or structures to the main entrances of the buildings and other areas, as determined to be appropriate by the director. 
(4)  Stone, gravel and rock. If stone, gravel, decorative rock, crushed granite or other non-plant derived materials are used in a residential front yard, no more than twenty percent (20%) of the yard area may be made up of these materials. Non-plant derived materials should be used as an accent to the areas of the lawn made up of sod, living ground cover, low bushes or plants, or mulch and shall include vegetative plantings within the stone/rock beds. In no case shall stone, gravel, rock or other non-plant derived materials be installed so that an impermeable surface area is created. 
(5)  Artificial or synthetic turf. Artificial or synthetic turf is prohibited. 
(6)  Entrances to townhome developments. The landscape island at the main or secondary entrances to the townhome development shall be within a platted common area lot to be owned and maintained by the homeowners association (HOA). Landscaped entries shall be a minimum size of six feet by 20 feet and may include a monument entrance sign. Entry designs shall be subject to the approval of any HOA and the director. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.06.17 - Multifamily landscape requirements. 
(a)  Minimum open space. New multifamily developments shall use the following regulations: 
(1)  Open space per bedroom. Each lot or parcel of land used for multiple-family residences shall provide on the same lot or parcel of land usable open space, in accordance with the table below: 
ARTICLE VI, TABLE F MULTIFAMILY OPEN SPACE REQUIRED PER BEDROOMNumber of Bedrooms 1 Open Space Required 1 400 square feet Each additional bedroom over 1 Additional 300 square feet  
Note 1. Each manufactured home site in the MH-2 district will be calculated as a two-bedroom unit for the open space requirement. 
(2)  Minimum dimensions. Each open space area shall have a minimum dimension of not less than 30 feet. 
(3)  Minimum overall percentage of open space. No less than 15 percent of the required open space shall be arranged or located as a contiguous mass. This contiguous mass must be located within the required open space. 
(4)  Credits for amenities. In meeting this requirements, a credit of three square feet may be applied for each square foot utilized for: 
a.  Swimming pools and adjacent decks, patios or lounge areas within ten feet of a pool; 
b.  Developed and equipped children's play areas; 
c.  Usable portions of recreational buildings; and 
d.  Private balconies and enclosed patios with a minimum dimension of five square feet. 
Tennis courts are specifically excluded from this credit allowance. 
(5)  Credit for sloped areas. At the time of site plan approval, the planning and zoning commission and town council may give full or partial credit for open areas that exceed the maximum slope, if it is determined that such areas are environmentally significant and that their preservation would enhance the development. 
(6)  Access to public parks. At the time of site plan approval, the planning and zoning commission and town council may allow a credit not to exceed ten percent of the total required usable open space for adjacent and immediately accessible public parks. The combined credit for areas calculated at a three to one (3:1) basis and for public parks shall not exceed 50 percent of the total usable open space for an individual lot or parcel of land. 
(7)  Minimum number of trees in open space. One large canopy tree shall be provided per 2,000 square feet of required open space. 
(8)  Hardscape. All multifamily developments submitted after the adoption of this ordinance shall be required to include stained and stamped crosswalks from parking lots or structures to the main entrances of the buildings and other areas, as determined to be appropriate by the director. 
(9)  Stone, gravel and rock. If stone, gravel, decorative rock, crushed granite or other non-plant derived materials are used in a residential front yard, no more than 20 percent of the yard area may be made up of these materials. Non-plant derived materials should be used as an accent to the areas of the lawn made up of sod, living ground cover, low bushes or plants, or mulch and shall include vegetative plantings within the stone/rock beds. In no case shall stone, gravel, rock or other non-plant derived materials be installed so that an impermeable surface area is created. 
(10)  Mailboxes. When mailboxes are grouped or clustered, they may be located in the right-of-way. The exterior of the mailbox structure shall be masonry to match the main buildings and the roof made of metal materials or materials that match the main buildings. 
(11)  Artificial or synthetic turf. Artificial or synthetic turf is prohibited. 
(12)  Entrances to multifamily developments. The landscape island at the main or secondary entrances to the multifamily development shall be within a platted lot to be owned and maintained by the management company. Landscaped entries shall be a minimum size of six feet by 30 feet and may include a monument entrance sign. Entry designs shall be subject to the approval of the director. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.06.18 - Commercial landscape requirements. 
(a)  Interior landscape requirements. 
(1)  Minimum landscaped area. A minimum of ten percent of the gross vehicular use area shall be devoted to living landscape which includes grass, groundcover, plants, shrubs and trees. This is to be measured from the edge of the parking and/or driveway paving and sidewalks. Where practical, the majority of this landscaped area should be visible from the roadway. 
(2)  Minimum trees provided overall. There shall be a minimum of one large canopy tree planted for each 400 square feet or fraction thereof of required interior landscape area. Three small ornamental trees, a minimum of six feet in height and three inches in diameter, may be substituted for one required large canopy tree not to exceed 25 percent of the required large canopy trees. 
(3)  Parking lot islands and terminus row islands. Interior areas of parking lots shall contain planting islands located so as to best relieve the expanse of paving. Such islands shall contain at least one large canopy tree, and shall be located at the terminus of all parking rows. The remainder of the island space shall be landscaped with shrubs, lawn and living groundcover not to exceed three feet in height. Any trees located within a planting island may be counted towards the required number of interior trees. The minimum total area of such islands shall be nine feet by 18 feet, but may design the radii to facilitate traffic maneuverability. 
(4)  Parking lot island spacing. Planting islands shall not be spaced greater than every 12 spaces unless approved on the landscape plan in order to preserve existing trees and natural features or due to unique site features. In all cases, the total area requirements for landscaped islands for the respective parking areas shall be satisfied. 
(5)  Parking lot swales. In some cases, the use of landscaped swales in lieu of curbs and/or curb stops may be allowed. Appropriate drainage plans and plants must be submitted if this option is proposed. 
(6)  Big box parking lot walkway. "Big box" stores may, in lieu of providing a tree every 12 spaces, choose to provide a minimum ten-foot-wide continuous landscape island every eight single rows of parking, with a large canopy tree every 30 linear feet, subject to review and approval by the director. This does not waive the requirement for terminus islands and trees on parking rows. 
(7)  Entrances to big box stores. In "big box" developments of 50,000 square feet or more, an urban tree shall be placed in a tree grate or tree well every 30 feet on center within a minimum 12-foot-wide sidewalk along active storefronts and mixed use building fronts. Trees may be clustered so not to block the main entrance. Facade trees are not required in areas with an architectural arcade. 
(8)  Vehicular access drives. A small ornamental tree is required along major access lanes every 25 linear feet within a development where reasonable, subject to review and approval by the director. 
(9)  Pedestrian connections. One urban tree is required along internal pedestrian connections every 30 linear feet. 
(10)  Curbs and wheel stops. All landscaped areas will be protected by a raised four-inch concrete curb and/or wheel stop. Wheel stops are required for all perimeter parking spaces. Pavement will not be placed closer than four feet from the trunk of a tree unless approved by the director. 
(11)  Hardscape. All nonresidential developments submitted after the adoption of this ordinance shall be required to include stained and stamped crosswalks from parking lots or structures to the main entrances of the buildings and other areas, as determined to be appropriate by the director. 
(12)  Variety. The applicant is also encouraged to plant a variety of ornamental trees, shrubs and flowers in addition to the required plantings. Any permeable surface not occupied by trees, shrubs, planting beds, signs or other permitted fixtures shall be planted with turf or other living groundcover. 
(13)  Stone, gravel and rock. If stone, gravel, decorative rock, crushed granite or other non-plant derived materials are used in an interior landscape area, no more than 20 percent of the area may be made up of these materials. Non-plant derived materials should be used as an accent to the landscaped areas made up of sod, living ground cover, low bushes, plants, or mulch and may include vegetative plantings within the stone/rock beds. In no case shall stone, gravel, rock or other non-plant derived materials be installed so that an impermeable surface area is created. 
(14)  Artificial or synthetic turf prohibited (e.g. AstroTurf(tm)). Artificial turf is prohibited in interior landscape areas. 
(15)  Exception to interior landscape requirements. Industrial uses shall be exempt from the interior landscape requirements, subject to review and approval by the director. 
(b)  Perimeter landscape requirements. 
(1)  Vehicular screening from right-of-way. All vehicular use areas shall be screened from all abutting properties and the public right-of-way with a wall, fence, evergreen hedge, berm or other durable landscape barrier. Plants and shrubs used in living barriers shall be at least 24 inches high at time of planting and shall be a type and species from the recommended plant list that will attain a minimum height of three feet within 18 months of planting and will form a continuous hedge. Sporadic breaks in the hedge row may be approved to achieve unique designs. Any landscape barrier not containing live plants or trees shall be a minimum of three feet high at time of installation. 
(2)  Minimum landscape buffer along rights-of-ways. Except in the Lakefront District, for all residential, nonresidential and multiple-family parcels, a minimum 20-foot landscape buffer adjacent to the right-of-way is required. 
(3)  Landscape ROW buffer corner clip. For all nonresidential and multifamily parcels located at the intersection of two dedicated public rights-of-way (ROW), a minimum 20-foot landscape buffer shall be provided parallel to the corner clip right-of-way dedication. 
(4)  Minimum number of trees within ROW landscape buffers. Landscape buffers adjacent to the public right-of-way shall contain at least one large canopy tree each 30 linear feet or fraction thereof of street frontage, inclusive of driveways. Trees may be grouped or clustered to facilitate site design. 
(5)  Landscape buffers between properties. A perimeter landscape buffer of at least ten feet in width shall be maintained between adjacent properties. This landscaping can be reduced to five feet when abutting property of the same zoning. This buffer does not apply to various lots within a unified development. Accessways between lots may be permitted through all perimeter landscape areas. 
(6)  Minimum number of large trees within perimeter landscape buffers. Perimeter landscape buffers not adjacent to the public right-of-way shall contain at least one large canopy tree every 40 linear feet or fraction thereof when adjacent to another commercial use, and at least one large canopy tree every 25 linear feet when adjacent to residential uses or zoning. Trees may be grouped or clustered to facilitate site design and shall be appropriately staggered when adjacent to property of the same zoning. 
(7)  Minimum number of small trees within perimeter landscape buffers. For every five large canopy trees or fraction thereof required along the street frontage and perimeter, three ornamental trees shall also be provided. 
(8)  Stone, gravel and rock. If stone, gravel, decorative rock, crushed granite or other non-plant derived materials are used in a perimeter landscape area, no more than ten percent of the area may be made up of these materials. Non-plant derived materials should be used as an accent to the landscaped areas made up of sod, living ground cover, low bushes, plants, or mulch. In no case shall stone, gravel, rock or other non-plant derived materials be installed so that an impermeable surface area is created. 
(9)  Artificial or synthetic turf. Artificial or synthetic turf is prohibited in perimeter landscape areas. 
(c)  Landscape point system. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of the landscape point system is to afford developers the freedom to design interesting and unique landscaping to augment the architecture of the development. Developers are encouraged to be creative in selecting the amenity type to create unique and memorable features. 
(2)  Points shown on plan. Landscape plans must show a minimum number of points in order to obtain approval. Landscape points are determined by the size of the lot being developed. These requirements are in addition to the interior and perimeter landscaping requirements. 
ARTICLE VI, TABLE GNUMBER OF LANDSCAPE POINTS PER ACRESite Size Minimum Number of Points Required <3 acres 25 points Between 3 and 15 acres 30 points >15 acres 35 points  
(3)  List of amenities and points earned. The following is a list of landscape elements and their associated point value, subject to review and approval by the director: 
ARTICLE VI, TABLE HLANDSCAPE POINTS EARNED PER AMENITYAmenity Type/Size Number of 
Points Hardscaping, signage, or architectural features that include reference to Little Elm's lakefront character, such as use of sailboats or lighthouses in amenities 10 Enhanced entranceway paving (using pavers, cobble or different colored-stamped concrete) 5 Enhanced hardscape (stamped crosswalks, decorative cobble walkways, meandering sidewalks, etc.) 5 Enhanced landscaping (within development and at the entranceways of the development) 5 Enhanced site canopy (planting perimeter trees one per 30 feet AND locating a parking island every ten spaces) 5 Enhanced streetscape elements (e.g. decorative lampposts, receptacles, decorative bollards, etc.) 5 Use of street furniture (benches, tables and chairs) 5 Enhanced buffers: (providing a landscape buffer five feet more than what is required adjacent to street frontage and perimeter) 5 Open space provision greater than what is required (20 to 30 percent over minimum) 5 Buffer berms (providing 3-foot-high berms along the street frontage) 5 Use of shaded and decorative outdoor seating areas (benches, outdoor dining, etc.) 5 Use of masonry planters with irrigation (minimum 4) 5 Foundation plantings along 75 percent of the building's primary facade 5 Decorative entrance including a landscaped median entry which is a minimum eight feet in width and 60 feet long 5 Public art, small (obelisks, sculptures, statues, clock towers, water fountains, etc.) 5 Public art, large (obelisks, sculptures, statues, clock towers, water fountains, etc.) 10 Amenity detention pond (dry) 5 Amenity retention pond (wet with fountain feature) 10 Other (a developer may propose a unlisted landscape element if it meets the spirit and intent of the ordinance, subject to review and approval by the director) 5  
(4)  Developer discretion. The developer may use any combination of the aforementioned landscape elements to obtain the necessary number of points required for the development. Different lots and landscapes will lend themselves to different types of designs. These regulations attempt to encourage creativity, diversity and water conservation in landscaping. 
(5)  Scale, size, type. Elements, both in terms of quantity and quality, should be in scale with the development, as determined by the director. Multiple repetitions of an element can be awarded extra points, as determined by the director. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.06.19 - Thoroughfare and median landscaping. 
(a)  Thoroughfare parkway landscaping. 
(1)  Applicability. As thoroughfares in Little Elm are widened and/or improved, the town may elect to landscape the parkway. 
(2)  Definition of parkway. The "parkway" is defined as the undeveloped area included in the right-of-way that is located between the paved lanes and the private property line of adjacent districts. 
(3)  Minimum requirements for parkway landscaping: 
a.  All trees and plant materials shall be chosen from the town's approved plant list; 
b.  One canopy tree per 25 linear feet of parkway, with a minimum of four-inch caliper trunk, and a well-formed canopy that is typical of the species. Canopy trees shall be planted no closer than 30 feet from streetlights if located in the parkway and no closer than 15 feet from any overhead electrical line; 
c.  Two ornamental trees per 30 linear feet of parkway. Ornamental trees shall be a minimum two-inch caliper and eight feet in height at time of planting and shall be used primarily as accent trees near the median nose and dispersed among the larger canopy trees; 
d.  Ornamental and canopy trees need not be evenly spaced and may be clustered for a more pleasing aesthetic effect; 
e.  Since underground infrastructure is often located within the parkway, the planting of certain tree types may be impractical or may necessitate the use of root guards to prevent encroachment into and damage to the underground system. Care should be taken to install trees that will not encroach into underground infrastructure or negatively affect sidewalks. 
f.  Parkways shall also be sodded or interspersed with native grasses, xeriscape elements, crushed granite or rock. 
g.  If stone, gravel, decorative rock, crushed granite or other non-plant derived materials are used in a parkway area, no more than ten percent of the area may be made up of these materials. Non-plant derived materials should be used as an accent to the landscaped areas made up of sod, living ground cover, low bushes, plants, or mulch. In no case shall stone, gravel, rock or other non-plant derived materials be installed so that an impermeable surface area is created. 
h.  All plant materials shall be chosen from the town's approved plant list. 
i.  Median lighting shall be provided using the design and spacing requirements from the engineering design manual. 
(4)  Town participation. The town, county and/or state is responsible for the landscaping within the parkway, depending on the legal ownership of the roadway. 
(b)  Median landscaping. Landscaping improvements shall be installed within the medians of all proposed or planned divided roadways within the town limits as shown on the town master thoroughfare plan. Frontage is defined as wherever a property abuts the right-of-way of the divided thoroughfare, and separate frontages exist on each side of the thoroughfare. 
(1)  Applicability. Only developments or subdivisions abutting or adjacent to a divided roadway, as defined in the master thoroughfare plan, shall be subject to this section. 
(2)  Developer obligation. The developer shall be fully responsible for the construction and installation of the required landscaping and maintenance of the improvements for a period of one year. During the first year following installation, the developer shall replace any tree, shrub, sod, groundcover or hardscape in substandard condition. Following the first year, the director shall inspect the installation and determine what, if any, plant materials and/or hardscape must be replaced prior to the town taking over maintenance. 
(3)  Installation or deferment. In the event that the town engineer, in his sole discretion, determines that the installation of improvements at any given time period is impractical due to further road construction or other factors, the developer shall establish an escrow account for future median landscaping and/or maintenance. 
(4)  Escrow account. Should the town engineer, at his sole discretion, determine that the immediate installation of median landscaping is impractical; the developer shall enter into a development agreement and established an escrow account for the estimated cost of the purchase and installation of the median landscaping. The escrow account shall be collected prior to filing the final plat with the county. The escrow account shall be applied to the design, construction, reconstruction, upgrading, and installation of median landscaping of divided roadways within the adjacent median landscape areas. 
(5)  Town participation. At the discretion of the director, the developer may install landscaping across the full width of the median, and be reimbursed by the town for the landscaping provided for the second frontage at the per linear foot of frontage rate or the actual cost of the improvements, whichever is less, if funds are available. 
(6)  Plan design burden/escrowed cost. In the case where undeveloped land exists on both sides of a divided public street, the first to develop shall carry the burden of submitting plans for landscaping, hardscape and irrigation of the median. 
(7)  Installation burden. However, if the town declines to participate in the immediate landscaping of the median in question, the second to develop will utilize the approved plans (or modify the approved plans with town approval of the modifications) and shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of the median improvements, using the escrowed account from the first developer and shall contribute an equal amount to the overall cost of the median landscaping. In the event that the original escrow amount has fallen short of current material and/or installation costs, the town will make up the difference in cost or the plans shall be modified to be installed within the cost allotted. 
(8)  Minimum requirements for median landscaping: 
a.  All trees and plant materials shall be chosen from the town's approved plant list; 
b.  Two ornamental trees per 30 linear feet of median. Ornamental trees shall be a minimum two-inch caliper and eight feet in height at time of planting and shall be used primarily as accent trees near the median nose and dispersed among the larger canopy trees; 
c.  One canopy tree per 25 linear feet of median, with a minimum of four-inch caliper trunk, and a well-formed canopy that is typical of the species. Canopy trees shall be planted no closer than 30 feet from streetlights located in the median, no closer than 20 feet to an intersection, and no closer than 15 feet from any overhead electrical line; 
d.  Ornamental and canopy trees need not be evenly spaced and may be clustered for a more pleasing aesthetic effect; 
e.  When the nose of a median is tapered to five feet or less, that portion of the median shall install stamped concrete aligned with the top of curb; 
f.  Stone, gravel and rock. Not including the stamped concrete area within the nose of the median mentioned above, up to 40 percent of the area may be made up of stone, gravel, decorative rock, crushed granite or other non-plant derived materials in clearly defined beds to reduce the amount of sod to be moved in these areas. Non-plant derived materials should be used as an accent to the landscaped areas made up of sod, living ground cover, low bushes, plants, or mulch. In no case shall stone, gravel, rock or other non-plant derived materials be installed so that an impermeable surface area is created; 
g.  A minimum of 20 percent of the landscaped area shall be planted in evergreen shrubs, ground cover and/or native grasses; 
h.  Planting beds shall be separated from turf grass using 14-gauge steel edging to define ground cover beds and reduce weed incursion; 
i.  Artificial turf (e.g. AstroTurf(tm)). Artificial turf is prohibited in medians; 
j.  Irrigation installation shall be installed at the time of planting and shall include bubblers or drip irrigation for all canopy and ornamental trees. Irrigation systems should be designed to uniformly water the planting beds with minimal water waste and shall be equipped with rain-freeze sensors; and 
k.  Landscape and installation plans shall be subject to review and approval by the director and the town engineer. The location and placement of landscaping shall conform to the town street design standards and shall be placed to accommodate the ultimate number of traffic lanes, although shrubs, native grasses and ornamental trees may be placed in future traffic lanes if it is determined that these lanes will likely not be constructed in less than ten years. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.06.20 - Xeriscaping. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the xeriscaping ordinance is to encourage the use of drought-resistant native plants in all or a portion of landscaped areas in order to conserve water. 
(b)  Re-use water. When practical, private and public users are encouraged to connect to the town's non-potable, treated re-use water for irrigation instead of the town's drinkable, affluent water. 
(c)  Native plant usage. Texas has an abundance of native plants which are naturally adapted to the region. Most native or adapted plants are drought tolerant or have lower water demands, and by combining Texas natives with well adapted exotic plants, water is conserved. The use of xeriscape can: 
(1)  Reduce landscape water and maintenance use by 60 percent or more, which helps extend limited water supplies and conserve water resources; 
(2)  Provide an enhanced regional identity for Little Elm; 
(3)  Lower pest problems and require less fertilizer needs than many non-adapted, exotic plants brought into Texas landscapes. By eradicating weeds, competition for available water resources is diminished; 
(4)  Lower monthly water bills for users; 
(5)  Reduce runoff through the plants root system, which helps water percolate into the soil, reducing erosion and runoff, improving water quality. 
(d)  Reduction of water usage. In order to promote prudent use of the town's water resources and reduce the need for additional water system infrastructure, additional water resources and water purification systems, and to help ensure viability of required plantings during periods of drought, all required landscaping shall comply with the following requirements designed to reduce water usage: 
(1)  All landscaping shall be from the recommended plant material list, which is comprised of native and adapted vegetation, unless alternate plant materials are approved through the landscape plan. 
(2)  For maximum reduction in water usage, xeriscape plants shall not be interspersed in plant massing with plants requiring higher water usage. 
(3)  Irrigation systems shall be designed to provide the appropriate amount of water without over watering. 
(4)  Lawn or turf is not permitted in areas with a dimension of less than eight square feet. 
(e)  Sight visibility. In complying with the landscaping requirements set forth herein, no landscaping shall be permitted to cause visibility obstructions and/or blind corners at intersections. All sight/visibility triangle distances herein shall be measured from the intersection edges of the curb or, where there is no curb, from the end of the pavement, unless otherwise specified. 
(1)  Street intersections. Each such intersection shall have a sight triangle of 45 feet on each leg from the point of intersection, or as determined by the town engineer. 
(2)  Driveway to street intersections. Each driveway intersection shall have a sight triangle of 45 feet along the street and 20 feet along the driveway from the point of intersection, or as determined by the town engineer. 
(3)  Vertical clearance. Landscaping within the triangular visibility area shall be designed to provide unobstructed vertical cross-visibility at a level between three and ten feet in height. Trees may be permitted in this area provided they are trimmed in a manner that prevent limbs or foliage from extending into the vertical visibility area. 
(f)  Distance from street pavement. Landscaping, except required grass and low groundcovers, shall not be located closer than three feet from the edge of any accessway pavement. 
(g)  Conflicts. In the event other visibility obstructions are apparent in the proposed landscape plan, as determined by the director, the minimum landscape area requirements set forth herein may be reduced to the extent to remove the conflict. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.06.21 - Tree preservation. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to encourage the preservation of mature trees which once removed cannot be replaced by equivalent trees, to preserve protected trees during construction, and to control the removal of protected trees when necessary. It is the intent of this section to achieve the following: 
(1)  Prohibit the indiscriminate clearing of property. 
(2)  Protect and increase the value of residential and commercial properties within the town. 
(3)  Maintain and enhance a positive image for the attraction of new business enterprises to the town. 
(4)  Protect healthy quality trees and promote the natural ecological environmental and aesthetic qualities of the town. 
(5)  Help provide needed shaded areas in order to provide relief from the heat by reducing the ambient temperature. 
(b)  Construction regulations. 
(1)  Tree pruning restrictions. No protected tree shall be pruned in such a manner which significantly disfigures the tree or in a manner which would reasonably lead to the death of a tree, except where such pruning is necessary for the safety of the public and to maintain utility service. Utility companies may prune trees as necessary to re-establish disrupted utility service. The practice of "topping" trees, either ornamental or canopy, is absolutely prohibited except when necessary for utility provision, public safety or some other official nuisance. 
(2)  Fill and grading. The area within the drip line of a protected tree shall not be filled or graded. 
(3)  Maintenance after development. If any of the trees required to be retained or trees planted as a part of this division should die within a period of one year after completion of the activities associated with construction, the owner of the property shall replace the trees within six months at a ratio of three-to-one (3:1) with an approved large canopy tree from the recommended plant materials chart, which is the same size as the tree removed. 
(c)  Regulations prior to construction. 
(1)  Tree flagging . All protected trees on the subject property within 40 feet of a construction area or surface improvements such as driveway, walks, etc., shall be flagged with bright fluorescent orange vinyl tape wrapped around the main trunk at a height of four feet or more such that the tape is highly visible to workers operating construction equipment. This shall not include the flagging of protected trees adjacent to ROW within approved residential subdivisions during the construction of the roadway. 
(2)  Protective fencing . Solid, protective fencing a minimum of three feet in height will be located at the drip lines of all protected trees that border the limits of construction. In situations where a protected tree is located within the immediate area of intended construction, protective fencing will be located at or beyond the drip line. 
(d)  Regulations during construction-Prohibited activities. The following activities shall be prohibited within the limits of the critical root zone of any protected tree, subject to the requirements of this division: 
(1)  Material storage. No materials intended for use in construction or waste materials accumulated due to excavation or demolition shall be placed within the limits of the critical root zone of any protected tree. 
(2)  Equipment cleaning/liquid disposal. No equipment shall be cleaned or other liquids deposited or allowed to flow overland within the limits of the critical root zone of a protected tree. This would include paint, oil, solvents, asphalt, concrete, mortar or similar materials. 
(3)  Tree attachments. No signs, wires or other attachments, other than those of a protective nature shall be attached to any protected tree. 
(4)  Vehicular traffic. No vehicular and/or construction equipment traffic or parking shall take place within the limits of the critical root zone of any protected tree other than on an existing street pavement. This restriction does not apply to single incident access within a critical root zone for purposes of clearing underbrush, emergency restoration of utility service, or routine mowing operations. 
(5)  Grade changes. No grade changes (cut or fill) shall be allowed within the limits of the critical root zone of any protected tree unless adequate construction methods are approved by the director. 
(6)  Impervious paving. No paving with asphalt, concrete or other impervious materials in a manner which may reasonably be expected to kill a tree shall be placed within the limits of the critical root zone of a protected tree. 
(7)  Removal of protective fencing. Protective fencing may only be removed from the construction site at the time of the installation of additional, permanent landscaping features. 
(e)  Permanent construction methods and standards. 
(1)  Boring. Boring of utilities under protected trees may be required in certain circumstances. When required, the length of the bore shall be the width of the critical root zone at a minimum and shall be a minimum depth of 48 inches. 
(2)  Trenching. All trenching where possible shall be designed to avoid trenching across the critical root zone of any protected tree. This shall not inhibit the placement of necessary underground services such as electric, telephone, gas, etc. 
(3)  Root pruning. It is recommended that all roots two inches or larger in diameter which are exposed as a result of benching or other excavation be cut off square with a sharp medium tooth saw and covered with pruning compound within two hours of initial exposure. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.06.22 - Tree mitigation. 
(a)  General rule. In the event that it is necessary to remove a protected tree, the applicant shall be required to replace the protected tree being removed with a large canopy tree from the recommended plant materials chart, or pay into the town's tree fund. 
(b)  Replacement trees. Trees shall be replaced at a ratio determined by the tree valuation schedule (for every one inch removed, "X" inches must be replaced). If any replacement tree cannot be properly located on the subject property, the applicant may plant the replacement tree(s) on property owned by the town and/or common area open space, subject to review and approval by the director. 
(c)  Mitigation. If the tree is not replaced on-site, or other town-approved location, fees must be paid to the town based on the tree valuation schedule and the tree valuation formula of this division. This fee shall be paid in addition to any tree removal permit fee and shall be held in a separate account (tree fund) to be used exclusively for future installation of trees within public lands owned by the town. 
(d)  Landscape plan. All replacement trees shall be shown with their caliper size and common name on an approved landscape plan. 
(e)  Replacement restriction. Any required replacement tree shall not be planted within an area such that the mature canopy of the tree will interfere with overhead utility lines, or that the mature root zone of the tree interferes with underground public utility lines. 
(f)  Landscaping limitation. Trees required to be added to the development per the landscaping requirements in the zoning ordinance or by virtue of deed restrictions shall not be considered or credited as replacement trees. 
(g)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Any person, firm, corporation, agent or employee thereof who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction hereof shall be fined a penalty of a sum not to exceed $500.00 for each offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs. The unlawful destruction or removal of each protected tree shall be considered a separate offense and each offense subjects the violator to the maximum penalty of $500.00 per tree for each day that the tree is not replaced. Unless otherwise specifically set forth herein, or in state law as adopted, allegation and evidence of culpable mental state are not required for the proof of an offense defined by this article. 
(2)  No acceptance of public improvements shall be authorized until all fines for violations of this ordinance have been paid to the town. 
(3)  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all fines for violations of the ordinance from which this article derives have been paid to the town. 
(4)  No building permit shall be issued unless the applicant signs an application or permit request which states that all construction activities shall meet the requirements of the tree preservation ordinance. The building official shall make available to the applicant a copy of the tree preservation ordinance. 
(h)  Tree valuation schedule. The following charts shall be used in interpreting the provisions of this article: 
ARTICLE VI, TABLE I TREE VALUATION SCHEDULE CLASS NO. 1
100% Value
5:1 Ratio
;b0;Floodplain Trees* 
ALL Oaks 
Pecan 
American Beech 
American Holly 
Yaupon Holly 
Sweet Gum 
Magnolia 
Ginkgo 
Chinese Pistachio 
Bald Cypress CLASS NO. 2
80% Value
4:1 Ratio
;b0;ALL Ashes 
ALL Elms 
ALL Maples 
Hickories 
Black Walnut 
Persimmon 
Chittamwood 
Golden Raintree CLASS NO. 3
60% Value
3:1 Ratio
;b0;ALL Pines 
Blue Spruce 
Junipers, Cedar 
Honey Locust 
Honey Mesquite 
Western Soapberry 
River Birch 
Redbud 
Eve's Necklace CLASS NO. 4
40% Value
2:1 Ratio
;b0;Crepe Myrtles 
Dogwood 
Plums/Pears 
Common Hackberry 
Sugarberry 
Bois D'Arc 
Cottonwoods 
Poplars 
Loquat 
Siberian Elm 
Silver Maple CLASS NO. 5
20% Value
1:1 Ratio
;b0;Other Fruit Trees 
Other Ornamentals 
Boxelder 
Tree of Heaven 
Mulberry Trees 
Chinaberry 
Catalpa 
Jujube 
Tallows 
Willows (* All trees in the floodplain, regardless of species)  
(i)  Tree valuation formula. 
ARTICLE VI, TABLE J TREE VALUATION FORMULA Tree 
Diameter Diameter 
Squared Diameter Squared x 
Area Multiplier Cross- 
Section 
Value Value per 
Square Inch Tree Value 6" 36 0.7854 × 36 = 28.3 × 22.00 = $622.60 7" 49 0.7854 × 49 = 38.5 × 22.00 = $847.00 8" 64 0.7854 × 64 = 50.3 × 22.00 = $1,106.60 9" 81 0.7854 × 81 = 63.6 × 22.00 = $1,399.20 10" 100 0.7854 × 100 = 78.54 × 22.00 = $1,727.88 11" 121 0.7854 × 121 = 95.0 × 22.00 = $2,090.00 12" 144 0.7854 × 144 = 113.1 × 22.00 = $2,488.20 13" 169 0.7854 × 169 = 133.0 × 22.00 $2,928.00 14" 196 0.7854 × 196 = 154.0 × 22.00 $3,388.00 15" 225 0.7854 × 225 = 177.0 × 22.00 $3,894.00 16" 256 0.7854 × 256 = 201.1 × 22.00 $4,424.20 17" 289 0.7854 × 289 = 227.0 × 22.00 $4,994.00 18" 324 0.7854 × 324 = 254.5 × 22.00 $5,599.00 19" 361 0.7854 × 361 = 284.0 × 22.00 $6,248.00 20" 400 0.7854 × 400 = 314.2 × 22.00 $6,912.40 21" 441 0.7854 × 441 = 346.4 × 22.00 $7,620.80 22" 484 0.7854 × 484 = 380.0 × 22.00 $8,360.00 23" 529 0.7854 × 529 = 415.5 × 22.00 $9,141.00 24" 576 0.7854 × 576 = 452.4 × 22.00 $9,952.80 25" 625 0.7854 × 625 = 491.0 × 22.00 $10,802.00 26" 676 0.7854 × 676 = 531.0 × 22.00 $11,682.00 27" 729 0.7854 × 729 = 573.0 × 22.00 $12,606.00 28" 784 0.7854 × 784 = 616.0 × 22.00 $13,552.00 29" 841 0.7854 × 841 = 661.0 × 22.00 $14,542.00 30" 900 0.7854 × 900 = 707.0 × 22.00 $16,554.00  
FORMULA: Tree diameter squared × 0.7854 = CROSS SECTION × VALUE/SQ.IN = TREE VALUE 
NOTE: Values of trees greater than 30 feet will be determined by a tree expert retained by the contractor and approved by the owner and architect. 
NOTE: Diameter measured four and one-half feet above the ground. 
( Reference: National Arborist Association ) 
Secs. 106.06.23-106.06.30 - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SCREENING WALLS AND FENCES 

Sec. 106.06.31 - Screening. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this section is to ensure the screening of commercial areas and service areas from roadways, open space corridors, and residential properties. 
(b)  General specifications. 
(1)  The requirements set forth herein shall apply to all new development or any building expansion of over 30 percent from what existed April 17, 2007, the date of the original ordinance adoption. 
(2)  Subdivision perimeter walls require a building permit and shall be constructed at the time of infrastructure. See also section 106.06.32(b), "residential fences." 
(3)  All screening or perimeter walls shall be constructed of laid in place stone, rock, brick, or monolithic concrete panels. Modular screening walls are generally prohibited. 
(4)  Chain link and wooden fences are generally prohibited on nonresidential and multifamily development. 
(5)  Integral color split-face concrete masonry units (CMU), or an eight-foot-high cedar board-on-board wooden fence with a decorative cap with masonry columns where appropriate, in unique circumstances, may be utilized, subject to discretionary review and approval by the director, as long as there is not an adverse impact on surrounding property, the spirit and intent of this chapter is maintained, and a financial hardship is not the sole justification for the use of a reduced screening standard. 
(6)  Engineered concrete foundations with piers are required, per review and approval by the town engineer. Spacing, depth and dimensions of the piers shall be determined by a licensed design engineer based on a geotechnical report. All walls four feet in height or greater must be designed and sealed by a professional engineer who is licensed by the State of Texas. Record drawings certified by a licensed engineer shall be submitted to the Town of Little Elm after completion of construction. 
(7)  No portion of a screening wall shall be used as a retaining wall. 
(8)  Walls shall be equally finished on all sides and constructed in one style using consistent materials. 
(9)  Each contractor is to verify location of all existing utilities prior to construction of the screening wall. 
(10)  No screening wall or fence shall be erected on public right-of-way or in visibility easements. 
(11)  Specifications for stone, rock or brick screening walls are as follows: 
a.  A decorative column no less than every 40 feet is required unless otherwise approved by the director and supported by the engineering design. 
b.  Lintels, bottom row soldier courses with concrete mow strip, and a decorative cap are to be applied to all walls. Openings along the bottom of the screening wall shall only be wide enough to allow for proper drainage as determined by the engineering design. 
c.  Construction of brick screening walls shall be in accordance with the requirements of "Recommended Practice for Engineered Brick Masonry" published by the Brick Institute of America. 
(12)  Specifications for monolithic concrete panel screening walls are as follows: 
a.  Walls shall have a maximum column spacing of 14 feet, unless otherwise approved by the director. 
b.  Panels shall be monolithic in design. Panels must have a full height of between six or eight feet; however panel screening walls adjacent to residential uses shall be a minimum of eight feet in height. 
c.  Panels must be a minimum of four inches in thickness with a decorative pattern and color on both sides and be made of a minimum of 4,000 psi concrete. 
(13)  Wall height. 
a.  Subdivision perimeter walls shall have a minimum height of six feet with a maximum height of eight feet. 
b.  Required screening walls separating residential and nonresidential (including MF Multifamily and TH Townhome Districts) uses must be between seven and one-half and eight feet in height. 
(14)  Living screen requirements.The use of a living screen with an open screening fence option is encourage in Little Elm. When a screening hedge is used as a required screening device in conjunction with an open fence (such as decorative metal or wrought iron), onetype of plant shall be used, as allowed by the landscaping ordinance. Plants shall not be less than five-gallon size at the time of planting, growing to not less than six feet in height within 18 months of planting. The property owner/developer, at its sole expense, shall furnish or cause to be furnished, all labor, materials, equipment, accessories, meters and irrigation and services necessary to maintain or replace all plant materials if and when they become damaged or die. 
(15)  Maintenance. Required screening walls shall be maintained in good condition by the property owner. Any repairs or replacement shall match the existing adjacent sections. 
(c)  Subdivision walls. 
(1)  Perimeter walls required with residential subdivisions. Subdivision perimeter screening walls must be constructed by the developer at the time the subdivision infrastructure is constructed. Perimeter landscaping and irrigation is required adjacent to rights-of-way, subject to review and approval by the director or his designee. 
(2)  Materials allowed. 
a.  Solid masonry wall a minimum of eight feet in height adjacent to either multifamily or nonresidential uses unless a living screen with an open fence option is approved during the site plan process. 
b.  The director may allow the use of wrought iron or decorative metal, not in excess of 50 percent of the subdivision perimeter wall, in conjunction with berms and landscaping, if deemed appropriate. 
(3)  Wall located within buffer. Subdivision solid perimeter walls are required to be constructed within a 20-foot-wide platted common area adjacent to collector roads or arterials, as indicated on the master thoroughfare plan, or other such roads that have a right-of-way of 60 feet or greater. 
(4)  Cul-de-sac adjacency. If a cul-de-sac abuts a collector or arterial roadway, the screening across the landscaped area adjacent to the cul-de-sac may be a living screen in conjunction with an open fence (such as decorative metal or wrought iron) with solid masonry columns in keeping with the solid masonry screening perimeter walls. 
(5)  Wall located within a common area lot or easement. Subdivision perimeter screening walls are required to be located within a common area lot maintained by a home owners association (HOA) or in an easement dedicated to the HOA. 
(6)  Perimeter wall extension required. When a perimeter fence is provided at the outer boundaries of a residential subdivision, the termination of a given side of the fence shall not occur in the middle of the adjacent property, but extend to the property line of the last platted lot that has partial adjacency with the perimeter fence. An easement may be required by separate instrument in order to construct this portion of the wall on the adjacent property. 
(7)  Timing. The owner or developer of a residential property adjacent to an undeveloped property zoned nonresidential or multifamily shall be responsible for and shall build the required masonry wall to provide screening between the two properties at the time of infrastructure development, prior to any vertical development on the site. 
(8)  Maintenance easement. A minimum five-foot-wide wall maintenance easement shall be provided at time of platting where screening walls are forecasted or required along adjacent property. 
(9)  Individual fences exempt. Individual single-family lots built in a subdivision without a perimeter wall are exempt from the requirement to install the masonry wall. In lieu, an eight-foot-high cedar board-on-board wooden fence with a decorative cap (and columns where appropriate) may be utilized. 
(d)  Screening requirements. 
(1)  In the event that any nonresidential use or zone, including the MF Multifamily District, is adjacent to or backs upon a residential district or use, a solid masonry screening wall of eight feet in height shall be erected on the property line separating these districts. 
(2)  Where an allowed institutional use (e.g. school, church, etc.) is adjacent to a residential district, the property owner or developer may choose to use an irrigated living screen and/or wrought iron fencing with brick columns, subject to discretionary review and approval by the director. 
(3)  The owner or developer of a property adjacent to an undeveloped property zoned residential shall be responsible for and shall build the required masonry wall to provide screening between the two properties at the time of infrastructure development, prior to any vertical development on the site. 
(4)  In cases where the director finds this screening requirement to be impractical for immediate construction, it may grant a temporary or permanent waiver of the required screening wall or fence, until such time as the screening wall is deemed necessary by the director. 
(5)  In the event that a development is being constructed adjacent to an existing development where a screening wall is not in place, the construction of the screening wall will be the responsibility of the new developer or property owner. 
(e)  Other screening requirements. 
(1)  Roof projections. Screening is required for all projections that are above the building roofline. Roof projections shall include, but are not limited to such projections as heating and air conditioning units and mechanical equipment, but does not include communications equipment or devices. The required screening shall be compatible with those used in the front facade of the structure and shall be constructed to a height appropriate for screening the roof projection from public view at ground level within 60 feet of the subject structure. 
(2)  Mechanical equipment. All mechanical equipment shall be screened on all sides from public view at a point six feet above ground level at the property line. If a parapet does not accomplish this screening, a masonry screening wall equal to the height of the equipment shall be provided. For ground-mounted equipment a solid evergreen hedge of sufficient height and density to screen equipment within 18 months of planting may be used if properly irrigated and maintained. If the owner wishes for the mechanical equipment to be enclosed, then a masonry wing wall or black tubular steel with sufficient evergreen screening is acceptable. 
(3)  Open storage. All allowed open storage of materials, equipment, or commodities shall be screened in accordance with section 106.05.02.2(s), "open storage - permanent or ongoing" of the zoning ordinance. 
(4)  Loading facilities. Loading docks or structures shall be screened from view from the public right-of-way, from adjacent residential property, and from adjacent nonresidential property, other than industrial. 
a.  Screening shall be by masonry wing walls matching the color and building materials of the primary structure or freestanding walls with complimentary landscaping as is needed to be compatible with the project design. 
b.  Screening walls shall be of adequate height to screen loading vehicles and the scope of the operation and activity. 
(5)  Waste collection areas. 
a.  Waste disposal collection areas, including nonresidential polycarts and all other service related equipment, shall be screened from public view. 
b.  Trash dumpsters, recycling containers and other waste receptacles shall be screened with a clay-fired brick or stone wall of a color that is consistent with the color of the primary building, minimum six-foot in height. Screening enclosures shall be visually and aesthetically compatible with the overall project. 
c.  Trash compactors shall be screened with a foot clay-fired brick or stone wall of a color that is consistent with the color of the primary building, minimum eight-[foot] in height. Screening enclosures shall be visually and aesthetically compatible with the overall project. 
d.  Collection area enclosures shall incorporate on the open, fourth side a solid metal gate (chain-link with slats is prohibited) to visually screen the dumpster or compactor, which shall remain shut at all times other than when being actively accessed. 
e.  Evergreen shrubs, 24 inches in height at the time of planting, shall be planted on the three solid masonry sides of the dumpster enclosure, spaced three feet on center. 
f.  Collection area enclosures shall be located behind the front building line and the service gate shall not directly face a public street or any residentially zoned property. Where this standard is not feasible, as determined by the director, the standards can be varied. 
g.  Dumpster pad sites shall be a minimum of 12 feet wide and 14 feet deep. Pads to accommodate two dumpsters or recycling shall be a minimum of 25 feet wide and 14 feet deep. 
h.  Dumpster pad sites shall be generally located to provide a minimum of 40 feet of clear backing, but not more than 80 feet, which is considered excessive. 
i.  Engineered concrete foundations with piers are required, per review and approval by the town engineer. 
j.  New commercial development shall provide space for a minimum two dumpster pad sites screened with masonry enclosures with the extra pad site being for recycling containers. 
(6)  Utility substations and tower facilities. Above ground mechanical equipment shall be screened to mitigate its negative visual impact and safely secure the site. The screening device shall be scaled accordingly to the height, size, scope, and area of the proposed facility, subject to discretionary review and approval by the director. Generally, masonry walls shall be eight to 12 feet in height, with decorative metal in limited application for visibility, ventilation, and access points. Larger facilities shall also provide evergreen large canopy screening trees every 20 feet on center to be irrigated and maintained accordingly. Concrete access shall be provided, in addition to associated easements necessary for development. Any associated overhead utilities shall be buried. Appeals to staff determination are the jurisdiction of the planning and zoning commission, with town council reserving final appellate review, all of which require a public hearing with all property owners within 1,000 feet of the subject property sent notices by U.S. mail. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.06.32 - Residential fences. 
(a)  General requirements. 
(1)  Permit required. 
a.  Fence construction or repair of greater than 50 percent of the length of the fence requires a permit. Repairs with a total length of less than one full length of the fence (side or back yard) may be completed without a permit with materials matching the existing fence. 
b.  A plan showing exact materials, location, height, dimensions from property lines, sidewalks, curbs, and location of gates must accompany the completed application form and fee. The design of the fence must accommodate vision sight lines at the intersections of two roadways and the intersection of a drive with an alley or a roadway with a five-foot by five-foot triangle in these locations, measured from the edge of pavement. 
(2)  Regulations. 
a.  Maximum height of residential fences. Fences shall not be greater than eight feet in height, excluding a maximum six inches allowance for ground clearance and a decorative cap. 
b.  Materials allowed. No fence material shall be used to construct a fence except for those listed and regulated in this chapter. Generally, residential fences should only be wooden or black tubular steel (powder coated ornamental iron). 
c.  Materials prohibited. Barbed wire, electric, and other injurious fence material is prohibited in the town, unless the property is an agricultural district over five acres in size with a current AG Agricultural exemption tax status, legitimately needed for industrial purposes, or otherwise approved by the director. 
d.  Fences that back or side to other residences. Fences that back or side to another residence may have either side of the fence face the interior of the lot. 
e.  Fences located on corner lots. On all corner lots, fences shall not be closer than 15 feet from the face of any curb, unless otherwise approved by the director. 
f.  Fences facing rights-of-way (on back, side or corners). All fences erected on side yards of corner lots and reverse corner lots or backing to a right-of-way of shall be cedar, board-on-board, with a decorative cap so that a finished fence side faces the street. 
g.  Fences located between houses that face the street. The portion of fence that is parallel to the street and perpendicular to the fence along the side yard must be constructed of cedar, board-on-board, with a decorative cap so that a finished fence side faces the street. 
h.  Fences in front yards. Fences and walls are only allowed in front yards up to 30 inches in height and must be either: split-rail, wrought iron, picket fence, or decorative masonry wall. Lots over one acre in size are exempt from this regulation, subject to review and approval by the director. All front yard fences should generally be 50 percent open, except for walls when allowed. 
i.  Public rights-of-way, easements. No fence shall be erected on public right-of-way or within any drainage easement, unless otherwise authorized by the director. 
j.  Within property lines. Fences shall not encroach upon any property line (front, side, or rear). 
k.  Fences adjacent to scenic views. All fences installed adjacent to a floodplain, creek, or dedicated open space shall be black tubular steel. 
l.  Neighborhood integrity grant program. Properties that have exterior fences improved by the town through the Neighborhood Integrity Grant program shall maintain, repair, and replace the fence to the same standard as it was installed by the town. 
(3)  Required inspections. 
a.  A footing inspection is required. The footing inspection must be completed prior to pouring concrete. 
b.  A final inspection is required and must be scheduled within one week (five business days) of completion. 
c.  All fence installers are required to be registered with the Town of Little Elm. 
d.  Fences that fail inspection through the rental registration program shall be repaired or replaced accordingly. 
(b)  Wooden fence standards. 
(1)  Vertical posts. All vertical posts shall be galvanized steel with a minimum two and three-eighths-inch diameter, a minimum CS 20 (.095) thickness, and set in a concrete footing. 
(2)  Concrete footings. Concrete footings shall be a minimum of eight inches in diameter and must be at least six inches deeper than the post depth. 
(3)  Spacing of footings. For fences less than seven feet in height, posts shall be spaced at a maximum of eight feet on center, set in a concrete footing of no less than 24 inches deep. For fences that are seven feet or greater in height, posts shall be spaced at a maximum of six feet on center, set in a concrete footing of no less than 36 inches deep. 
(4)  Allowed materials. Residential wood material shall be stained Western Red Cedar. White wood, if pre-stained or stained a natural brown or earth tone color, is also allowed. 
(5)  Construction. All materials shall be securely fastened, vertical boards to horizontal stringers, stringers to vertical posts, top rail, to ensure an ongoing attractive appearance and safe condition, free from rot, rust, vandalism, and other sources of decay. 
(6)  Kick board. The bottom of the fence shall be designed to prevent ground-to-wood contact and allow drainage beneath it. This can be achieved through the use of a concrete mow strip poured between the fence supports or by installing a two- by six-inch pressure treated kick board to cover the gap between the bottom of pickets and the ground. The kick board may have ground contact so long as it does not inhibit drainage. 
(7)  Private residential fence adjacent to a subdivision perimeter wall. A fence that is parallel to or perpendicular to such wall shall not exceed the height of the adjacent subdivision wall. A fence that is separated from the subdivision screening wall by a public alley or right-of-way is deemed to not be adjacent to the subdivision screening wall. If abutting, the height of the residential fence is allowed to transition or increase in height from the height of the subdivision screening wall to the maximum allowable height of the residential fence, provided that the transition is an even or smooth rate of increase and does not exceed a span of 16 feet in length. 
(8)  Fences facing streets. When a residential fence is visible to the right-of-way, the construction must be board-on-board with a decorative cap and with support posts placed on the inside of the fence (i.e. facing the enclosed area). This applies to both new fences and existing fences being replaced. 
(c)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Materials. The use of chain link, vinyl, split-rail, and composite materials may be allowed, if constructed to manufacturer's specifications, subject to discretionary review and approval by the director. Otherwise, these materials are generally prohibited. Existing non-conforming chain link fences may be replaced with similar material. 
(2)  Interior fences. Defined as fences within the property fence for specific uses, such as dog runs, swimming pool fences, and other similar situations within the interior of a back yard. These interior fences may be constructed of alternate materials, as long as all exterior and shared fence lines are built to compliance with section 106.06.32(a) and (b) and the alternate interior materials are shorter than the exterior fence and not visible to the public, subject to discretionary review and approval by the director. 
(3)  Gate embellishments. Decorative gate embellishments are allowed; however, they shall not exceed the height of the fence by more than two feet. 
(4)  Submittal for review and approval. Alternate materials and methods that deviate from the fence standards listed above may be submitted, subject to discretionary review and approval by the director. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Secs. 106.06.33-106.06.40 - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PARKING, STACKING, AND LOADING STANDARDS 

Sec. 106.06.41 - Parking standards. 
(a)  Purpose. To secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to lessen congestion on public streets; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation; to conserve the value of buildings; and to encourage the most appropriate use of land. Minimum off-street parking, stacking, and loading shall be provided as set forth in the following schedules and provisions. The following regulations are in support of the following goals: 
(1)  To manage parking so that it is convenient, efficient, and supports an active and vibrant retail environment; 
(2)  To decrease the expansive "seas" of parking that are too common in the suburbs, noting that most new development is typically over-parked, resulting in wasted space, unnecessary impervious surface, higher construction costs, and loss of retail square footage; 
(3)  To support the creation of shared parking in order to enable visitors to park once at convenient location and access a variety of commercial enterprises in a pedestrian and bicycle-friendly environment; 
(4)  To provide flexibility for changes in land uses which have different parking requirements within the district. 
(5)  To ensure ease of access to parking; 
(6)  To provide flexibility for the redevelopment of small sites; 
(7)  To avoid diffused, inefficient single-purpose reserved parking; and 
(8)  To avoid adverse parking impacts on residential neighborhoods. 
(b)  Parking regulations, general. 
(1)  Except for allowed on-street parking, maneuvering of vehicles shall take place entirely on site or within a mutual access easement. No public right-of-way shall be used for backing or maneuvering into or from a parking space, or for circulation within the parking lot. 
(2)  Parking spaces shall be clearly identified by stripes, buttons, tiles, curbs, barriers, or other approved methods. Non-permanent type marking, such as paint, shall be regularly maintained to ensure continuous clear identification of the space. All vehicular use areas must also be maintained without large cracks or other failures. 
(3)  No parking or loading area shall be used for storage of inventory, materials, display, sanitation containers, supplies, or for any other use, except as approved through the site plan process. Under no circumstances shall a required parking space be used for any purpose other than parking except and unless specifically approved for temporary use for a special event of limited duration, as approved by the director. 
(4)  All off-street parking areas shall be kept free of litter, trash, debris, vehicle repair operations, display, and advertising uses. 
(5)  The property owner shall be responsible for adequately maintaining all parking facilities, including paving, striping, elimination of debris, and correction of use violations. 
(c)  Parking design. 
(1)  Dimensions. The minimum dimensions for off-street parking shall be as follows: 
a.  Standard parking space: nine feet by 20 feet. 
b.  Parallel parking space: eight feet by 22 feet. 
c.  Stacking space: ten feet by 20 feet. 
(2)  Each standard off-street surface parking stall and structure shall conform to the following table: 
ARTICLE VI, TABLE KPARKING SPACE AND DRIVE AISLE DIMENSIONSParking Angle 90° 75° 60° 45° Parallel Space width 9 ft. 9 ft. 9 ft. 9 ft. 8 ft. Space length 20 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. 22 ft. Drive aisle width, 2-way 24 ft. 24 ft. Drive aisle width, 1-way 16.5 ft. 13.1 ft. 16.5 ft. Minimum turning radius 1 20 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft.  
Note 1. If an applicant wishes to reduce any of the above requirements, a turning study may be submitted for review and comment by the director. 
(3)  Allowed paving material. All vehicular use areas, whether newly constructed or rehabilitated, shall be concrete. 
(4)  Floodplain parking. A maximum of 50 percent of the required parking may be located at or above the 534-foot elevation line, subject to review and approval by the director. The remainder of the parking must be located above the floodplain line (537-foot elevation). 
(5)  Two-way drives. Two-way drive aisle widths within parking lots shall be 24 feet unless specifically approved by the director. 
(6)  Dead-end parking. Dead-end parking rows are generally prohibited; although the director may approve a dead-end parking row of no greater than six spaces during the site plan process if the property has unusual features that requires such a layout. 
(7)  Fire lanes. Fire lanes shall be provided as required by the adopted fire code of the town, and shall be adequately reinforced to withstand heavy vehicle loading, subject to review and approval by the fire marshal. 
(8)  Cross access required. For safety, firefighting purposes, and increased connectivity, cross access between parking areas of adjacent nonresidential parcels shall be provided and is required. 
(9)  Striping. Striping for parking spaces shall be white. 
(10)  ADA ramps. Ramps as prescribed by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) (handicapped access) shall be pavers or stamped concrete to provide added traction and painted or stained in muted shades of adobe red or terra cotta for added visibility. 
(11)  Revisions to location or number of spaces. At no time after initial approval of the parking area layout can changes be made to the location or number of provided spaces, unless approved by the director. 
(12)  Construction and architectural standards. All parking structures must conform to the construction and architectural design standards of the district in which they are located. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.06.42 - Parking access from a public street-All districts. 
(a)  [Parking space.] All parking space configuration, location, arrangement, size and circulation in all districts shall be constructed according to this section. 
(b)  Entrances to developments. During the review and approval of a conceptual plan or site plan, design consideration shall be given to providing entrance and exit drives which extend out from the site to provide adequate queuing of vehicles on the site and outside of the public rights-of-way. 
(c)  Minimizing traffic congestion. In all districts, except single-family zoning districts, building plans shall provide for entrance and exit drives appropriately designed and located to minimize traffic congestion or conflicts within the site and that align with adjoining public streets, as approved by the director. 
(1)  Based upon analysis by the town, if projected volumes of traffic entering or leaving a development are likely to interfere with the projected peak traffic flow volumes on adjacent streets, additional right-of-way and paving in the form of a deceleration lane or additional turn lane may be required of a developer in order to reduce such interference. 
(2)  The determination of additional right-of-way or paving requirements shall be made at the time the final site plan is approved. 
(3)  Any additional right-of-way required by the town shall be dedicated to the town with the cost of engineering design, materials and installation borne entirely by the developer. 
(d)  No alley access. Vehicular access to nonresidential uses shall not be permitted from alleys serving residential areas. 
(e)  "Head-in" parking restrictions. Head-in parking spaces that are accessed directly from the street are prohibited in all nonresidential uses except in the Office, Neighborhood Services, and the Lakefront Districts. Head in spaces are to be avoided if possible in all districts. 
(f)  Perimeter landscaping. Necessary access drives from the public right-of-way shall be permitted through all perimeter landscaping required in section 106.06.18(b), "commercial landscape requirements - perimeter landscape requirements." The width for access drives shall be between 30 and 50 feet for nonresidential two-way movements and a minimum 20 feet for nonresidential one-way movement. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.06.43 - Off-street parking standards-Residential districts. 
(a)  Parking to be located on lot. Required off-street parking shall be provided on the same site as the use it is to serve. 
(b)  Concrete parking standard. All required vehicle parking shall be on a suitably paved parking surface. All driveways and approaches to parking spaces shall be similarly paved, except in the AG Agricultural and SF-RE Ranchette Estate Districts. 
(c)  Heavy load vehicles prohibited. No required parking space, garage, carport, or other automobile storage space shall be used for the storage of any heavy load vehicle (see section 106.01.15, "other zoning ordinance definitions"). 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.06.44 - Off-street parking standards-Nonresidential and multifamily districts. 
(a)  Lighting provided in parking lots. To prevent nuisance or unsafe situations, parking lots serving multiple-family residential developments shall provide sufficient lighting for safe movement to and from vehicles. All parking area lighting shall be designed and operated so as not to reflect or shine on adjacent properties. 
(b)  Emergency access. For safety and firefighting purposes, free access through to adjacent nonresidential parking areas shall be provided in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Location. Fire lanes shall be provided in all multiple-family, manufactured home, and nonresidential developments, and in some single-family attached, as required by the adopted fire code of the town and the subdivision ordinance. 
(2)  Dimension. Fire lanes shall be a minimum width of 24 feet of paving, and shall have a minimum inside turning radius at curves of 30 feet, or as required by the adopted fire code of the Town of Little Elm. 
(3)  Vertical clearance. The minimum overhead vertical clearance over fire lanes shall be 14 feet for a linear distance of 50 feet on each side (in front of and behind, as a fire apparatus would traverse underneath) of any overhead structure, such as a canopy, roof overhang or vertical height control device. 
(c)  Concrete parking standard. All off-street parking, maneuvering, loading and storage areas shall be constructed of concrete in accordance with the parking lot paving requirements in the town's Code of Ordinances and with any other applicable state or local requirements. 
(d)  Parking space markings. Parking spaces shall be permanently and clearly identified by stripes, buttons, tiles, curbs, barriers, or other approved methods. Non-permanent type marking, such as paint, shall be regularly maintained to ensure continuous clear identification of the space. 
(e)  Curb stops . All parking and loading spaces, and vehicle sales areas on private property shall have a vehicle stopping device, such as a curb or wheel stop at the perimeter of parking lots, installed so as to prevent encroachment of motor vehicles in any required landscaped areas, to prevent vehicles from damaging buildings, to protect public and/or private utility structures or facilities, and to prevent parked vehicles from overhanging into a public right-of-way line, a public or private sidewalk, or into adjacent private properly. An extra-wide walkway on private property may be permitted so as to allow encroachment of vehicle overhang while maintaining an unobstructed four-foot minimum walkway width. The requirement shall apply only where spaces are adjacent to the walks, right-of-way, and required landscaping. Parking shall not be permitted to encroach upon the public right-of-way in any case. In all nonresidential and multiple-family zoning districts, the perimeter of all parking lots and driveways shall be provided with ribbon concrete curbs or other means to control traffic, unless an approved landscape swale system has been utilized between parking rows and at the perimeter of parking lots to allow free water run-off into landscaped areas. Curbstops shall be used to prohibit vehicle encroachment into landscaped areas and/or walkways when swales are used. 
(f)  On-street parking adjacent to multifamily development. When a public roadway bisects a multiple-family residential development, no on-street parking shall be allowed unless the following conditions apply: 
(1)  The planned development district regulations specifically call out on-street parking as part of the required parking; 
(2)  The public roadway is designed for on-street parking and is of sufficient right-of-way width to accommodate parking and travel lanes, as determined by the town engineer; 
(3)  The on-street parking includes landscaped bump-outs a minimum of every three parking spaces; 
(4)  Sufficient spaces for visitor parking are provided on site; 
(5)  Crosswalks are provided with protective bump-outs at sidewalk corners and are either painted or constructed of stamped concrete to afford a high degree of visibility for pedestrians, bikers and drivers; and 
(6)  The director has approved the overall parking plan. 
(g)  Location of refuse storage facilities. Refuse storage facilities placed in a parking lot shall not be located in a designated parking or loading space. Each refuse facility shall be located so as to facilitate pickup by refuse collection agencies, with a minimum of 40 feet of clear backing space, and shall be appropriately screened, as required by section 106.06.31(e)(5), "screening." 
(h)  Handicapped parking spaces. Parking space(s) for persons with disabilities and other associated provisions shall be provided according to building codes, state laws, and requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Parking spaces for persons with disabilities shall be as close as possible to the entryway of the appropriate structure, and shall be appropriately and clearly marked with ADA standard signage and pavement markings. 
(i)  Prohibited activities in parking lots. In all nonresidential and multiple-family zoning categories, designated parking and loading areas shall not be used for the repair, storage, dismantling or servicing (except for normal maintenance of a private vehicle) of vehicles or equipment, or for the storage of materials or supplies, or for any other use in conflict with the designated parking and loading areas, including, but not limited to, advertising or open storage of raw materials. 
(j)  Maintenance. To ensure that all requirements set forth in this section are carried forward, it will be the responsibility of the owner of the parking area to adequately maintain the facility, including but not limited to timely repainting parking space markings and repair of pavement. All off-street parking areas shall be kept free of trash, debris, vehicle repair operation or display and advertising uses. At no time after initial approval of the parking area layout can changes be made in the location and number of provided spaces without approval of the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.06.45 - Parking requirements per land use. 
(a)  Computation of parking spaces. In computing the number of parking spaces required for any building or development, the following rules shall govern: 
(1)  The term "floor area" means the gross floor area of the specific use. 
(2)  Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be constructed to be the next higher whole number. 
(3)  The parking space requirement for a use not specifically mentioned herein shall be the same as required for a use of similar nature, subject to review and approval by the director. 
(b)  Compliance upon changes of use. Whenever a building or use is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity, or otherwise, which creates a need for an increase in the number of existing parking spaces, such spaces shall then and thereafter comply with the parking requirements set forth herein. 
(c)  Off-street parking. When a building or structure is constructed or expanded, off-street parking shall be provided, per the following table: 
ARTICLE VI, TABLE LREQUIRED PARKING RATIOSLand Use Parking Ratio Amusement, indoor commercial 1 space per 200 square feet of floor area. Amusement, outdoor commercial 1 space per 1,000 square feet within the outer boundaries of the proposed use, including any buildings, exhibit booths and areas devoted to the use. Assembly uses (non-profit) 1 space per 4 seats in the main auditorium. Athletic stadium or field 50 spaces per field for fields without fixed seating. Bank or similar financial establishment 1 space per 300 square feet of floor area. Big box 1 space per 250 square feet of floor area. Bowling alley 6 spaces per lane. Car wash (automated) 1 space per 200 square feet of floor area; plus adequate stacking spaces per bay; minimum of 2 spaces. Car wash (self-serve) 2 spaces; plus stacking spaces for each bay. Child care center 1 space for every 10 students; plus adequate stacking spaces for drop-off lane. Civic/convention/community center 10 spaces, plus one additional space per 300 square feet of floor area in excess of 2,000 square feet. 
If an auditorium is included as a part of the building, its floor area shall be deducted from the total and additional parking provided on the basis of 1 space per 4 seats that it contains. 
The parking ratio can also be determined by a parking demand analysis study for proposed use, subject to review and approval by the director. College, university or 
trade school 1 space per classroom, laboratory, or instruction area plus 1 space per 3 students accommodated in the institution. Convenience store 1 space per 200 square feet of floor area. Duplex A concrete drive with a minimum 2 car garage and 2 spaces in driveway per unit. Golf course Minimum 30 spaces per 9 holes, plus 1 space per 200 square feet of floor area for country club, retail, office, etc. Green house or nursery 1 space per 5,000 square feet of outdoor storage area; plus 1 space for each 200 square feet of indoor floor area. Health/fitness center/ 
gymnasium 1 space per 200 square feet of floor area. Hospital 1 space per 2 beds and 1 space per employee on the largest shift. Hotel 1 space per room, unit or guest accommodation plus 1 space for every 300 square feet of restaurant, office, or conference area Kennel or stable 1 space per 500 square feet of floor area. Library or museum 10 spaces, plus 1 space per 300 square feet of floor area. Lodge, club, or fraternal organization 1 space per 200 square feet of floor area. Manufacturing, processing, warehousing, and industrial uses 1 space per employee on the maximum working shift plus 1 space for every 1,000 square feet of floor area. Mini-warehouse (self-storage) 1 space per 5,000 square feet of total floor area. Mixed use building See Lakefront Zoning District for parking regulations section 106.04.02. Mobile home - 
Manufactured home A concrete drive with a minimum of 2 spaces, which may include a carport. Mortuary or funeral home 1 space per 4 seats in funeral service rooms. Movie theatre or cinema 1 space per 4 seats. Nursing home 1 space per 6 beds and 1 space for each day staff member. Office, business or professional 1 space per 300 square feet of floor area. Office, medical, dental, or health 1 space per 200 square feet of floor area. Recreational, private or 
commercial area or building (other than listed) 1 space per 4 persons to be normally accommodated in the establishment. Restaurant or cafeteria 1 space per 100 square feet of floor area. 
Outdoor seating areas (covered or not) under 500 square feet are exempt. 
When part of a multitenant development 15,000 square feet or greater, 1 space for every 200 square feet. Retail or personal service 1 space per 200 square feet of floor area. Retirement housing 1 space per 5 beds. School, elementary and 
junior high 1 space per classroom plus 1 space for each 4 seats in any auditorium, gymnasium, or other place of assembly. School, high school 1 space per classroom, laboratory, or instruction area plus 1 space for every 3 students accommodated in the institution. Single-Family residential Minimum 2 car garage with parking for 2 cars in driveway is required. Carports prohibited, unless fully encased with masonry, pitched roof, and attached to the primary residence in the rear yard. Townhouse Minimum 2 car garage with parking for 2 cars in driveway is required. Carports prohibited, unless fully encased with masonry, pitched roof, and attached to the primary residence in the rear yard. Veterinary or animal hospital 1 space per 300 square feet of floor area.  
(d)  Parking reduction. An overall 15 percent parking reduction is granted to multitenant developments that are 15,000 square feet or greater, provided there are dedicated mutual access easements. 
(e)  Parking penalty. Where parking exceeds the minimum number of required spaces by more than ten percent, landscaping of parking areas shall be increased so that planting islands shall not be spaced greater than every ten spaces rather than the required 12 spaces. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.06.46 - Stacking standards. 
(a)  Minimum size. A stacking space shall be an area on a site measuring ten feet by 20 feet with direct forward access to a service window or station of a drive-through facility which does not constitute space for any other circulation driveway, parking space, escape lane or maneuvering area. 
(b)  Distinctive markings. All stacking spaces shall be marked with stamped or stained concrete to differentiate the spaces from drive aisles or parking spaces. 
(c)  Escape lane. If the director deems that an escape lane is necessary by to allow vehicles to get out of stacking lane in the event of a stalled vehicle, emergency or accidental entry, it shall be of at least eight feet in width and shall have a negotiable geometric design. 
(d)  Minimum number of stacking spaces per land use. Off-street stacking requirements for drive-through facilities shall be as follows: 
ARTICLE VI, TABLE MREQUIRED STACKING SPACESType of Land Use Minimum Number of Stacking Spaces Banks, financial institutions 3 spaces per line Car wash, automated self-service 3 spaces per wash bay, including one at the bay exit for drying Car wash, full-service 3 spaces per car wash line Car wash, wand-operated self-service 2 spaces per wash bay, including one at the bay exit for drying Kiosks with drive-thru 2 spaces per line (or per director) Restaurants with one order window 4 spaces per line Restaurants with two or more order windows 2 spaces per second line and any subsequent line Retail, pharmacy, dry cleaners 3 spaces per line  
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.06.47 - Off-street loading spaces. 
(a)  Loading and unloading of goods/merchandise. 
(1)  Loading spaces required. All retail, commercial, and industrial structures in excess of 5,000 square feet of building area shall provide and maintain off-street facilities for the loading and unloading of merchandise and goods within a building or on the lot or tract. The loading space(s) shall be stained, painted or stamped so that the area is easily identified. 
(2)  Loading space minimum size. Such off-street loading space or truck berth shall consist of a minimum area of ten feet by 45 feet, and such spaces or berths shall be provided in accordance with the following schedule: 
ARTICLE VI, TABLE NREQUIRED LOADING SPACESTotal Square Feet of Gross Floor Area Minimum Number of Spaces 5,000 to 25,000 None 25,001 to 50,000 1 space 50,001 to 100,000 2 spaces Every additional 100,1000 1 additional space  
(3)  Siting and maneuverability. All drives and approaches shall provide adequate space and clearances to allow for the maneuvering of trucks off-street. Each site shall provide a designated on-site maneuvering area for trucks. Such off-street loading space may be adjacent to, but not on any portion of, a public alley or private service drive, or it may consist of a truck berth within the structure. 
(4)  Prohibited loading locations. 
a.  Loading docks or service or delivery entrances shall not be constructed facing any public street, and shall not be visible from any public street. 
b.  Loading docks that are adjacent to a residential use or district shall be set back from the adjacent residential district boundary by a distance of at least 60 feet. 
c.  Loading docks shall be designed and constructed so as to enclose the loading operation on three sides, in order to reduce the effects of the noise of the operation on any adjacent residences. 
(5)  Exceptions. In instances where three or more sides of the building face dedicated streets, loading berths and apron spaces shall be located at the rear or side of the building. These loading areas shall be screened from abutting streets as follows: 
a.  A combination of permanent architectural and landscape elements such as walls, berms, trees and shrubs shall be placed so as to distract, soften or interrupt the view of the casual observer. These elements shall be installed along approximately 50 percent of the affected property line; 
b.  Screening shall be to the height of the top of the dock door but no greater than 12 feet above the truck dock apron; 
c.  When viewed from a perpendicular angle from the street, the truck berths shall be screened completely, except for driveway openings; and, 
d.  The loading dock or service bay doors shall not be allowed on any portion of a front wall facing FM 423 or Eldorado Parkway, on a side or rear wall within 100 feet of FM 423 or Eldorado Parkway right-of-way, or within 60 feet of any front property line along FM 423 or Eldorado Parkway. 
(b)  Loading and unloading of children. 
(1)  Purpose. In order to ensure the safety of children entering and exiting day care centers or other places where loading and unloading to automobiles and/or buses occurs, the following regulations shall apply. 
(2)  Designated loading/unloading spaces. Schools, day care centers, and similar child training and care establishments shall provide loading and unloading parking spaces as close to the front door of the establishment as is practical. These spaces shall be located on an internal drive that does not block the fire lane or other businesses' vehicular movement and shall be stained, painted or stamped so that the area is easily identified. 
(3)  Drop-off lane. Kindergartens, elementary schools, day schools, and similar child training and care facilities shall provide a separate, concrete-paved loading and unloading lane area adjacent to an entrance that allows drivers to approach the entrance and, without exiting the vehicle, the staff will assist in loading and unloading of the children in and out of the vehicle. This drop-off lane should be one-way and with sufficient stopping points to allow a minimum of two cars to unload simultaneously. In addition, the drop-off lane shall be constructed to allow vehicles to exit the lane without impeding the movement of other vehicles using other drive aisles or causing a safety hazard with parents and/or children entering or exiting the building. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.06.48 - Bicycle parking. 
Bicycle  parking is required in nonresidential districts in order to encourage the use of bicycles by providing convenient and secure places to park bicycles. 
(a)  Bicycle parking per vehicle parking spaces. Bicycle parking shall be provided based on at least one standard bike rack* for each development or one bike rack per 100 car parking spaces required, whichever is greater, unless otherwise approved by the director. No more than five bicycle racks shall be required per development. 
(b)  Bicycle parking location. Required bicycle parking should be located within 50 feet of a public entrance to the building. Bicycle parking may be provided within a building, but the location must be easily accessible by the public. 
(c)  Bicycle parking to be included on site plans. Site plans shall include the location of all proposed bike racks, which are subject to the streetscape architectural standards of the zoning ordinance 
* A standard bicycle rack holds six bicycles. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.06.49, 106.06.50 - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - LIGHTING STANDARDS 

Sec. 106.06.51 - Lighting administration. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The use of outdoor lighting is often necessary for adequate nighttime safety and utility, but common lighting practices can also interfere with other legitimate public concerns. Principles among these concerns are: 
(1)  The degradation of the nighttime visual environment by production of unsightly and dangerous glare; 
(2)  Unnecessary waste of energy and resources in the production of excessive or wasted light; 
(3)  Interference in the use or enjoyment of property which is not intended to be illuminated at night; and 
(4)  The loss of the often-neglected scenic view of the night sky due to increased urban sky-glow. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  New uses, buildings and additions. All proposed new land uses, developments, buildings, structures, or building additions of 25 percent or more in terms of additional dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity, or other units of measurement specified herein, either with a single addition or cumulative additions subsequent to the effective date of this provision, shall meet the requirements of this Code for the entire property. For all building additions of less than 25 percent cumulative, the applicant shall only have to meet the requirements of this Code for any new outdoor lighting provided. 
(2)  Change of use/intensity. Except as otherwise provided within, whenever the use of any existing building, structure, or premises is changed to a new use, or the intensity of use is increased through the incorporation of additional dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity, or other units of measurement specified herein, and which change of use or intensification of use creates a need for an increase in the total number of parking spaces of 25 percent or more, either with a single change or cumulative changes subsequent to the effective date of this provision, then all outdoor lighting sources shall meet the requirements of this Code for the entire property, to the maximum extent possible as determined by the director. For changes of use or intensity which require an increase in parking of less than 25 percent cumulative, the applicant shall only have to meet the requirements of this Code for any new outdoor lighting provided. 
(c)  Nonconformity. 
(1)  Whenever a nonconforming use, structure or lot is abandoned for a period of 180 consecutive days and then changed to a new use according to the requirements of section 106.05.04, "new and unlisted uses," of the zoning ordinance, then any existing outdoor lighting shall be reviewed and brought into compliance as necessary for the entire building, structure or premises, to the maximum extent possible as determined by the director. 
(2)  No outdoor lighting fixture or use which was lawfully installed or implemented prior to the enactment of this Code shall be required to be removed or modified except as expressly provided herein; however, no modification or replacement shall be made to a nonconforming fixture unless the fixture thereafter conforms to the provisions of this Code, except that identical lamp replacement is allowed. 
(3)  In the event that an outdoor lighting fixture is abandoned or is damaged to the point of requiring repairs for safe operation, the repaired or replacement fixture shall comply with the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.06.52 - Lighting calculations and definitions. 
(a)  General calculations. 
(1)  Computation of illumination. For the purpose of this Code, the luminance shall be computed by the formula: L (d 2 + h 2) 
Where "L" is the fixture candlepower in candelas in the direction of the point from which the calculations are to be made, "d" is the shortest distance in feet measured horizontally from the property line to a point directly under the luminaire, and "h" is the height of the luminaire at five feet above the ground. 
(2)  Computation data. Computation methods shall consist of an Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) accepted method, using certified photometric data furnished by the fixture manufacturer, lamp manufacturer, photometric laboratory, or other reliable authority satisfactory to the town. Computations shall be based on new, properly seasoned lamps, new and clean fixtures, and at rated voltage and wattage, with ballasts, lenses, shields, diffusers, and other appurtenances in place, and with proper regard taken for mounting height, relative elevation, natural and manmade objects and industry standard maintenance factors. 
(3)  Metering equipment. Lighting levels shall be measured in footcandles with a direct reading portable light meter. 
(4)  Method of footcandle measurement. The meter sensor shall be not more than six inches above ground level in a horizontal position. The reading shall be taken only after the cell has been exposed long enough to provide a constant reading. 
(b)  Lighting definitions. As used in this Code, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, certain words terms, and phrases shall mean the following: 
    Bulb or lamp means the source of electric light. To be distinguished from the whole assembly, lamp is used to denote the bulb and its housing. 
    Candela means the unit of luminous intensity in a given direction. It is commonly considered one candlepower. 
    Class 1 lighting means all outdoor lighting used for, but not limited to, outdoor sales or eating areas, assembly or repair areas, advertising and other signs, recreational facilities and other similar applications where color rendition is important. 
    Class 2 lighting means all outdoor lighting used for, but not limited to, illumination for walkways, roadways, equipment yards, parking lots and outdoor security where general illumination of the grounds is the primary concern. 
    Class 3 lighting means any outdoor lighting used for decorative effects including, but not limited to, architectural illumination, flag monument lighting, and illumination of trees or other features. 
    Direct illumination means illumination resulting from light emitted directly from a lamp, luminary or reflector, not light diffused through translucent signs or reflected from other surfaces such as the ground or building facades. 
    Director means the director of development services for the Town of Little Elm or his or her designated representative. 
    Floodlight means a luminaire designed to project its light in a well-defined area. It is directional in character. 
    Floodlight beam means the angular spread of light between two orthogonal planes each of which equal ten percent of the maximum candlepower within the beam. 
    Footcandle means the amount of illumination provided by one lumen uniformly distributed on one square foot of surface. 
    Fixture means the assembly that holds the lamp in a lighting system. It includes the elements designed to give light output control, such as a reflector (mirror) or defractor (lens), the ballast, housing and the attachment parts. 
    Full cutoff luminaire means a luminaire that allows no direct light above a horizontal plane, from the lowest light emitting part of such device, in its mounted form. This applies to all lateral angles around the luminaire. 
    Fully shielded fixture means that fixtures are shielded in such a manner that light rays emitted by the fixture, either directly from the lamp or indirectly from the fixture, are projected below a horizontal plane running through the lowest point on the fixture where light is emitted. 
    Glare means direct lighting emitted from a luminaire that causes reduced vision or temporary blindness, especially to motorists. 
    High pressure sodium (HPS) means a high-intensity discharge lamp where radiation is produced from sodium vapor at relatively high partial pressures (100 tore). HPS is essentially point source light. 
    Horizontal plane means a line horizontal to the lowest point on the fixture from which light is emitted. 
    Illumination means the density of the luminous flux (lumens) incident on a surface. It is the quotient of the luminous flux divided by the area of the surface, expressed in footcandles. 
    Incandescent lamp means any lamp that produces light by heating a filament by means of an electric current. 
    Installed means the attachment, or assembly fixed in place, whether or not connected to a power source, or any outdoor light fixture. 
    Light source means a device (such as a lamp) which produces visible energy as distinguished from devices or bodies which reflect or transmit light such as a luminaire. 
    Light trespass means light extending outside the boundary of property for which it was originally intended or needed. Also referred to as spillover light or obtrusive light. 
    Low pressure sodium (LPS) means a discharge lamp where the light is produced by radiation from sodium vapor at a relatively low partial pressure (about 0.001 tore). LPS is a "tube source" monochromatic light. 
    Lumen means the quantity of luminous flux intercepted by a surface of one square foot, all points of which are one foot from a uniform source of one candela. 
    Luminaire means a device or fixture containing a light source and means for directing and controlling the distribution of light from the source. 
    Luminance means the luminous intensity per unit projected area of a given surface viewed from a given direction for purposes of this Code expressed in candelas divided by distance squared. 
    Maintenance (factor) means 70 percent footcandles maintained for illuminating devices. Check number. 
    Mercury lamp means a high intensity discharge lamp where light is produced by radiation from mercury vapor. 
    Metal halide lamp means a high intensity discharge lamp where light is produced by radiation from metal halide vapor. 
    Mounting height means the maximum height of the pole from ground level. The lighting fixture shall not exceed the height of the pole. 
    Motion sensing security lighting means a fixture designed, and properly adjusted, to illuminate an area around a residence or other building by means of switching on a lamp when motion is detected inside a specific perimeter, and switching the lamp off when the detected motion ceases. 
    Multi-class lighting means any outdoor lighting used for more than one purpose, such as security and decoration, when those purposes fall under the definitions for two or more lighting classes as defined for Class 1, 2 and 3 lighting above. 
    Net acreage means the remaining ground area of a parcel after deleting all portions for proposed and existing public rights-of-way and undeveloped area. 
    Outdoor light fixtures means all outdoor illuminating devices, reflective surfaces, lamps and other devices, either permanently installed or portable, which are used for illumination or advertisement. Such devices shall include, but are not limited to, searchlights, spotlights and floodlights for: 
 Buildings and structures; 
 Recreational areas; 
 Parking lot lighting; 
 Landscape and architectural lighting; 
 Billboards and other signs (advertising or other); 
 Street lighting; 
 Product display area lighting; 
 Building overhangs and open canopies; and 
 Security lighting. 
    Outdoor recreation facility means an area designed for active recreation, whether publicly or privately owned, including but not limited to parks, baseball diamonds, soccer and football fields, golf courses, tennis courts and swimming pools. 
    Photometric means quantitative measurements of light levels and distribution. 
    Security lighting is lighting designed to illuminate a property or grounds for the purpose of visual security. This includes fully shielded lighting designed to be left on during nighttime hours as well as motion sensing lighting fixtures. 
    Temporary lighting means lighting which does not conform to the provisions of this Code and which will not be used for more than a single 45-day period within a calendar year. Temporary lighting is intended for uses which by their nature are of limited duration (e.g. holiday decorations, civic events, or construction projects). 
    Total outdoor light output means the maximum total amount of light, measured in lumens, from all outdoor light fixtures on a property. For lamp types that vary in their output as they age (such as high pressure sodium and metal halide), the initial output, as defined by the manufacturer, is the value to be considered. 
    Unshielded fixture means a fixture that allows light to be emitted above the horizontal directly from the lamp or indirectly from the fixture or a reflector. 
    Watt is the unit used to measure the electrical power consumption (not the light output) of a lamp. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.06.53 - Lighting regulations. 
(a)  Outdoor lighting types. 
(1)  Full cutoff luminaries over 15 watts shall be required in all outdoor lighting installations unless permitted below. Lamp types shall be prohibited or permitted as specified below: 
ARTICLE VI, TABLE OPROHIBITED OUTDOOR LIGHTING TYPESLamp Type Class I Lighting Class II Lighting Class III Lighting Mercury vapor Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Low pressure sodium (LPS) Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited High pressure sodium (HPS) Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Metal halide Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited  
  
ARTICLE VI, TABLE PPERMITTED OUTDOOR LIGHTING TYPESLamp Type Class I Lighting Class II Lighting Class III Lighting LED solid state Permitted Permitted Permitted Fluorescent Permitted Permitted Any light source 
<15 watts Non-cutoff 
permitted Non-cutoff 
permitted Non-cutoff 
permitted Low intensity neon, krypton, or argon discharge tubes Non-cutoff 
permitted Non-cutoff 
permitted Non-cutoff 
permitted  
(2)  All light fixtures, including security lighting, except street lamps, shall be aimed or shielded so that the direct illumination shall be confined to the property boundaries of the source. Particular care is to be taken to ensure that the direct illumination does not fall onto or across any public or private street or road. Motion sensing lighting fixtures shall be properly adjusted, according to the manufacturer's instructions, to turn off when detected motion ceases. 
(3)  Class 1 lighting, including but not limited to, sales, service, commercial, assembly, repair, maintenance, and industrial areas, may only continue in operation until 10:00 p.m., or for as long as the area is in active use. 
(4)  Class 2 lighting shall have no time restrictions except as specified by the town council for new projects as specified herein. 
(5)  Class 3 lighting, except for flag pole lighting, shall be extinguished after 10:00 p.m. or when the business closes, whichever is later, except that low-wattage holiday decorations may remain on all night from November 1 to January 31. 
(6)  Multi-class lighting, except for security lights, must conform to the time limitations of the strictest class. 
(7)  Lighting for all outdoor athletic fields, courts, tracks or ranges shall be subject to approval of the town council. All events shall be scheduled so as to complete all activity by 10:00 p.m. Illumination shall be permitted after 10:00 p.m. only to conclude a scheduled event that was unable to conclude before 10:00 p.m. When the proposed light levels exceed the allowed limits, the installation shall be designed to achieve no greater than the minimum illumination levels for sports lighting set forth in "Sports and Recreational Area Lighting," RP-6-01, published by the IESNA. Lighting shall meet cutoff standards so that light is primarily aimed at and directed to the activity area. 
(8)  Outdoor lighting shall be constructed and installed in a manner consistent with this Code and shall be located so as not to produce glare or direct illumination across the building property line or onto rights-of-way and private streets. 
(9)  Lighting used for all externally illuminated signs shall conform to all restrictions of this Code and shall be fully shielded and oriented toward the ground and not toward the sky. 
(10)  Outdoor light fixtures used to illuminate flags, statues, or any other objects mounted on a pole, pedestal, or platform shall use a very narrow cone of light for the purpose of confining the light to the object of interest and minimize spill-light and glare. Compliance with this provision shall be subject to approval by the director. 
(11)  Building facades and architectural features of buildings may be floodlighted when the following conditions are met: 
a.  Floodlight fixtures are equipped with shields and are located so as to limit the fixture's direct light distribution to the facade or feature being illuminated; 
b.  The configuration of the floodlight installation shall block all view to the floodlight fixture's lamps from adjacent properties; and 
c.  The maximum luminance of any floodlighted surface does not exceed the footcandles specified in the IESNA Lighting Handbook for floodlighting surfaces. 
(b)  Illumination levels. The maximum outdoor illumination level on the subject property shall not exceed 20 footcandles at any one point, except where stated and allowed below. 
(1)  Townhouse and multifamily residential uses should average no more than three footcandles, with a maximum of ten footcandles, and a minimum of one footcandle. 
(2)  Retail uses should average no more than six footcandles, with a maximum of 15 footcandles, and a minimum of one footcandle. 
(3)  Parking areas should average no more than one and one-half footcandles, with a maximum of ten footcandles, and a minimum of one-half footcandle. 
(4)  Lighting under canopies (such as service stations) shall not exceed 30 footcandles. All luminaries shall be flush with the lower surface of canopies and utilize flat glass or plastic covers. 
(5)  Lighting for car dealerships shall not exceed 30 footcandles within the front yard. The remainder of the property cannot exceed 20 footcandles. 
(c)  Spill-over. The limit of illumination on neighboring property emanating from an establishment shall be based on the zoning and/or use of the neighboring property. Maximum computed maintained and maximum measured footcandles at the neighboring property line shall not exceed: 
(1)  One-quarter footcandle for single-family residential and duplex districts. 
(2)  One-half footcandle for multifamily and agricultural districts. 
(3)  Three footcandles for commercial districts and rights-of-way. 
(4)  Exception. Illumination at interior property lines on contiguous lots in a multitenant, nonresidential development may exceed the above criteria when necessary to provide constant lighting of adjoining parking areas, fire lanes and interior access roadways, as determined by the director. 
(5)  When a dispute arises regarding the district/use of an adjoining property and the allowed "spill-over," the director's decision shall be binding. 
(d)  Pole heights. Lighting standards (i.e. poles) shall be sized in such a manner that the top of any luminary does not exceed 30 feet above the adjacent grade. Lighting located in industrial zoned districts may be 35 feet in height. Where within 100 feet of a residential district or use, the maximum allowed pole height is 20 feet. 
(e)  Infrared security lighting. Such lighting is permitted in all zones with the following restrictions: 
(1)  Fixed lights must be fully-shielded. 
(2)  Moveable lights, such as spot lights attached to infrared-sensitive cameras, must be mounted such that the lights cannot be directed higher than 20 degrees below the horizontal, measured from the center of the light beam. 
(f)  Prohibited lighting. The following lighting is prohibited. No owner or occupant of land shall permit any of the following conditions to exist: 
(1)  An unshielded light source, including bare bulbs, above 15 watts, except for temporary holiday lighting; 
(2)  "Cobra head" type light fixtures having dished or "drop" lenses or refractors which house other than incandescent light sources; 
(3)  Light sources or luminaries are prohibited in buffer areas and within required setback yard areas except on pedestrian walkways, hike and bike trails, and internal access drives when needed for safety; 
(4)  The operation of searchlights, strobes, flickering, flashing, or pulsating lights; 
(5)  The use of partial cutoff light source; 
(6)  The use of a drop lens; or 
(7)  Any combination of lighting that creates a nuisance, as determined by the director. 
(g)  Permitting. 
(1)  Single-Family residential and duplex development are not required to submit lighting plans. 
(2)  Sufficient information shall be submitted to evaluate the photometric criteria outlined herein as part of the site plan submittal whenever a person is required to obtain a building or electrical permit for outdoor lighting or signage, a specific use permit, subdivision approval or any development plan approval by the town, including all town projects, or whenever a person requests annexation or rezoning. All applications may be subject to review and action by the town council at the discretion of the director or the town council. 
(3)  Photometric plans shall include the following: 
a.  A site exhibit, drawn to scale, indicating the proposed location of all outdoor lighting fixtures; 
b.  A description of each illuminating device, fixture, lamp, support and shield. This description may include, but is not limited to, manufacturer's catalog cuts and drawings (including sections where required), lamp types and lumen outputs; and the mounting height of the light; 
c.  Photometric data showing illumination levels (average, minimum, and maximum) on the property, at the property line and just beyond the property line, as well as other data such as that furnished by manufacturers or similar data showing the angle of cut off for light emissions; 
d.  The height of all proposed poles; and 
e.  Such other information as the director may determine is necessary to ensure compliance with this Code. 
(4)  Prior to final approval and issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the applicant shall submit to the planning division a photometric plan, stamped by a certified engineer that illustrates that the proposed lighting is in compliance with this Code. 
(5)  Should any outdoor lighting fixture or type of light source be changed therein after the building permit has been issued, a change request must be submitted to the building official for approval together with the adequate information to ensure compliance with this Code, which must be received and approved prior to substitution. 
(6)  If the director determines that the proposed lighting does not comply with this Code, the permit shall not be issued or the plan approved. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.06.54 - Lighting exemptions and variances. 
(a)  Temporary exemptions. 
(1)  The director may grant a permit for temporary lighting if he or she finds all of the following: 
a.  The purpose for which the lighting is proposed is not intended to extend beyond 45 days; 
b.  The proposed lighting is designed in such a manner as to minimize light pollution as much as is feasible; 
3.  The proposed lighting will comply with the general intent of this Code; and 
4.  The permit will not conflict with the public interest. 
(2)  The director shall rule on the application within five business days from the date of submission of the request and notify the applicant in writing of his or her decision. The director may grant one renewal of the permit for an additional 30 days if he or she finds that, because of an unanticipated change in circumstances, a renewal would not be in conflict with the public interest. The director is not authorized to grant more than one temporary permit and one renewal for the same property within one calendar year. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the director under this subsection may appeal the decision to the town manager, if, within five days of the date of director issuing his or her opinion, the applicant provides written notice of appeal to the town manager. The decision of the town manager shall be final. 
(3)  Temporary lighting permits are not required for typical holiday lighting. 
(b)  Variances. 
(1)  A variance may be permitted by the board of adjustment from the regulations set forth in this Code. A person seeking a variance from the express terms of this section shall demonstrate the existence of a hardship which would exempt the applicant from compliance with the regulation in question. Such variances shall only be allowed as provided by the Town of Little Elm Zoning Ordinance. 
(2)  The provisions of this Code are not intended to prevent the use of any design, material, or method of installation or operation not specifically prescribed by this Code, provided any such alternate has been approved by the town council. 
(3)  The town council may approve any such proposed alternate provided that such alternate: 
a.  Provides at least equivalence to the applicable specific requirements of this Code; and 
b.  Is otherwise satisfactory and complies with the intent of this Code; and 
c.  Does not create a nuisance as defined in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Secs. 106.06.55-106.06.60 - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 

Sec. 106.06.61 - Performance standards, generally. 
    In all zoning districts, any use indicated as a permitted use shall conform in operation, location, and construction to the performance standards hereinafter specified. In the LI Light Industrial Zoning District, HI Heavy Industrial Zoning District, and PD Planned Development Zoning District with underlying zoning of industrial, in addition to the permitted uses, there shall be permitted any other manufacturing, processing, fabrication, packing, or storage use, except those requiring specific use permits, which conform in operation, location, and construction to the performance standards hereinafter specified for noise, smoke, and particulate matter, odorous matter, fire, or explosive hazard material, toxic and noxious matter, vibration, glare, and open storage. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.06.62 - Noise. 
(a)  General noise prohibition. No person shall make, continue, or cause to be made or continued: 
(1)  Any unreasonably loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noise; or 
(2)  Any noise which unreasonably disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivity; or 
(3)  Any noise which is so harsh, prolonged, unnatural, or unusual in time or place as to occasion unreasonable discomfort to any persons within the neighborhood from which said noise emanates, or as to unreasonably interfere with the peace and comfort of neighbors or their guests, or operators or customers in places of business, or as to detrimentally or adversely affect such residences or places of business. 
(b)  Factors for determination. Factors considered in determining whether a sound is unreasonably loud and raucous include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The proximity of the sound to sleeping facilities, whether residential (homes) or commercial (hotels); 
(2)  The land use, nature, and zoning of the area from which the sound emanates and the area where in which it is received or perceived; 
(3)  The time of day or night the sound occurs; 
(4)  The duration of the sound; and 
(5)  Whether the sound is recurrent, intermittent, or constant. 
(c)  General noise definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section: 
    "A" level. The total sound level of all noise as measured with a sound level meter using the "A" weighting network. The unit of measurement is dBA. 
    Decibel (dBA). A unit of measurement for sound pressure level at a specified location. 
(d)  Types of noises. The following list of noises that may cause offense to a person of reasonable sensibilities is not considered comprehensive, but should be used for those uses listed in table Q and a reference for unlisted uses of a similar nature. Refer to table Q, "Maximum Noise Levels," for specific maximum noise levels per activity, type, or venue. Note that any type of noise production that has specific hours of operation are also subject to the "all other noises" maximum noise levels during hours outside the listed hours of operation. 
(1)  Construction activities. Any construction, grading, or use of heavy machinery, including but not limited to the activities of erection, excavation, demolition, alteration or repair work on any building, is prohibited at any time other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. During the allowed hours, the operation must adhere to the maximum noise levels listed in table Q. However, the director may issue a town special event permit to extend the hours of operation and/or the maximum noise level for a limited time for such work in case of urgent necessity and in the interest of public safety and convenience. 
(2)  Loading and unloading activities. The creation of any loud and excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any vehicle or the opening or destruction of bales, boxes, crates or containers is prohibited at any time other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. During the allowed hours, the loading and unloading activities must adhere to the maximum noise levels listed in table Q. 
(3)  Big box stores. Stores or facilities greater than 50,000 square feet must adhere to the maximum noise levels listed in table Q for the timeframes listed. 
(4)  Outdoor music event. At any outdoor music event, it shall be unlawful for any person or group sponsoring the event to make, cause, allow, or permit any noise that exceeds those listed in table Q when measured at the established perimeter of the event. Exceptions to this regulation for extended hours or increased sound levels may be allowed by the application for and approval of an annual outdoor music license to be approved by the director. 
(5)  Music. The playing of any phonograph, television, radio or any sound-emitting instrument or device in such a manner or with such volume as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons of ordinary sensibilities inside any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence or in or near a town building or park, is prohibited at any time. 
(6)  Amplification. The use of any stationary loudspeaker, amplifier or musical instrument in such a manner or with such volume as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity of dwellings, hotels or other residences is prohibited at any time. Exceptions to this regulation may be allowed by the application for and approval of a town special event permit for a special event when the public interest will be served thereby. 
(7)  Trash collection. Noise created by trash and/or recycling haulers within 300 feet of residential zoning is prohibited at any time other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. During the allowed hours, the trash collection activities must adhere to the maximum noise levels listed in table Q. 
(8)  Lawn care (Blowers, lawn mowers and similar devices). In residential areas, the operation of any noise-creating blower, power fan, mower, or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which exceeds those listed in table Q, is prohibited at any time. During the allowed hours listed in table Q, the operation must adhere to the maximum noise levels listed in table Q. 
(9)  Ice cream vendors. Noise from bells or music boxes used on vehicles operated by ice cream and snow cone vendors to produce jingles or music to attract children as patrons that exceed those listed in table Q, are prohibited at any time. During the allowed hours listed in table Q, the operation must adhere to the maximum noise levels listed in table Q. 
(10)  Adjacent to schools and hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school in session, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the operation of such institution is prohibited at any time; provided, however, that conspicuous signs are displayed or other evidence is available indicating school or hospital quiet zones. 
(11)  Steam-produced noise. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler or the blowing of any other loud or far-reaching steam whistle within the corporate limits is prohibited at any time, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of danger. 
(12)  Compressed air noise. The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air is prohibited at any time unless the noise created is effectively muffled and reduced. 
(13)  Animals and birds. The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or long, continued noise, shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity is prohibited at any time. Each and every person shall prevent each, any and every dog, cat, or bird upon any premises in the town controlled or used by such person from barking, howling, or producing other excessive noises for any period of more than three consecutive minutes, and from making any such noises as could reasonably be expected to disturb the peace, rest, quietude or comfort of any person of normal sensibilities. 
(14)  Peddlers. The raucous shouting or crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood is prohibited at any time. 
(15)  Public speaking. The loud speaking, preaching, orating or exhorting by any person upon any public street or sidewalk within the corporate limits of the town which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood is prohibited at any time. 
(16)  Noise used to attract. The use of any drum, loudspeaker, or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention, which causes crowds of people to block or congregate upon the sidewalks or streets near or adjacent thereto is prohibited at any time. 
(17)  Vehicular noises. The excessive spinning of the tires of any motor vehicle, or the racing of its engine unnecessarily, or the running of a vehicle so out of repair that it emits loud or unnecessary grating, grinding or rasping noises, or the running of vehicles without proper mufflers, which disturbs the peace and quiet of a neighborhood is prohibited at any time. 
(18)  Vibration. Using or causing the use of any device that creates any ground vibration which is perceptible without instruments at any point on or beyond the property boundary of the source if on private property or at 50 feet from the source if on public property; or the creation of vibration or bass reverberations at any time if it is perceptible inside a complaining person's residence, through the sense of touch or through visual observation of moving objects, or through the sense of hearing, is prohibited at any time. (See section 106.06.67, "vibration" for more information) 
(e)  Maximum noise levels. The following chart illustrates the maximum noise levels allowed: 
ARTICLE VI, TABLE QMAXIMUM NOISE LEVELSType of Noise Zoning 
Districts Applicable Hours of Operation Max dBA Construction Nonresidential 7:00 a.m. - 9:00 p.m. 90 dBA Loading/unloading Nonresidential 7:00 a.m. - 9:00 p.m. 90 dBA Big box store Nonresidential 7:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m. 110 dBA " Nonresidential 10:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m. 80 dBA Outdoor music event 
(Fri.-Sat.) Nonresidential noon - 11:00 p.m. 100 dBA Outdoor music event 
(Sun.-Thur.) Nonresidential noon - 10:00 p.m. 100 dBA All other noises Nonresidential 7:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m. 90 dBA " Nonresidential 10:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m. 80 dBA Trash collection Residential 7:00 a.m. - 9:00 p.m. 80 dBA Lawn care Residential 8:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m. 80 dBA Ice cream vendors Residential 10:00 a.m. - 9:00 p.m. 80 dBA All other noises Residential 7:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m. 80 dBA " Residential 10:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m. 70 dBA  
Note 1. All measurements of sound shall be taken at the property line, 5 feet above grade, using ASNI Type 2 or greater precision instrument. 
Note 2. Noise measurement shall be a minimum of 30 seconds in duration - the highest decibel level during the 30-second measurement shall be used. 
Note 3. Any noise occurring outside the hours of operation listed above shall be considered to be limited to the general "all other noises" category per the type of zoning district in which the noise emanates. 
(f)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Emergencies. Noise that is caused in the performance of emergency or public service, including police, fire and public utility operations, acting in the performance of lawful duties to protect the health, safety or welfare of the community. 
(2)  Street or utility repairs. Noise as a result of repairs of utility structures which pose a clear and immediate danger to life, health, or significant loss of property. 
(3)  Town service work. Noise created by power equipment being operated by town employees or utility company employees, during normal performance of duties. 
(4)  Town events. Noise resulting by the use of amplification equipment or sounds created at official municipal functions, parades approved by the town, events sanctioned or sponsored by the town occurring at lakeside, or the use of amplification equipment in conjunction with functions or events for which a special event permit has been issued under the town's ordinances. 
(5)  School activities. Noise resulting from reasonable activities conducted on public playgrounds and public or private school grounds, which are conducted in accordance with the manner in which such spaces are generally used, including, but not limited to, school athletic and entertainment events. 
(6)  Horns or backing warning devices. Horns or other warning devices required by law. 
(7)  Church bell. A person operating a bell for a religious activity. 
(g)  Annual outdoor music license. A venue or activity that incorporates music or other loud noises (such as a pub or outdoor event venue) on an ongoing and basis shall apply for an annual outdoor music license. This license will ensure that the applicant is aware of and willing to comply with the maximum dBA levels listed on table Q and that specific sound mitigation efforts are being used to contain the sound. 
(1)  Application. The application for an outdoor music venue or any other entity that expects, as part of normal operation, to include a high noise level requires the approval of an annual outdoor music license, issued at the discretion of the director. 
(2)  Definition. Music venue/tavern/pub. Any physical building with or without an outside pavilion or patio that is anticipated to include a high noise level, including but not limited to musicians, entertainers, or loud-speakers. This type of business will utilize the annual outdoor music license application. 
(3)  Regulations. The applicant for an annual outdoor music license shall provide the following information and is obligated to meet the standards stated in the application for the duration of the permit: 
a.  Dates and times. The dates and timeframes for which the license is required. 
b.  Noise level. The maximum dBA anticipated (not to exceed the maximum limit on table Q). 
c.  Noise abatement measures. The noise abatement measures to be taken to limit the noise from extending beyond the property line, including but not limited to placement of speakers, noise containment structures, landscaping, and fencing. 
d.  Signature of person in authority. The application must include the person or persons who are responsible for the operation of the venue and who will be liable for any penalties and/or fines due to exceeding the noise levels listed in the license application. 
(4)  Approval. Once the director has determined that the noise levels requested for the particular location and venue are appropriate for the location requested, the date(s) and time(s) requested, will not place an unwarranted burden on the persons located in adjacent properties, and that the regulations listed in (3), above, have been met and will continue to be met, approval for the annual outdoor music license may be granted. 
(h)  Special event permit. 
(1)  Application. The application for an infrequent special event that includes high noise levels that may exceed those listed in table Q requires the approval of a special event permit, issued at the discretion of the director. 
(2)  Definition. For the purposes of this chapter section, a "special event" is defined as any outside activity that may include noise levels that are anticipated to exceed those listed in table Q, including but not limited to musicians, entertainers, loud-speakers, fireworks, parades, charity events, races, or other similar functions or activities. This type of activity will use the special event permit application form and will only be considered for events that occur infrequently. 
(3)  Regulations. The applicant for a special event permit shall provide the following information and is obligated to meet the standards stated in the application for the duration of the permit: 
a.  Date and time. The date and timeframe for which the permit is required. 
b.  Noise level. The maximum dBA anticipated (if greater than the stated maximum in table Q). 
c.  Signature of person in authority. The application must include the person or persons who are responsible for the operation of the event and who will be liable for any penalties and/or fines due to exceeding the noise levels listed in the permit. 
(4)  Approval. Once the director has determined that the noise levels requested for the particular location and venue are appropriate for the location requested, the date(s) and time(s) requested, will not place an unwarranted burden on the persons located in adjacent properties, and that the regulations listed in (3), above, have been met and will continue to be met, approval for the special event permit. 
(i)  Enforcement and penalties. Once one of the above permits is approved, the permittee shall place the approved permit in a prominent location, easily seen by the public. If a special events permit, the permit will state the dates and times that noise may exceed those listed in table Q and will list the new maximum sound level and any other exceptions that have been approved by the town. If an annual outdoor music license, will state the date on which the annual license expires. 
(1)  First offense. An entity either with or without a special event permit or an annual outdoor music license that exceeds the noise limits listed either in the approved special event permit or table Q, respectively, will be given a warning by a town official or police officer. Immediate action to reduce the noise levels to the approved acceptable levels must be taken. 
(2)  Second offense. 
a.  With a permit or license. A second offence for an entity with an approved special event permit or an approved annual outdoor music license that exceeds the noise limits listed either in the special event permit or table Q, respectively, will be fined the amount equal to the application fee. 
b.  Without a permit or license. A second offence for an entity without an approved permit or license shall be fined the amount equal to the special event permit application fee. 
c.  Immediate action to reduce the noise levels to the written acceptable levels must be taken. 
(3)  Third or subsequent offense. 
a.  With a permit or license. Any third or subsequent offense for an entity with an approved special event permit or an approved annual outdoor music license that exceeds the noise limits listed either in the special event permit or table Q, respectively, may be fined double the amount equal to the application fee, at the discretion of the town manager. In addition, the special event permit or the annual outdoor music license may be revoked, also at the discretion of the town manager. No registration fees shall be returned to the entity in violation. If the offending entity, company, or individual's permit or license is revoked, no new special event permit or music license will be approved for that entity, company, or individual for a period not less than six months following the revocation of the permit or license. 
b.  Without a permit or license. Any third or subsequent offense for an entity producing excessive noise may be fined double the amount equal to the special event permit application fee, at the town manager's discretion. 
(4)  A violation of this section is a nuisance. The prosecution of an offense under this section does not limit the town's right to abate the nuisance, including the use of injunctive or other civil relief. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.06.63 - Smoke and particulate matter. 
(a)  Smoke and particulate matter in all districts except HI Heavy Industrial District. No operation or use shall cause, create, or allow the emission for more than three minutes in any one hour or air contaminants which at the emission point or within the bounds of the property are: 
(1)  As dark or darker in shade as that designated as No. 2 on the Ringlemann Chart as published by the United States Bureau of Mines Information Circular 7118. 
(2)  Of such opacity as to obscure an observer's view to a degree equal to or greater than does smoke or contaminants in the standard prescribed in section 106.05.04, "new and unlisted uses," except that; when the presence of uncombined water is the only reason for failure to comply or when such contaminants are emitted inside a building which prevents their escape into the atmosphere the standards specified in section 106.05.04, "new and unlisted uses," shall not apply. 
(3)  The emission of particulate matter from all sources shall not exceed one-half pound per acre of property within the plant site per any one hour. 
(4)  The open storage and open processing operations, including on site transportation movements which are the source of wind or air borne dust or other particulate matter, or which involves dust or other particulate air contaminants, generating equipment such as used in paint spraying, grain handling, sand or gravel processing or storage or sand blasting shall be so conducted that dust and other particulate matter so generated are not transported across the boundary line of the tract on which the use is located in concentrations exceeding four grains per 1,000 cubic feet of air. 
(b)  Smoke and particulate matter in HI Heavy Industrial District. No operation or use shall cause, create, or allow the emission for more than three minutes in any one hour or air contaminants which at the emission point or within the bounds of the property are: 
(1)  As dark or darker in shade as that designated as No. 2 on the Ringlemann Chart as published by the United States Bureau of Mines Information Circular 7118. 
(2)  Of such opacity as to obscure an observer's view to a degree equal to or greater than does smoke or contaminants in the standard prescribed in section 106.05.04, "new and unlisted uses," except that; when the presence of uncombined water is the only reason for failure to comply or when such contaminants are emitted inside a building which prevents their escape into the atmosphere the standards specified in section 106.05.04, "new and unlisted uses," shall not apply. 
(3)  The emission of particulate matter from all sources shall not exceed one pound per acre of property within the plant site per any one hour. 
(4)  The open storage and open processing operations, including on site transportation movements which are the source of wind or air borne dust or other particulate matter; or which involves dust or other particulate air contaminants, generating equipment such as used in paint spraying, grain handling, sand or gravel processing or storage or sand blasting shall be so conducted that dust and other particulate matter so generated are not transported across the boundary line of the tract on which the use is located in concentrations exceeding four grains per 1,000 cubic feet of air. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.06.64 - Odorous matter. 
(a)  Odorous matter in all districts except HI Heavy Industrial District. 
(1)  No use shall be located or operated which involves the emission of odorous matter from a source of operation where the odorous matter exceeds the odor threshold at the bounding property line or any point beyond the tract on which such use or operation is located. 
(2)  The odor threshold as herein set forth shall be determined by observation by a person. In any case, where uncertainty may arise or where the operator or owner of an odor emitting use may disagree with the enforcing officer or where specific measurement of odor concentration is required, the method and procedures specified by American Society for Testing Materials A.S.T.M.D. 1391-57 entitled Standard Method for Measurement of Odor in Atmospheres shall be used and a copy of A.S.T.M.D. 1391-57 is hereby incorporated by reference. 
(b)  Odorous matter in HI Heavy Industrial District. 
(1)  No use shall be located or operated which involves the emission of odorous matter from a source of operation where the odorous matter exceeds a concentration at the bounding property line or any point which when diluted with an equal volume of odor free air exceeds the odor threshold (2 odor units). 
(2)  The odor threshold as herein set forth shall be determined by observation by a person. In any case, where uncertainty may arise or where the operator or owner of an odor emitting use may disagree with the enforcing officer or where specific measurement of odor concentration is required, the method and procedures specified by American Society for Testing Materials A.S.T.M.D. 1391-57 entitled Standard Method for Measurement of Odor in Atmospheres shall be used and a copy of A.S.T.M.D. 1391-57 is hereby incorporated by reference. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.06.65 - Flammable or explosive hazard material. 
(a)  Flammable or explosive hazard materials in all districts except HI Heavy Industrial District. 
(1)  No use involving the manufacture or storage of compounds or products which decompose by detonation shall be permitted except that chlorates, nitrates, perchlorates, phosphorus, and similar substances and compounds in small quantities for use by industry, school laboratories, druggists or wholesalers may be permitted when approved by the fire department. 
(2)  The storage and use of all flammable liquids and materials such as pyroxylin plastics, nitrocellulose film, solvents, and petroleum products shall be permitted only when such storage or use conforms to the standards and regulations of the fire department. 
(b)  Flammable or explosive hazard materials in HI Heavy Industrial District. 
(1)  No use involving the manufacture or storage of compounds or products which decompose by detonation shall be permitted except when such use is in conformance with all other ordinances of the town and has been approved by the fire department. 
(2)  The storage and use of all flammable liquids and materials such as pyroxylin plastics, nitrocellulose film, solvents, and petroleum products shall be permitted only when such storage or use conforms to the standards and regulations of the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.06.66 - Toxic and noxious matter. 
    Toxic and noxious matter in all districts. No operation or use shall emit a concentration across the bounding property line of the tract on which such operation or use is located of toxic or noxious matter which will exceed ten percent of the concentration (exposure) considered as the threshold limit for an industrial worker as such standards are set forth by the Texas State Department of Health in Threshold Limit Values Occupational Health Regulation No. 3. and a copy of which is hereby incorporated by reference and is on file in the office of the building official. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 106.06.67 - Vibration. 
(a)  Vibration in all districts except HI Heavy Industrial District. No operation or use shall at any time create earthborn vibration which when measured at the bounding property line of the source operation exceed the limits of displacement set forth in the following table in the frequency ranges specified: 
ARTICLE VI, TABLE R VIBRATION LIMITS
ALL DISTRICTS EXCEPT HI HEAVY INDUSTRIAL Frequency Cycles per Second Displacement in Inches 0 to 10 0.0010 10 to 20 0.0008 20 to 30 0.0005 30 to 40 0.0004 40 and over 0.0003  
(b)  Vibration in HI Heavy Industrial District. No operation or use shall at any time create earthborn vibration which when measured at the bounding property line of the source operation exceed the limits of displacement set forth in the following table in the frequency ranges specified: 
ARTICLE VI, TABLE S VIBRATION LIMITS - HI HEAVY INDUSTRIAL Frequency Cycles Per Second Displacement In Inches 0 to 10 0.0020 10 to 20 0.0016 20 to 30 0.0010 30 to 40 0.0006  
Sec. 106.06.68 - Glare. 
    Glare in all districts. No use or operation in any zoning district shall be located on or conducted so as to produce intense glare or direct illumination across the bounding property line from a visible source of illumination nor shall any such light be of such intensity as to create a nuisance or detract from the use and enjoyment of adjacent property. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Chapter 107 - SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE 
ARTICLE 107.01 - GENERAL SUBDIVISION AUTHORITY OF THE TOWN 

Sec. 107.01.01 - Authority, purpose and applicability. 
(a)  Authority. The regulations of this subdivision ordinance [from which this chapter is derived] are authorized under the V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 212, (including subchapter B) and the town's Charter. The provisions of this subdivision ordinance expressly extend to all areas inside the town limits and throughout the town's extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ), as either may be adjusted in the future, and as provided in the town's interlocal agreement with Denton County, in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 242. 
(b)  Purpose. 
(1)  The development and subdivision of land, as they affect a community's quality of life, are activities for which regulation is a valid function of municipal government. The regulations contained within this subdivision ordinance are intended to protect the interests of the public and of private parties by granting certain rights, privileges and obligations. The requirements in this ordinance are also intended to establish a fair and rational procedure for developing and subdividing land such that land will be developed in accordance with existing physical, social, economic, and environmental conditions. 
(2)  The provisions of this ordinance are intended to implement standards and requirements provided for herein, and shall be requirements for the platting and developing of subdivisions within the town and its ETJ. 
(3)  The provisions of this ordinance are intended to implement the following objectives: 
a.  Promote the development and the utilization of land in a manner that provides an attractive and high-quality community environment in accordance with the comprehensive plan and the zoning ordinance of the town; 
b.  Assist orderly, efficient, and coordinated development within the town's limits and its ETJ; 
c.  Guide and assist property owners and applicants in the correct procedures to be followed, and to inform them of the required standards; 
d.  Protect the public interest by having standards for, but not limited to, the location, design, class and type of streets, sidewalks, trails, alleys, utilities and essential public services; 
e.  Integrate the development of various tracts of land into the community, and coordinate the future development of adjoining tracts; 
f.  Promote the most efficient and beneficial provision of public facilities and services for each tract being subdivided; 
g.  Provide for compatible relationships between land uses and buildings; 
h.  Provide for efficient traffic circulation throughout the municipality; 
i.  Provide for pedestrian and bicyclist movement that is appropriate within the context of various uses of land and buildings; 
j.  Minimize pollution of the air, streams, bodies of water, and aquifers; promote the adequacy of storm drainage facilities; minimize erosion; safeguard both surface and groundwater supplies, as well as natural resources and endangered or threatened plant and animal life; and encourage the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the municipality in order to preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty of the community and the value of the land; 
k.  Preserve the natural beauty and topography of public and private properties by encouraging where possible that natural features and land forms are incorporated into developments as amenities; 
l.  Establish accurate records of land subdivision; 
m.  Provide for necessary infrastructure that will have sufficient capacity to serve existing and future developments as well as current and future citizens within the town and its ETJ; 
n.  Provide for adequate light, air and privacy; safety from fire, flood, and other dangers; and prevent overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of population; 
o.  Encourage the development of residential areas that incorporate a range of housing and lifestyle choices. 
(c)  Applicability. 
(1)  The provisions of this subdivision ordinance apply to any non-exempt (see section 107.04.01(d), exemptions) division of land, combination of separate land parcels, and/or development of land within the corporate boundaries of the town and within its ETJ. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued for any building or structure on a property until a plat has been approved unless specifically exempted herein (see section 107.04.01(d), exemptions). 
(d)  Subdivision rules. The provisions of this subdivision ordinance, the standards governing constructed facilities applicable to plats in other portions of the Little Elm Code of Ordinances, and the technical standards contained in the engineering design standards, constitute the subdivision rules of the town, which apply to applications for plat approval inside town limits and within the town's ETJ. 
(e)  Engineering design standards. The Town of Little Elm adopted engineering design standards on July 18, 2017. These standards, as they exist or may be amended, shall remain in force of law and effect and are herein incorporated into the subdivision ordinance. The engineering design standards may be drafted or revised, from time to time, at the discretion and determination of the town engineer, with approval by the town council. As revised engineering design standards are approved and adopted by the town council, said standards shall be included and substituted for the existing engineering design standards, and shall thereafter have the same force of law and effect as if originally adopted hereby. Any individual may request to receive written notice of any new or amended provision to the engineering design standards by providing said request in writing to the town engineer. A copy of the current engineering design standards shall be kept on file and available for review with the town engineer's office and on the town's website. 
(f)  Compliance with town plans and ordinances required. Compliance with all town ordinances pertaining to the subdivision and development of land, and the comprehensive plan (where applicable), shall be required prior to approval of any application pursuant to this ordinance. All such ordinances and the comprehensive plan shall be construed to mean those documents as they exist or may be amended. It is the applicant's responsibility to be familiar with, and to comply with, town ordinances, the comprehensive plan, and the provisions of this ordinance. Applicable town ordinances and plans with which all applications must comply include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Comprehensive plan (Ordinance No. 1398, adopted on June 20, 2017), and as amended. 
(2)  Zoning ordinance (Ordinance No. 1407, adopted on August 15, 2017), and as amended. 
(3)  Engineering design standards (Ordinance No. 1403, adopted as "appendix A" of the subdivision ordinance on July 18, 2017), and as amended. 
(4)  Parks, recreation and open space master plan (Resolution No. 08021605, adopted on August 2, 2016), and as amended. 
(5)  International Building, Residential, and Fire Codes (Ordinance No. 1264, adopted on February 4, 2015), and as amended. 
(6)  Impact fee ordinance (Ord. No. 1041, adopted on March 15, 2011), and as amended. 
(7)  Flood prevention ordinance (Ordinance No. 1035, adopted on February 15, 2011), and as amended. 
(8)  Federal, state and local environmental regulations. 
(9)  Other applicable portions of the Little Elm Code of Ordinances. 
(g)  Special provisions. 
(1)  No permit shall be issued by the town for the installation of septic tanks upon any lot in a subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved and filed for record, or upon any lot in a subdivision in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full. 
(2)  No building, repair, plumbing or electrical permit shall be issued by the town for any structure on a lot in a subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved, nor for any structure on a lot within a subdivision in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full. 
(3)  The town manager and the town engineer may allow sectional development (i.e. phased development) of an approved final plat provided that the section of the final plat meets all the requirements of this ordinance in full as though it were a subdivision within itself. 
(4)  The town shall not authorize any other person, nor shall the town itself repair, maintain, install or provide any streets or public utility services in any subdivision for which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full. 
(5)  The town shall not authorize any other person nor shall the town itself sell or supply any water, gas, electricity or sewerage service within a subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved, nor in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full. 
(6)  In behalf of the town, the town attorney shall, when directed by the town council, institute appropriate action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this ordinance or the standards referred to herein with respect to any violation thereof which occurs within the town, within the extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) of the town as such jurisdiction is determined under the Municipal Annexation Act, or within any area subject to all or a part of the provisions of this ordinance. 
(7)  If any subdivision exists for which a final plat has not been approved or in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full, the town council shall pass a resolution reciting the fact that such noncompliance or failure to secure final plat approval, and reciting the fact that the provisions of paragraphs (1), (2), (4) and (5) of this section will apply to the subdivision and the lots therein. The town secretary shall, when directed by the town council, cause a certified copy of such resolution under the corporate seal of the town to be filed in the deed records of Denton County. If full compliance and final plat approval are secured after the filing of such resolution, the town secretary shall forthwith file an instrument, in the deed records of the county stating that paragraphs (1), (2), (4) and (5) no longer apply. 
(8)  The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the issuance of permits to any lots upon which a residential building exists and was in existence prior to passage of this subdivision ordinance, or to prohibit the repair, maintenance or installation of any street or public utility services for any residential building, or abutting any sale lot, the last recorded conveyance of which prior to passage of this ordinance was by metes and bounds, and/or any subdivision, or lot therein, recorded or unrecorded, which subdivision was in existence prior to the passage of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Secs. 107.01.02-107.01.10 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 107.02 - AUTHORITY OF DECISION MAKERS 

Sec. 107.02.01 - General provisions. 
(a)  Source of authority. Authority under this subdivision ordinance shall be vested in and delegated to the officials and decision-makers designated in section 107.02.02, responsible official assigned, and under the town's Charter, the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, and the Little Elm Code of Ordinances. This authority shall be deemed supplemental to any other authority lawfully conferred upon the officials and decision-makers. The omission of a citation in this subdivision ordinance to any authority conferred upon the officials and decision-makers under the town's Charter, the constitution or laws of the State of Texas, or the Little Elm Code of Ordinances, or the failure to identify in this article authority conferred by other provisions of this subdivision ordinance, shall not be construed as limiting the actions of such officials and decision-makers taken in accordance with and in reliance upon such authority. 
(b)  Implied authority. The officials and decision-makers shall have all implied authority necessary to carry out the duties and responsibilities expressly delegated by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 212 and this subdivision ordinance, to the extent that the implied authority is not in conflict with the expressly delegated authority. 
(c)  Limitation on authority. 
(1)  Town policy. It is the policy of the town that the standards and procedures applicable to development of property within the town limits and within the town's extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) are as stated in this subdivision ordinance, notwithstanding any representation by any town official summarizing, paraphrasing or otherwise interpreting such standards to the contrary, whether generally or as applied to development of specific property. 
(2)  Representations. The applicant shall not rely on any representation made by an employee of the town, a member of an appointed board or commission, or a member of the town council concerning the likelihood of an outcome of that official's decision or the decision of an appointed board or commission or the town council, on any application that has yet to be filed or is pending before the town. An official may, however, convey information concerning that official's position on a pending application in accordance with his role as the responsible official for such application or as the town staff contact person. 
(3)  Effect of comprehensive plan or development standard on liability claims. The town's approval of an application under the standards and procedures of this subdivision ordinance does not guarantee or ensure that development of the property in accordance with the standards will prevent, minimize or mitigate harm to adjoining property. A person who undertakes development activities shall not rely on the town's approval of an application as ensuring that the development activities will not result in harm to adjoining property. The regulations contained in this subdivision ordinance constitute an exercise of the town's governmental authority, and approval of an application shall not give rise to any liability on the part of the town or its officers, agents and employees, nor will an approval release the applicant from any liability for harm arising out of development of the property under applicable law. 
(4)  Variances. Except as expressly provided for in section 107.10.01, variances, this subdivision ordinance, no official, board or commission of the town, or the town council, shall have authority to waive any requirement or standard for an application. Any attempted variance of a requirement or standard for an application in contravention of this section shall hereby be deemed null and void, and, upon discovery, shall be grounds for revocation of a permit or approved application. 
(d)  Conflict in authority. If any of the provisions of this subdivision ordinance are in apparent conflict, the director of development services shall, after due consideration as to the purpose and intent of each conflicting provision, make a determination as to which provision shall apply. The director of development services shall make every effort to be fair and consistent in such interpretations, and his decision may be appealed to the town manager (see section 107.02.06, town manager and other officials), unless otherwise noted within. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.02.02 - Responsible official assigned. 
(a)  Responsible official. The responsible official shall be the director of a designated town department who is assigned responsibility under this subdivision ordinance for taking the following actions with regard to a particular type of application authorized under this subdivision ordinance (see also table 107.13.01, applications - responsible officials, decision makers, and appeals). 
(1)  Accepting the application for filing, and processing an application; 
(2)  Reviewing and making recommendations concerning an application; 
(3)  Seeking advice of other town departments, and coordinating any recommendations from such departments concerning an application; 
(4)  Determining a request for exemption; 
(5)  Preparing reports to and advising any board, commission or the town council that has responsibility for making recommendations on or approving/denying an application; 
(6)  Promulgating additional or modified policies, standards and administrative rules for adoption by the town council that apply to an application; 
(7)  Initiating enforcement actions concerning compliance with the standards applicable to an application and the conditions imposed thereon; and 
(8)  Taking all other actions necessary for administration of the provisions of this subdivision ordinance with respect to an application, petition, approval, or appeal. 
(b)  Delegation. The responsible official may delegate the official's authority under this subdivision ordinance to subordinate officials, who shall thereupon be deemed the responsible official for purposes of carrying out the delegated duties. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.02.03 - Director of development services. 
(a)  Responsible official. the director of development services is the responsible official for the following types of applications, waivers, variances and petitions: 
(1)  Review and staff report, including a staff recommendation for approval/denial, for any type of plat; 
(2)  Waiver of right to 30-day action; 
(3)  Extension of a plat approval; 
(4)  Appeal of a decision on any application for which the town engineer is the responsible official; 
(5)  Vested rights petition for any application when the director of development services is the responsible official. 
(6)  Review recommendations by the community development corporation (CDC), and carry out the CDC's decisions, on the following types of applications: 
a.  Acceptance of fees in lieu of parkland dedication; 
b.  The portion of an application showing where park land, including trails, is to be dedicated, and whether such dedication is acceptable; 
c.  Any other portions of applications showing items required by article 107.09, parks and open space. 
(b)  Final decision-maker. The director of development services is the final decision-maker for the following types of applications (subject to any appeal): 
(1)  Minor plat, as outlined in section 107.04.05, minor plats; 
(2)  Amending plat, as outlined in section 107.04.08, amending plats; 
(3)  Extension for a preliminary plat approval, as outlined in section 107.04.03, preliminary plats; and 
(4)  Certain types of vested rights petitions, as outlined in section 107.10.02, vested rights. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.02.04 - Town engineer. 
(a)  Responsible official. The town engineer is the responsible official for the following types of applications: 
(1)  Review of construction plans, including all engineering plans and related construction tasks, and approval of contracts for public improvements, as outlined in section 107.05.01, construction plans; 
(2)  Time extensions for construction plans, as outlined in section 107.05.01(h), extension; 
(3)  Construction releases, as outlined in section 107.05.01(i), construction release; 
(4)  Development agreement, as outlined in section 107.05.04, development agreements; 
(5)  Appeal related to an application for which the town engineer is the responsible official; 
(6)  Certain types of variances (related to construction requirements), as outlined in section 107.10.01, variances; and 
(7)  Vested rights petition for an application for which the town engineer is the responsible official, as outlined in section 107.10.02, vested rights. 
(b)  Final decision-maker. The town engineer is the final decision-maker for the following types of applications (subject to any appeal): 
(1)  Approval of construction plans, including all engineering plans and related construction management tasks, and approval of contracts for public improvements; 
(2)  Construction release; 
(3)  Extension for construction plans approval; 
(4)  Certain types of vested rights petitions for an application for which the town engineer is the initial decision-maker. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.02.05 - Director of parks and recreation. 
(a)  Responsible official and initial decision-maker. the director of parks and recreation is the responsible official for the review and recommendation to the community development corporation (which acts as the "park board") and for carrying out the CDC's decisions, on the following types of applications: 
(1)  Acceptance of fees in lieu of parkland dedication; 
(2)  The portion of an application showing where park land, including trails, is to be dedicated, and whether such dedication is acceptable; 
(3)  Any other portions of applications showing items required by article 107.09, parks and open space. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.02.06 - Town manager and other officials. 
(a)  Town manager. Any decision which is made by a staff person other than the director of development services shall be reviewed first by the director of development services. Any decision that cannot be resolved by the director of development services shall be appealed to the town manager, who is the appellate decision-maker for any appeal for which the director of development services is responsible. Any further appeal as may be provided for in any subsequent sections of this subdivision ordinance. 
(b)  Fire chief. No provision contained in this subdivision ordinance shall be deemed or interpreted as a limitation on the fire chief's exclusive authority as set forth in the International Fire Code, especially as the decision relates to health and safety issues. 
(c)  Other town officials. The town attorney and any other official delegated responsibilities under this subdivision ordinance or other provisions of the Code of Ordinances are authorized to take all actions necessary to carry out their responsibilities in accordance with the requirements and limitations prescribed herein. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.02.07 - Planning and zoning commission. 
(a)  Organization, powers and duties. The planning and zoning commission (also referred to as the "commission") shall hold meetings and have the powers and duties as provided for in the Code of Ordinances of the town (Code of Ordinances, chapter 106, zoning), and as authorized by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code chs. 211 and 212. Such powers and duties shall include exercising all the authority and control conferred by law relating to platting. 
(b)  Staff liaison. the director of development services shall act as the staff liaison to the commission, and shall abide by the town's usual record-keeping and retention policies for boards and commissions, as amended, in maintaining records of the commission's meetings and actions. 
(c)  Authority for deciding applications. The commission shall have the authority to act on the following types of applications: 
(1)  Conveyance plats; 
(2)  Preliminary plats; 
(3)  Final plats; 
(4)  Replats (at a public hearing); 
(5)  All other types of plats, with the exception of minor plats and amending plats (which may be decided by the director of development services unless deferred to the commission). 
(d)  Authority for deciding appeals. The commission shall hear and decide the following appeals: 
(1)  Any variance petition on an application for a preliminary plat, final plat or replat; 
(2)  Minor plat or amended plat that is deferred by the director of development services, as outlined in section 107.04.05(h), appeal of decision on minor plat application, or section 107.04.08(i), appeal of decision on amending plat application, as applicable; 
(3)  Any other appeal so authorized by this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.02.08 - Town council. 
(a)  Authority for deciding applications and appeals. The town council shall hear and decide appeals from decisions made by the commission when such appeals are authorized by this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.02.09, 107.02.10 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 107.03 - SUBMITTAL PROCESSING 

Sec. 107.03.01 - Pre-submittal meeting (development review committee meeting). 
(a)  Optional development review committee meeting. Prior to the official submission of an application for review and consideration, applicants are strongly encouraged to contact the development services staff to schedule a development review committee (DRC) meeting. This meeting will alert the applicant to the ordinances that apply to the specific project. 
(b)  Meeting request. To schedule a DRC meeting, the applicant requests a DRC meeting with the planning and development services staff, and such request shall describe the type of development desired and/or the type of application intended for submittal along with an initial concept plan. The applicant shall then be notified by the planning and development services staff of the time and place for the requested meeting. 
(c)  Vested rights. There shall be no vested rights based on the DRC meeting. 
(d)  Effect. Following the DRC meeting, the applicant may proceed with the submittal of the appropriate application(s), including, but not limited to, the conveyance or preliminary plat, final plat, and civil plans. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.03.02 - Application contents. 
(a)  Application contents generally. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the development services staff with the required information and exhibits as stated on the application form. Incomplete applications shall not be accepted. 
(1)  Application timing. 
a.  Development services staff shall establish submittal deadlines for all applications decided by the director of development services and by the commission. Such submittal schedule will be posted on the town website. 
b.  An application must be considered officially complete in accordance with section 107.03.03(c), determination of completeness, of this subdivision ordinance prior to being processed for review and consideration. 
(2)  Fees required. Every application shall be accompanied by the prescribed fees set forth in the town's fee schedule, as approved by town council and as may be amended from time to time. Fees are not refundable and are not a guarantee of approval. Review of the application will not begin until the appropriate fees have been processed by the town. 
(3)  Proof of paid taxes on property. An application shall not be deemed complete, nor shall it be approved, if there are delinquent town taxes on the subject property. 
(b)  Modification of applications prior to approval. The applicant may modify any submitted application prior to the expiration of the period during which the town is required to act on the application. 
(1)  Modifications requested by the town. Town requested revisions or modifications to any plat are required to be resubmitted to the department services department a minimum of five calendar days prior to the scheduled date for the planning and zoning commission hearing to allow staff adequate time to review the revisions and modifications for completeness and accuracy. Resubmittals for residential replats that require public noticing must be submitted a minimum of 20 calendar days prior to the scheduled date for the planning and zoning commission hearing to allow staff adequate time to review the revisions and modifications for completeness and accuracy and to publicize the public hearing in the official newspaper of the town, as required by state law. 
(2)  Additional revisions. Should certain requested revisions not be completed to the satisfaction of the town staff, additional revisions may be required from the applicant. The additional comments to be addressed may affect the tentatively scheduled planning and zoning commission hearing date (see section 107.04.04). 
(3)  Applicant initiated revisions. In all other instances (e.g., when the applicant chooses to submit a revised application on his own accord because of a change in development decisions), submittal of a modified application shall be accompanied by a properly executed waiver of right to 30-day action (see section 107.03.03(d), waiver of right to 30-day action) in order to allow town staff adequate time to review the new information and modifications, and shall extend the time for deciding the application for a period equal to the time specified in this subdivision ordinance to decide the original application, commencing on the official filing date of the modified application. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.03.03 - Application submittal process, official filing date, thirty-day waiver. 
(a)  Initiation by owner. An application required under this subdivision ordinance may be initiated only by the owner of the land subject to the application, or by the owner's duly authorized representative. If the applicant is a representative of the property owner, the application shall include a written and notarized statement from the property owner, such as a duly executed power of attorney, authorizing the representative to file the application on the owner's behalf. 
(b)  Applicability. The procedures within this chapter shall apply to all applications that are required by the town and submitted in accordance with this subdivision ordinance. 
(c)  Official filing date. The 30-day time period established by state law, and by this subdivision ordinance, for processing and deciding an application shall begin on the official filing date. The official filing date is defined as the scheduled intake date for each bimonthly review period and shall be 30 days prior to the planning and zoning commission meeting, as shown on the planning submittal schedule, found on the Town of Little Elm Development Services webpage. Submittals presented to the town either in person or received by mail shall be considered to be accepted for submittal on the first official filing date following the date the plans are physically received. If the official filing date falls on a town holiday, then the official filing date shall be the next business day following the holiday. the fee for the plat shall be processed on the official filing date. 
(d)  Waiver of right to 30-day action. The director of development services shall be the responsible official for a waiver of right to 30-day action. 
(1)  Application includes waiver language. A waiver of right to 30-day action is included as part of plat applications. Applicants are strongly encouraged to sign the request waiving the right to 30-day action since the review and revision process for plats frequently requires more time than the number of days allowed by state law. Signing the waiver in no way slows the processing of the plat in question and staff will make every effort to expedite the plat approval process. 
(2)  Effect of not signing the 30-day waiver. However, if the applicant chooses to not sign the waiver of right to 30-day action, and the plat review has not been completed within the time limit imposed by state law, the staff must take to plat to the planning and zoning commission with a recommendation for denial within the 30-day time period. Subsequently, the applicant must re-submit the plat request, pay the application fee again, and begin the process as if the plat had never been submitted or reviewed. 
(3)  Residential replat notification and 30-day waiver. An application for a residential replat requiring public noticing by state law shall necessitate the inclusion of a waiver of right to 30-day action since it is not possible to legally notice for the public hearing for a residential replat as required by state law and also schedule the residential replat for consideration before the planning and zoning commission within the 30-day timeframe. 
(4)  Requirements maintained. Submission of a waiver of right to 30-day action, and acceptance of such waiver by the town as part of an application, shall not be deemed in any way a waiver to any requirement within this subdivision ordinance. Any waiver from the subdivision requirements herein is a separate and distinct process (see section 107.10.01, variances). 
(e)  Owners dedication language. Refer to the plat checklist for the appropriate owner dedication language to include on the plat. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.03.04 - Application process, revisions, approval. 
(a)  Action by responsible official. The responsible official for an application shall initiate internal (i.e., by town departments) review and assessment of the application according to the town's development review procedures. The responsible official shall also, to the extent possible, work with the applicant by advising on and communicating revisions that may be necessary to bring the application into compliance with town regulations in preparation for consideration by the appropriate decision-maker. 
(b)  Revisions to exhibits. The responsible official may enumerate to the applicant such revisions to the plat exhibits as are necessary to bring the exhibit into compliance with the subdivision ordinance. Such revisions shall be made by the applicant or his agent in a timely fashion. 
(c)  Decision. The decision-maker for the application shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application within the time period prescribed by this subdivision ordinance. 
(d)  Conditions attached. The decision-maker may attach such conditions to the approval of an application as are reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with all applicable requirements of this subdivision ordinance. These conditions of approval shall be completed prior to the plat being filed for record in Denton County. 
(e)  Notification of decision. The town shall send written notice of a decision on an application within 14 calendar days following the approval date. This written notice will include any future steps the applicant must take. 
(f)  Notification of town appeal. Whenever appeal is requested from a final decision on an application following a public hearing, or whenever the town is to consider revocation of an application which was obtained following a public hearing, personal notice of the appeal or revocation proceeding shall be provided to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.03.05 - Public hearings required for certain replats. 
(a)  Scheduling and noticing the hearing. When the responsible official determines that an application is complete and that a public hearing is required by this subdivision ordinance (see section 107.04.07, residential replats), the official shall cause notice of such hearing to be prepared and made in accordance with state law. The time set for the hearing shall conform to the time periods required by sections 107.03.06, amendments and expirations of current projects, and 107.03.07, expiration of projects approved prior to the establishment of this subdivision ordinance in this subdivision ordinance and by state law. 
(1)  Residential replats. By state law, residential replats require that a public notice be placed in the official newspaper of the town a minimum of 15 days prior to the public hearing. In addition, written notices of the proposed residential replat shall be mailed to all property owners located within 200 feet of the subject property a minimum of 15 days prior to the public hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall also be posted with the agenda at the town hall and on the town's website within the prescribed time limits, as required by state law. 
(2)  Replats other than residential replats. All replats require a public hearing. However, no public noticing is required on a nonresidential replat other than the agenda being posted at the town hall and on the town's website, as with any other platting case coming before the planning and zoning commission. 
(b)  Conduct of the hearing. The public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with state law. Any person may appear at the public hearing and submit evidence, either individually or as a representative of an organization. Each person who desires to speak at a public hearing shall state his name and address, and if appearing on behalf of an organization, state the name of the organization for the record. 
(c)  Record of proceedings. The planning and zoning commission shall record the proceedings using standard municipal record-keeping procedures (i.e. minutes of the meeting). 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.03.06 - Amendments and expiration of current projects. 
(a)  Amendments/revisions to an approved application. Unless another method is expressly provided by this subdivision ordinance, any request to amend or revise an approved application shall be considered a new application, which must be considered in accordance with the procedures governing the original application and the standards in effect at the time such new application is filed with the town. 
(b)  Expiration. 
(1)  Unless otherwise expressly provided by this subdivision ordinance, an approved application for a plat or civil plans shall automatically expire one year following the approval date of the application (see section 107.05.01(g), expiration of construction plans), and shall become null and void, and all activities under the application thereafter shall be deemed in violation of this subdivision ordinance, if: 
a.  The applicant fails to satisfy any condition that was imposed by this subdivision ordinance or as part of the approval of the application or that was made under the terms of any development agreement, within the time limits established for satisfaction of such condition or term; or 
b.  The applicant fails to submit a subsequent complete application required by this subdivision ordinance within the time so required; or 
c.  A development agreement has not been approved for the development. 
(2)  The town engineer may extend the time of expiration for the plat or construction plans by one year if the applicant has requested the extension in writing and listed the cause for the delay. Any further extension of the expiration date shall be considered by the planning and zoning commission and the commission's decision shall be final. 
(3)  If no time limit for satisfaction of conditions is specified in the decision on the application, the time shall be presumed to be two years following the date the application was approved, except as provided through a vested rights petition. 
(4)  An expiration date may differ from the first anniversary of approval upon approval of a different date being determined pursuant to a vested rights petition (section 107.10.02, vested rights). 
(c)  Effect of expiration. Upon the expiration of an approved application, all previously approved applications for the same land shall also expire on the expiration date if the filing of an application was required to avoid expiration for the previously approved application(s), except as provided in section 107.03.07, expiration. Thereafter, a new application must be submitted for consideration and approval subject to regulations in effect at the time the new application is filed. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.03.07 - Expiration (projects approved prior to the establishment of this subdivision ordinance). 
(a)  Two-year expiration established. Notwithstanding any other provision of this subdivision ordinance, for any approved application for which no expiration date was in effect on the date this subdivision ordinance was duly adopted by town council, an expiration date of two years following the date of approval of the application shall apply, unless the applicant files a written petition before such date for a vested rights determination pursuant to section 107.10.02, vested rights, alleging that progress has been made toward completion of the project for which the application subject to expiration was filed. If a vested rights petition is timely filed and subsequently approved, the town council shall determine the expiration date of the application in deciding the petition. 
(b)  Five-year expiration established. Notwithstanding any other provision of this subdivision ordinance, once an application has expired as described above, all previously approved applications for the same land also shall expire no later than five years following the date of filing of the first application for the project for which the expired application was filed, unless the applicant files a written petition before such date for a vested rights determination pursuant to section 107.10.02, vested rights. If a vested rights petition is timely filed and subsequently approved, the town council shall determine the expiration date of the previously approved applications in deciding the petition. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Secs. 107.03.08-107.03.10 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 107.04 - SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES 

Sec. 107.04.01 - Subdivision procedures and plat types. 
(a)  Approval required. 
(1)  Unless and until any plat, plan, or replat shall has been first approved in the manner provided by law, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, or organization to construct or cause to be constructed any streets, utilities, buildings or other improvements to any tract of land; and any official of the town shall not issue any permit for such improvements or to serve or connect said land, or any part thereof, or for the use of the owners or purchasers of said land, or any part thereof, with any public utilities such as water, sewers, lights, gas, etc., which may be owned, controlled, distributed, franchised, or supplied by the town. 
(2)  No building permits will be issued for the construction of any building on any unplatted land within the town and the town's extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ). Minor repair permits may be issued for an existing structure. When additions, alterations, or repairs within any 12-month period exceed 50 percent of the value of an existing building or structure on previously unplatted property, the land upon which such building or structure is located shall be platted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Improvements required. All of the improvements required under these regulations, or improvements specified in the comprehensive plan of the town, or improvements which, in the judgment of the town engineer, are necessary for the adequate provision of streets, utilities, drainage, services, and facilities to the subdivision and to surrounding areas of the town, shall be constructed at the sole expense of the developer, unless other provisions are approved by the town council. All improvements required by this chapter shall be constructed and accepted by the town engineer prior to filing the associated plat, unless otherwise specified in a binding contractual development agreement approved by town council. Payment for any and all improvements that are not to be made at the time of the primary construction of the subdivision or development shall be made a part of the signed and executed development agreement. 
(c)  Types of plats required. 
(1)  Final plat or a minor plat. A final plat or minor plat must be approved prior to any land division that is subject to these regulations and prior to commencement of any new development or construction project. A conveyance plat may be approved for the reasons enumerated in section 107.04.02(a), purpose, but no vertical construction may occur until an associated final plat or minor plat is approved. 
(2)  Replat. A replat in accordance with state law and the provisions of sections 107.04.06, replats, and 107.04.07, residential replats, shall be required any time a platted, recorded lot is further divided or expanded, thereby changing the boundary and dimensions of the property. In the case of minor revisions to recorded plats or lots, a minor plat or amending plat may also be utilized if allowed by state law and if in accordance with section 107.04.05, minor plats, section 107.04.06, replats, and 107.04.08, amending plats, respectively. 
(d)  Exemptions. The following land divisions are exempt from the requirements of this subdivision ordinance that apply to plats: 
(1)  Use of existing cemeteries complying with all state and local laws and regulations; and 
(2)  A division of land created by order of a court of competent jurisdiction, provided however, that prior to construction of improvements, a plat meeting the requirements of this ordinance shall be approved and recorded prior to the issuance of permits. 
(e)  Zoning. Within the corporate limits, the following shall apply: 
(1)  Conformance with existing zoning. All applications shall be in conformance with the existing zoning on the property, as applicable. 
(2)  Request to rezone prior to platting. If an applicant seeks to change the zoning for the property, the request to rezone the land shall be submitted and approved prior to acceptance of an application for any type of plat for recordation unless as otherwise provided below: 
a.  The applicant may request approval from the director of development services to submit a plat application simultaneously with the zoning change request, in which case the application for the zoning amendment shall be acted upon first, provided that the application is accompanied by a properly executed waiver of right to 30-day action (due to the more lengthy timeframe necessary to advertise and process zoning applications). 
b.  In the event that the requested zoning amendment is denied, the plat application shall also be denied. 
c.  It is not necessary to rezone the tract prior to the submittal and approval of a conveyance plat which is exclusively for the purpose of the sale of land and not as a precursor to development. 
d.  It is not necessary to zone or rezone the tract prior to the submittal and approval of any plat within the town's ETJ, since the ETJ is not subject to the zoning ordinance. 
(3)  Site plan approval. Where site plan or concept plan approval is required by the zoning ordinance, a conveyance plat or preliminary plat shall be submitted prior to or concurrently with the site plan or concept plan application so the interrelated plans may be reviewed to determine if they will function together. A final plat may be submitted concurrently with the site plan application or at a later date. 
(f)  Stages of plat approval, staff review, and approval. 
(1)  Preliminary and final plats. The platting process of land not previously platted typically involves two approval stages: submission and approval of a preliminary plat (or conveyance plat under certain circumstances) and subsequent submission and approval of an associated final plat. However: 
a.  An applicant may proceed with the plat to be recorded without an approved conveyance plat or preliminary plat if one of the following conditions apply: 
1.  A minor plat is sufficient for submittal; 
2.  A preliminary site plan for a multi-family, single-family attached or nonresidential development is submitted and approved in accordance with the zoning ordinance; or 
3.  The lot in question is less than two acres in size and will be developed in one phase. 
b.  An applicant may submit construction plans and a final plat (or minor plat) simultaneously in lieu of a preliminary plat if a development agreement and appropriate surety (see section 107.05.04, development agreements) are submitted along with the application. 
(2)  Staff review. Unless otherwise specified under the regulations for a specific type of plat: 
a.  The director of development services shall be the responsible official for processing a plat, and shall be responsible for the initial review of a plat for conformance with this subdivision ordinance and any other applicable ordinances of the town. 
b.  The director of development services shall direct other town staff to review all applications for conformance with this subdivision ordinance and with other applicable town regulations and supply to the applicant a list of revisions necessary for compliance with the subdivision ordinance, if warranted. 
(3)  Approval. Authority for the approval of plats is granted by the state to either the planning and zoning commission or the director of development services. See individual plat descriptions, below, for the appropriate approval authority. 
(4)  Signatures required on filed plats. When any plat is prepared for filing with Denton County, each copy to be certified by the county must be signed by the assigned town official, with the signature attested by the town secretary. 
(5)  Town engineer signature required. When any plat is prepared for filing with Denton County, and the installation of public improvements is required prior to the recordation of the plat, the town engineer shall also endorse the plat after all conditions of approval have been satisfied and all public improvements completed to the town's specifications. There shall be written evidence that the required public improvements have been installed in a manner satisfactory to the town as shown by a certificate signed by the town engineer stating that the necessary dedication of public lands and installation of public improvements has been accomplished. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.04.02 - Conveyance plats. 
(a)  Purpose. There are several purposes of a conveyance plat: 
(1)  To subdivide land and to provide for recordation of same, for the purpose of conveying (i.e., selling) the property without developing it in the near future. A conveyance plat may be used to convey the property or interests therein; however, a conveyance plat does not constitute approval for any type of development on the property. A conveyance plat is an interim step in the subdivision and development of land. 
(2)  To establish a general layout of lots as a preliminary step to final platting. In this case, the conveyance plat may establish and show fire lanes and other easements when a portion of the conveyance plat tract is being final platted. For example, a conveyance plat may lay out the tract into multiple lots and only one of those lots will be final platted. However, no vertical construction may occur on any portion of a conveyance plat that has not subsequently been final platted. This function of a conveyance plat eliminates the necessity of filing legal separate instruments with Denton County for off-site improvements necessary for the development of the lot being final platted (see diagram 107.13.01, median and cross access). 
(3)  To record the remainder of a tract that is larger than five acres, and that is created by the final platting of a portion of the property, provided that the remainder is not intended for immediate development. 
(4)  To record the subdivision of property into parcels, five acres or smaller in size, that are not intended for immediate development, provided all required public improvements exist to the town's current standards prior to approval and minimum frontage requirements are met. All public rights-of-way, fire lanes, and access easements must be dedicated and all abutting streets and utilities must be installed and accepted by the town. Installation of on-site improvements may be deferred if development of other tracts is not affected. 
(b)  Review and consideration. 
(1)  Unless otherwise specified within this section for specific requirements for a conveyance plat, a conveyance plat shall be processed and approved using the same timing and procedures, including recordation, as specified for a final plat. Procedures to appeal a decision on a conveyance plat shall also be processed and considered the same as a final plat. 
(2)  Specific requirements for the plat exhibit may be found on the Town of Little Elm Development Services webpage under plat checklists. 
(3)  A conveyance plat shall be accompanied by a concept plan regardless if the development of the tract is to be postponed in order to ensure that accepted development practices will be applied to the parcel in the future and the conveyance plat will not create an undevelopable tract of land. 
(c)  Subsequent filing of a final plat. No final plat processed and approved in association with a conveyance plat shall be filed without the concurrent or prior filing of the associated approved conveyance plat for the remainder of the subject property. 
(d)  Conveyance plat limitations. 
(1)  No building or development permit shall be issued nor permanent utility service provided for land that has only received approval as a conveyance plat; a final plat must be filed for building and development permits and for utility service. 
(2)  A conveyance plat may be superseded by a revised conveyance plat or a final plat in total or in part through compliance with the procedures and requirements of this ordinance. 
(e)  Standards for approval. 
(1)  Access. All lots created by a conveyance plat shall have access to an improved public street that meets the town's minimum design and paving standards. All lots created by a conveyance plat shall provide points of access as required by the zoning ordinance and/or by this ordinance. 
(2)  Reservation of rights-of-way. Conveyance plats must provide for the reservation of future rights-of-way of planned roadways, as shown on the master thoroughfare plan. Right-of-way reservation acknowledges the future obligation to dedicate right-of-way for public thoroughfares and streets specified on the town's thoroughfare plan or approved concept plan. Reservation of right-of-way does not grant any right or interest in the property to the town, state, or other government entity. The final alignment of such roadways may be adjusted upon final platting in order to meet the standards of the engineering design standards. 
(3)  Dedication of rights-of-way. Dedication of right-of-way shall be required where a conveyance plat is used to record the remainder of a tract created by the final platting of a portion of the property. The required right-of-way dedication shall be limited to that which is necessary to provide access to the property proposed for the final plat approval and to complete turn lanes, intersections, and transitions in road pavement width resulting from development of the property proposed for the final plat approval. The town engineer may require a temporary paved turn-around if a street is stubbed pending future construction. 
(f)  Approval of conveyance plats. The planning and zoning commission is authorized to approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove conveyance plats. 
(g)  Effect of approval. 
(1)  The approval of a conveyance plat authorizes the sale of the lot(s) created thereon, but does not authorize any type of development on the property. The applicant and future owner(s) of the property remain obligated to comply with all provisions in this subdivision ordinance upon future development of the property including, but not limited to, all requirements for platting, required public improvements, utility extensions, street improvements or assessments, right-of-way and easement dedications, and all other requirements in this subdivision ordinance. 
(2)  Neither reservation nor dedication of right-of-way shall relieve the property owner from obligations for street construction or assessments associated with public street improvement programs. 
(3)  Easements for access, utilities, and drainage may be recorded on conveyance plats. 
(4)  No building permit shall be issued nor permanent utility service provided for land which has only received approval as a conveyance plat. Notwithstanding the above, the building official may authorize temporary building permits, temporary occupancy permits, and temporary utility service prior to final plat approval and recordation, if deemed appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.04.03 - Preliminary plats. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of a preliminary plat is to determine the general layout of the subdivision, the adequacy of public facilities needed to serve the intended development, and the overall compliance of the land division with applicable requirements of this subdivision ordinance and the zoning ordinance regulations for each zoning district. A preliminary plat is not recorded in the county. If a development is to be constructed in phases, a conveyance plat may be substituted for a preliminary plat should the lots be final platted separately and off-site easements need to be filed for record. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  A preliminary plat is not required when a minor plat or amending plat is adequate. 
(2)  A final plat in accordance with section 107.04.04, final plats, along with construction plans in accordance with section 107.05.01, construction plans, may be submitted in lieu of a preliminary plat if a development agreement and appropriate surety are submitted along with the application. 
(c)  Accompanying applications. 
(1)  An application for a preliminary plat shall be accompanied by a preliminary drainage plan, a preliminary utility plan, and other plans deemed necessary for thorough review by the director of development services or the town engineer. However, approval of each shall be separate and in accordance with this section 107.04.03, preliminary plats and with section 107.05.01, construction plans. 
(2)  The applicant shall furnish as part of the preliminary plat submittal a current title commitment issued by a title insurance company authorized to do business in Texas, a title opinion letter from an attorney licensed to practice in Texas, or some other acceptable proof of ownership, identifying all persons having an ownership interest in the property that is the subject of the preliminary plat. 
(3)  Specific requirements for the plat exhibit may be found on the Town of Little Elm Development Services webpage under plat checklists. 
(d)  Review by director of development services. The director of development services shall: 
(1)  Initiate review of the plat and materials submitted (including the required preliminary drainage plan and preliminary utility plan). 
(2)  Request written comments from other town departments, such as engineering, fire, parks and recreation, or other departments, as deemed necessary, which will be submitted to the applicant for compliance and revisions. 
(3)  Provide and make available the plat exhibit and reports to the commission for review. 
(4)  Upon determination that the application is ready to be acted upon, schedule the preliminary plat for consideration on the agenda of the next available meeting of the planning and zoning commission. 
(e)  Action by planning and zoning commission. The commission shall: 
(1)  Review the preliminary plat application, the findings and recommendation of the director of development services, and any other information available. From all such information, the commission shall determine whether the preliminary plat conforms to the regulations of this subdivision ordinance. 
(2)  Act within 30 calendar days following the official filing date of the preliminary plat application (unless the applicant submits a waiver of right to 30-day action as outlined in section 107.03.03(d), waiver of right to a 30-day action. If no decision is rendered by the commission within the 30-day period described above or such longer period as may have been agreed upon by the applicant and the town officials, the preliminary plat, as submitted, shall be considered to be approved. 
(3)  Take one of the following actions: 
a.  Approve the preliminary plat; 
b.  Approve the preliminary plat with conditions, which shall mean that the preliminary plat shall be considered to have been approved once such conditions are fulfilled; or 
c.  Deny the preliminary plat. 
(f)  Standards for approval. The following criteria shall be used by the commission to determine whether the application for a preliminary plat shall be approved, approved with conditions, or denied: 
(1)  The preliminary plat is consistent with all zoning requirements for the property, including any applicable planned development zoning standards, and with any approved development agreement, if applicable; 
(2)  The proposed provision and configuration of public improvements including, but not limited to, roads, water, wastewater, storm drainage, park facilities, open spaces, habitat restoration, easements and rights-of-way are adequate to serve the development, meet applicable standards of this subdivision ordinance, and conform to the town's adopted master plans for those facilities; 
(3)  The preliminary plat is in accordance with the town's interlocal agreement with Denton County if the proposed development is located in whole or in part in the ETJ of the town; 
(4)  The preliminary plat has been duly reviewed and accepted as meeting the requirements of the subdivision ordinance by town staff; 
(5)  The preliminary plat conforms to design requirements and construction standards as set forth in the engineering design standards; and 
(6)  The preliminary plat is consistent with the comprehensive plan, except where application of the plan may conflict with state law (e.g., land use in the ETJ). 
(7)  The proposed development represented on the preliminary plat does not endanger public health, safety or welfare. 
(g)  Approval of preliminary plats. The planning and zoning commission is authorized to approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove preliminary plats. 
(h)  Effect of approval. The approval of a preliminary plat shall allow the applicant to proceed with the development and platting process by submitting construction plans, building permits, and a final plat. Approval of the preliminary plat shall be deemed general approval of the subdivision's layout only, and shall not constitute approval or acceptance of construction plans or the associated final plat. 
(i)  Appeal of the decision on a preliminary plat application. 
(1)  Initiation of an appeal. The applicant may appeal the decision of the commission by submitting a written notice of appeal to the director of development services within 14 calendar days following the date of the commission's decision. A letter stating the reasons for the appeal, citing the specific applicable section(s) of the subdivision ordinance, shall be submitted by the applicant to the director of development services. 
(2)  Council decision. The town council shall consider the appeal at a public meeting no later than 30 calendar days after the date on which the notice of appeal is submitted to the director of development services. The town council may affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the commission by simple majority vote. The decision of the town council is final. 
(j)  Expiration. 
(1)  Two-year validity. The approval of a preliminary plat shall remain in effect for a period of two years following the date of approval, during which period the applicant shall submit and receive approval for construction plans and a final plat for a portion or all of the land area shown on the preliminary plat. If construction plans and a final plat application have not been approved within the two-year period, the preliminary plat shall expire. 
(2)  Phased developments. A final plat and construction plans must be approved within two years of the approval of the preliminary plat. When a project is phased, the preliminary plat may be extended for a period of one year, during which time a subsequent final plat and construction plans must be approved. Preliminary plats may be extended automatically for a period of one so long as substantial activity on the property continues. 
(3)  Relationship to construction plans. A preliminary plat shall remain valid for the period of time in which approved construction plans are valid. 
(4)  Action on final plat. Should a final plat application be submitted within the two-year period, but not be acted upon by the commission within the two-year period, the preliminary plat shall expire unless an extension is granted as provided below in section 107.04.03(k), extension, and in section 107.03.06, amendments and expiration of current projects. 
(5)  Void if not extended. If the preliminary plat is not extended as provided above, it shall expire and shall become null and void after a period of two years of the date of approval. 
(k)  Extension. A preliminary plat may be extended for a period not to exceed one year beyond the preliminary plat's expiration date. A request for extension shall be submitted to the development services department in writing at least 60 calendar days prior to or following the expiration of the preliminary plat, and shall include reasons why the preliminary plat should be extended. 
(1)  Decision by the director of development services. 
a.  The director of development services will review the extension request and shall approve it, approve it with conditions, or deny the extension request within 30 calendar days following the official filing date of the request. 
b.  Should the director of development services fail to act on an extension request within 30 calendar days, the extension shall be deemed to be approved. 
(2)  Considerations. In considering an extension, the director of development services shall consider whether the following conditions exist: 
a.  A final plat has been submitted and/or approved for any portion of the property shown on the preliminary plat; 
b.  Construction plans have been submitted and/or approved for any portion of the property shown on the preliminary plat; 
c.  Construction is occurring on the subject property; 
d.  The preliminary plat complies with new ordinances that impact the health, safety and general welfare of the community; and/or 
e.  If there is a need for a park, school or other public facility or improvement on the property. 
(3)  Additional conditions. 
a.  In granting an extension, the decision-maker may impose such conditions as are needed to ensure that the land will be developed in a timely fashion and that the public interest is served. Any extension may be predicated upon compliance with new development regulations and/or the applicant waiving any vested rights. 
b.  All applicable town taxes shall be paid prior to the consideration of any extension of the preliminary plat expiration date. Proof of payment shall be entered into the file. 
(4)  Appeal of denial for extension. 
a.  Appeal of the director's decision. The denial of an extension by the director of development services may be appealed to the commission. A written request for such appeal shall be received by planning and development services within 14 calendar days following the denial. The commission shall hear and consider such an appeal within 30 calendar days following planning and development services' receipt of the appeal request. 
b.  Appeal of the commission's decision. The denial of an extension by the commission may be appealed to the town council. A written request for such appeal shall be received by the director of development services within 14 calendar days following the denial. The town council shall hear and consider such an appeal within 30 calendar days following development services' receipt of the appeal request. The decision of the town council is final. 
(l)  Amendments to preliminary plat following approval. 
(1)  Minor amendments. Minor amendments to the design of the subdivision subject to an approved preliminary plat may be incorporated in an application for approval of the associated final plat without the necessity of submitting a new application for reconsideration of a preliminary plat. Minor amendments include, but are not limited to, minor adjustments in street or alley alignments, street lengths and paving details, and minor adjustments to lot lines that do not result in creation of additional lots or any non-conforming lots (that do not comply with zoning standards), provided that such amendments are consistent with the intent of the previously approved application. 
(2)  Major amendments. All other proposed changes to the design of the subdivision subject to an approved preliminary plat shall be deemed major amendments that require submittal and approval of a new application for approval of a preliminary plat (including new fees, new reviews, new official filing date, etc.) before approval of construction plans and/or a final plat. 
(3)  Determination. the director of development services shall make a determination of whether proposed amendments are deemed to be minor or major, thereby requiring new submittal of a preliminary plat. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.04.04 - Final plats. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of a final plat is to ensure that the proposed subdivision and development of the land is consistent with all standards of this subdivision ordinance pertaining to the adequacy of public facilities, that public improvements to serve the subdivision or development have been installed and accepted by the town or that provision for such installation has been made, that all other requirements and conditions have been satisfied or provided to allow the final plat to be recorded. The town engineer may allow the grading and flatwork on the subject property following the approval of a final plat by the planning and zoning commission. 
(b)  Exceptions. A final plat is not required when a minor plat is sufficient (refer to section 107.04.05, minor plats). 
(c)  Ownership. 
(1)  The applicant shall furnish to the town a current title document issued by a title insurance company authorized to do business in Texas, a title opinion letter from an attorney licensed to practice in Texas, or some other acceptable proof of ownership, identifying all persons having an ownership interest in the property subject to the final plat. 
(2)  The final plat application shall be signed by each owner, or by the representative of the owners authorized to sign legal documents for the owners, effectively denoting that they are consenting to the platting of the property and to the dedications and covenants that may be contained in the final plat. Such consent shall be subject to review and approval by the town attorney, and the applicant shall reimburse the town for all related legal costs for review. This reimbursement shall be paid in full prior to filing of the final plat. 
(d)  Complete applications for final plats in the extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ). Where the land to be platted lies within the ETJ of the town, pursuant to the existing or amended interlocal agreement with Denton County under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 242, a complete application shall be submitted to the town. 
(e)  Accompanying applications. An application for a final plat may be accompanied by construction plans if also accompanied by a development agreement and appropriate surety in accordance with section 107.05.04, development agreements. However, approval of each shall be separate and in accordance with this section for final plats and with section 107.05.01, construction plans. 
(f)  Prior approved conveyance plat or preliminary plat. The final plat and all accompanying data shall conform to the associated conveyance plat or preliminary plat as approved by the commission, or as the initial plats may have been amended subsequently incorporating all conditions imposed or required by the commission. 
(g)  Review by director of development services. The director of development services shall: 
(1)  Initiate review of the plat and materials submitted. 
(2)  Determine that the final plat substantially conforms to the associated conveyance plat or preliminary plat. 
(3)  Determine that the final plat conforms to the zoning ordinance and other applicable regulations. 
(4)  Request written comments from other town departments, such as engineering, fire, and parks and recreation, as deemed necessary. 
(5)  Make available plats and reports to the commission for review. 
(6)  Upon determination that the application is ready to be acted upon, schedule the final plat for consideration on the agenda of the next available meeting of the commission. 
(7)  A final plat may not include any aspect that conflicts with the conditions, covenants and restrictions (CCRs) of any governing association, such as a HOA. 
(h)  Action by planning and zoning commission. The commission shall: 
(1)  Review the final plat application, the findings and recommendation of the director of development services, and any other information provided. From this information, the commission shall determine whether the final plat conforms to the regulations of this subdivision ordinance. 
(2)  Act within 30 calendar days following the official acceptance date of final plat (unless the applicant submits a waiver of right to 30-day action as outlined in section 107.03.03(d), waiver of right to a 30-day action). If no decision is rendered by the commission within the 30-day period described above or such longer period as may have been agreed upon, the final plat, as submitted, shall be deemed to be approved. 
(3)  Take one of the following actions: 
a.  Approve the final plat; 
b.  Approve the final plat with conditions, which shall mean that the final plat shall be considered to have been approved once such conditions are fulfilled; or 
c.  Deny the final plat. 
(i)  Standards for approval. The following criteria shall be used by the commission to determine whether the application for a final plat shall be approved, approved with conditions, or denied: 
(1)  Prior approved conveyance or preliminary plat. 
a.  The final plat conforms to the associated, approved conveyance plat or preliminary plat except for minor amendments that are authorized under section 107.04.03(k), amendments to preliminary plats following approval, and that may be approved without the necessity of revising the approved associated plat; 
b.  All conditions imposed at the time of approval of the conveyance plat or preliminary plat, as applicable, have been satisfied; 
c.  The construction plans conform to the requirements of section 107.05.01, construction plans, and have been approved by the town engineer; 
d.  Where public improvements have been installed, the improvements conform to the approved construction plans and have been approved for acceptance by the town engineer; 
e.  Where the town engineer has authorized public improvements to be deferred, an development agreement has been executed and submitted by the property owner in conformity with section 107.05.04, development agreements; 
f.  The final layout of the subdivision or development meets all standards for adequacy of public facilities contained in this ordinance; 
g.  The final plat meets all applicable county standards to be applied under an interlocal agreement between the town and Denton County under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 242, where the proposed development is located in whole or in part in the ETJ of the town and in the county; 
h.  The plat conforms to design requirements and construction standards as set forth in the engineering design standards; and 
i.  The plat conforms to the planning and development services' subdivision application checklists. 
(2)  Final plat approval with no prior approved conveyance plat or preliminary plat. 
a.  The construction plans conform to the requirements of section 107.05.01, construction plans, and have been approved by the town engineer; 
b.  A development agreement or surety for installation of public improvements has been prepared and executed by the property owner in conformance with section 107.05.04, development agreements; 
c.  The final layout of the subdivision or development meets all standards for adequacy of public facilities contained in this ordinance; 
d.  The final plat meets all applicable county standards to be applied under an interlocal agreement between the town and Denton County under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 242, where the proposed development is located in whole or in part in the ETJ of the town and in the applicable county; and 
e.  The final plat conforms to the development services application checklist. 
(j)  Approval of final plats. The planning and zoning commission is authorized to approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove final plats. Upon approval, a certificate stating that the final plat has been reviewed and approved by the planning and zoning commission shall be provided to the applicant, as required in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.0115(b). 
(k)  Procedures for recordation of final plat documents upon approval. The applicant shall supply to development services department the required number of signed and executed copies of the final plat documents (whether mylar or paper originals, as required by both the town and Denton County) that will be needed to file the plat, upon approval, with Denton County. No copies of the exhibits will be accepted. 
(1)  General. 
a.  Signatures. After approval of the final plat, the director of development services shall procure the appropriate town signatures on the final plat. 
b.  Recording upon performance. The final plat shall be recorded after: 
1.  The final plat is approved by the town; 
2.  All required public improvements have been completed and accepted by the town (or an development agreement has been executed and appropriate surety provided in accordance with section 107.05.04, development agreements; 
3.  All Denton County filing requirements are met. 
(2)  Submittal of final plat documents for filing when improvements installed. When all required public improvements have been installed prior to recording of the final plat, the applicant shall meet all requirements in accordance with section 107.05.05, inspection, maintenance and acceptance of public improvements. 
(3)  Submittal of final plat documents for filing when improvements have not been installed. When some of or all required public improvements are not yet completed in connection with an approved final plat, the applicant shall submit the final plat documents for filing as approved by the commission, revised to reflect any conditions imposed by the commission as part of approval. 
(4)  Update of proof of ownership. If there has been any change in ownership since the time of the proof of ownership provided under section 107.04.04(c), ownership, the applicant shall submit a new consent agreement executed by each owner consenting to the platting of the property and the dedications and covenants contained in the plat. The title commitment or title opinion letter and consent agreement shall be subject to review and approval by the town attorney, and the applicant shall reimburse the town for all related legal costs for review. This reimbursement shall be paid in full prior to filing of the final plat. 
(l)  Effect of approval. The approval and filing of a final plat: 
(1)  Supersedes any prior approved conveyance plat or preliminary plat for the lots final platted. 
(2)  Authorizes the applicant to install any improvements in public rights-of-way in conformance with approved construction plans and under a development agreement (refer to section 107.05.04, development agreements), if applicable. 
(3)  Authorizes the applicant to seek construction release (refer to section 107.05.01(i), construction release) and/or issuance of a building permit for vertical construction. 
(m)  Appeal of decision of final plat application. Appeal of a decision on a final plat application shall be brought to the town council. Council's decision shall be final. 
(n)  Revisions following recording/recordation. Revisions may only be processed and approved as a replat or amending plat, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.04.05 - Minor plats. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of a minor plat is to simplify divisions of land under certain circumstances as outlined in state law. 
(b)  Applicability. An application for approval of a minor plat may be filed only in accordance with state law, when all of the following circumstances apply: 
(1)  The proposed division results in four or fewer lots; 
(2)  All lots in the proposed subdivision front onto an existing public street and the construction or extension of a street or alley is not required to meet the requirements of this subdivision ordinance; and 
(3)  Except for right-of-way widening and easements, the plat does not require the extension of any municipal facilities to serve any lot within the subdivision. 
(c)  Application requirements. The requirements for the submittal of a minor plat shall be the same as the requirements for a final plat, as outlined in section 107.04.04, final plats. 
(d)  Review by director of development services . The director of development services shall: 
(1)  Initiate review of the plat and materials submitted. 
(2)  Request written comments from other town departments, such as engineering and public works, fire department, and parks and recreation, if deemed necessary. 
(e)  Action by director of development services. The director of development services shall: 
(1)  Determine whether the minor plat meets the regulations of this subdivision ordinance. 
(2)  Act within 30 calendar days following the official filing date of a completed application for a minor plat (unless the applicant submits a waiver of right to 30-day action as outlined in section 107.03.02(d), waiver of right to 30-day action. If no decision is rendered by the director of development services, or if the director has not deferred the application to the planning and zoning commission for decision, within the 30-day period described above or such longer period as may have been agreed upon, the minor plat, as submitted, shall be deemed to be approved. 
(3)  The director of development services is authorized to make one of the following actions: 
a.  Approve the minor plat; 
b.  Approve the minor plat with conditions, which shall mean that the minor plat shall be considered to have been approved once such conditions are fulfilled; or 
c.  Defer the minor plat to the commission for consideration prior to expiration of the required 30-day approval period unless a waiver of right to 30-day action is submitted. 
(f)  Standards for approval. The following criteria shall be used by the director of development services to determine whether the application for a minor plat shall be approved, approved with conditions, or denied: 
(1)  The minor plat is consistent with all zoning requirements for the property (if applicable), any approved development agreement (if applicable), and all other requirements of this subdivision ordinance that apply to the plat; 
(2)  All lots to be created by the plat already are adequately served by an improved public street access and by all required town utilities and services and by alleys, if applicable; 
(3)  The ownership, maintenance and allowed uses of all designated easements have been stated on the minor plat; and 
(4)  Except for right-of-way widening and easements, the plat does not require the extension of any municipal facilities to serve any lot within the subdivision. 
(g)  Approval of minor plats. the director of development services is authorized to approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove minor plats. However, the director of development services may defer the decision of any minor plat for any reason to the planning and zoning commission. Upon approval, a certificate stating that the minor plat has been reviewed and approved by the either the director of development services or the planning and zoning commission shall be provided to the applicant, as required in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.0115(b). 
(h)  Procedures for recordation following approval. The procedures for recordation of a minor plat shall be the same as the procedures for recordation of a final plat, as outlined in section 107.04.04(j), procedures for recordation of final plat documents upon approval. 
(i)  Appeal of decision on minor plat application. 
(1)  Commission decision. If the director of development services defers the minor plat application to the planning and zoning commission, the commission shall consider the application at a regular meeting no later than 30 calendar days after the date on which the director of development services deferred the application to the commission. The commission shall, upon simple majority vote, take one of the following actions: 
a.  Approve the minor plat; 
b.  Approve the minor plat with conditions, which shall mean that the minor plat shall be considered to have been approved once such conditions are fulfilled; or 
c.  Deny the minor plat. 
(2)  Appeal. The decision of the commission may be appealed to the town council in accordance with the procedures for an appeal on a final plat decision. The town council decision is final. 
(j)  Revisions following approval. Revisions submitted by the applicant following initial approval may only be processed and approved as a replat or amending plat, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.04.06 - Replats. 
(a)  Applicability and terminology. 
(1)  The procedures outlined in this section and in subsequent sections 107.04.07, residential replats, and 107.04.08, amending plats, shall apply only if a property owner seeks to change any portion of a plat that has been filed for record with Denton County. 
(2)  The term "replat" includes changes to a recorded final plat, whether the change is effected by replatting without vacation or replatting by vacating the recorded plat (section 107.04.09, plat vacation) and approving a new application. 
(b)  Town action required. Unless otherwise specified, any change to a recorded plat shall be subject to approval by the planning and zoning commission. 
(c)  Construction management. If the subdivision as replatted requires construction of additional improvements, the provisions of section 107.05.04, development agreements, shall apply. If the subdivision as replatted does not require any appreciable alteration or improvement of utility installations, streets, alleys, building setback lines, etc., then no additional construction plans shall be required. 
(d)  Application and approval procedures. Unless otherwise specified, application and all related procedures and approvals, including recordation, for a replat shall be the same as specified for a final plat. 
(e)  Partial replat application. If a replat is submitted for only a portion of a previously platted subdivision, the replat must reference the previous subdivision name and recording information, and must state on the replat the specific lots which are being changed along with a detailed "purpose for replat" statement. 
(f)  Replats other than residential replats. All replats must be considered as a public hearing item. However, those replats that are not residential in nature do not require any public notification, whether to adjacent property owners or in the newspaper of record. 
(g)  Approval of replats. The planning and zoning commission is authorized to approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove replats. Upon approval, a certificate stating that the replat has been reviewed and approved by the planning and zoning commission shall be provided to the applicant, as required in the V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.0115(b). 
(h)  Effect of approval. Upon approval and recording of the replat, it is controlling over the previously recorded plat for the portion replatted. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.04.07 - Residential replats. 
(a)  Purpose and applicability. A residential replat of all or a portion of a recorded plat may be approved in accordance with state law without vacation of the recorded plat, if the replat: 
(1)  Is signed and acknowledged by all of the owners or their agents of the property being replatted; 
(2)  Is approved following a public hearing with due notification as required by state law; and 
(3)  Does not propose to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions previously incorporated in the recorded plat. 
(b)  General notice and hearing requirements. Public notice of the public hearing on any residential replat application is required, as described in section 107.03.05, public hearings. 
(c)  Partial replat application. If a replat is submitted for only a portion of a previously platted subdivision, the replat must reference the previous subdivision name and recording information, and must state on the replat the specific lots which are being changed along with a detailed "purpose for replat" statement. 
(d)  Special replat requirements. 
(1)  Applicability. A replat without vacation of the preceding plat, in accordance with state law, must conform to the requirements if: 
a.  During the preceding five years, any of the area to be replatted was limited by an interim or permanent zoning classification to residential use for not more than two residential units per lot; or 
b.  Any lot in the preceding plat was limited by deed restrictions to residential use for not more than two residential units per lot. 
(2)  Exception. The requirements shall not apply to any approval of a residential replat application for a portion of a recorded plat if all of the proposed area sought to be replatted was designated or reserved for usage other than for single family or duplex residential usage. Such designation must be noted on the recorded plat or in the legally recorded restriction applicable to such plat. 
(3)  Protest. If the residential replat application is accompanied by a variance petition (per section 107.10.01, variances) and is protested in accordance with this section, approval of the replat shall require the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths of the voting members of the commission present at the meeting. For a legal protest, written instruments signed by the owners of at least 20 percent of the area of the lots or land immediately adjoining the area covered by the residential replat application and extending 200 feet from that area, but within the original subdivision, must be filed with the planning and zoning commission prior to the close of the public hearing. The area of streets and alleys shall be included in the area computations. 
(e)  Review and consideration. The review and approval processes for a residential replat shall be the same as the review and approval processes for a final plat (except for the public hearing and notice requirements described in section 107.03.05, public hearings). The director of development services shall be the responsible official and the commission shall be the initial decision-maker for a residential replat application. Procedures to appeal a decision on a residential replat shall also be processed and considered the same as a final plat. 
(f)  Approval of residential replats. The planning and zoning commission is authorized to approve or disapprove residential replats. Upon approval, a certificate stating that the replat has been reviewed and approved by the planning and zoning commission shall be provided to the applicant, as required in the V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.0115(b). 
(g)  Effect of approval. Upon approval and recording of the residential replat, it is controlling over the previously recorded plat for the portion replatted. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.04.08 - Amending plats. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of an amending plat shall be to provide an expeditious means of making minor revisions to a recorded plat consistent within the provisions of state law. 
(b)  Applicability. The procedures for an amending plat shall apply only if the sole purpose of the amending plat is to achieve one or more of the following: 
(1)  To correct an error in a course or distance shown on the preceding plat; 
(2)  To add a course or distance that was omitted on the preceding plat; 
(3)  To correct an error in a real property description shown on the preceding plat; 
(4)  To indicate monuments set after the death, disability or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor responsible for setting monuments; 
(5)  To show the location or character of a monument that has been changed in location or character or that is shown incorrectly as to location or character on the preceding plat; 
(6)  To correct any other type of scrivener or clerical error or omission previously approved by the municipal authority responsible for approving plats, including lot numbers, acreage, street names, and identification of adjacent recorded plats; 
(7)  To correct an error in courses and distances of lot lines between two (2) adjacent lots if: 
a.  Both lot owners join in the application for amending the plat; 
b.  Neither lot is abolished; 
c.  The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; and 
d.  The amendment does not have a material adverse effect on the property rights of any of the owners in the plat; 
(8)  To relocate a lot line to eliminate an inadvertent encroachment of a building or other improvement on a lot line or easement; 
(9)  To relocate one or more lot lines between one or more adjacent lots if: 
a.  The owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the plat; 
b.  The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; and 
c.  The amendment does not increase the number of lots; 
(10)  To make necessary changes to the preceding plat to create six or fewer lots in the subdivision or a part of the subdivision covered by the preceding plat if: 
a.  The changes do not affect applicable zoning and other regulations of the municipality; 
b.  The changes do not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions; and 
c.  The area covered by the changes is located in an area that the commission or other appropriate governing body of the municipality has approved, after a public hearing, as a residential improvement area; or 
(11)  To replat one or more lots fronting on an existing street if: 
a.  The owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the plat; 
b.  The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; 
c.  The amendment does not increase the number of lots; and 
d.  The amendment does not create or require the creation of a new street or make necessary the extension of municipal facilities. 
(c)  Certificates of correction. Certificates of correction are prohibited. 
(d)  Notice. In accordance with state law, the approval and issuance of an amending plat shall not require notice, hearing or approval of adjacent lot owners. 
(e)  Review by director of development services. The director of development services shall: 
(1)  Initiate review of the plat and materials submitted. 
(2)  Request written comments from other town departments, such as engineering and and public works, fire department, and parks and recreation, if deemed necessary. 
(f)  Action by director of development services. The director of development services shall: 
(1)  Determine whether the amending plat meets the regulations of this subdivision ordinance. 
(2)  Act within 30 calendar days after the application is deemed complete per section 107.03.03(c), determination of completeness. 
(3)  The director of development services is authorized to take one of the following actions: 
a.  Approve the amending plat; 
b.  Approve the amending plat with conditions, which shall mean that the amending plat shall be considered to have been approved once such conditions are fulfilled; or 
c.  Defer the amending plat to the commission for consideration prior to expiration of the required 30-day approval period unless a waiver of right to 30-day action is submitted in accordance with section 107.03.03(d), waiver of right to 30-day action. 
(g)  Approval of amending plats. The director of development services is authorized to approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove amending plats. However, the director of development services may defer the decision of any amending plat for any reason to the planning and zoning commission. 
(h)  Procedures for recordation following approval. The procedures for recordation of an amending plat shall be the same as the procedures for recordation of a final plat. 
(i)  Effect of approval. Upon approval, an amending plat shall be recorded and is controlling over the previously recorded plat without vacation of that plat. Upon approval, a certificate stating that the amending plat has been reviewed and approved by either the director of development services or the planning and zoning commission shall be provided to the applicant, as required in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.0115(b). 
(j)  Appeal of decision on amending plat application. 
(1)  Commission decision. If the director of development services defers the amending plat application to the planning and zoning commission, the commission shall consider the application at a regular meeting no later than 30 calendar days after the date on which the director of development services deferred the application to the commission. The commission shall, upon simple majority vote, take one of the following actions: 
a.  Approve the amending plat; 
b.  Approve the amending plat with conditions, which shall mean that the amending plat shall be considered to have been approved once such conditions are fulfilled; or 
c.  Deny the amending plat. 
(2)  Appeal. The decision of the commission may be appealed to the town council in accordance with the procedures for an appeal on a final plat decision. The town council decision is final. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.04.09 - Plat vacation. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of a plat vacation is to provide an expeditious means of nullifying a recorded plat in its entirety, consistent with provisions of state law. 
(b)  Initiation of a plat vacation. 
(1)  By property owner. The property owner of the tract covered by a plat may submit an application to vacate the plat at any time before any lot in the plat is sold. 
(2)  By all lot owners. If lots in the plat have been sold, an application to vacate the plat must be submitted by all the owners of lots in the plat. 
(3)  Town initiation. If the planning and zoning commission, on its own motion, determines that the plat should be vacated in the interest of and to protect the public's health, safety and welfare; and: 
a.  No lots within the approved plat have been sold within five years following the date that the final plat was approved by the town; or 
b.  The property owner has breached a development agreement, and the town is unable to obtain funds with which to complete construction of public improvements, except that the vacation shall apply only to lots owned by the property owner or its successor; or 
c.  The plat has been recorded in Denton County for more than five years, and the planning and zoning commission determines that the further sale of lots within the subdivision or addition presents a threat to public health, safety and welfare, except that the vacation shall apply only to lots owned by the property owner or its successors. 
(c)  Notice. Published notice of the public hearing on the plat vacation application shall be given in accordance with section 107.03.05, public hearings, and state law. The hearing shall be conducted by the planning and zoning commission. 
(d)  Review by director of development services. the director of development services shall: 
(1)  Initiate review of the plat vacation application and materials submitted. 
(2)  Request written comments from other town departments, such as engineering and public works, fire department, and parks and recreation, if deemed necessary. 
(e)  Action by the planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning commission shall: 
(1)  Review the plat vacation application, the findings and recommendation of the director of development services, and any other information provided. From all such information, the planning and zoning commission shall conduct a public hearing and make a finding as to whether or not the plat should be vacated. The planning and zoning commission decision on a plat vacation shall be final. 
(2)  Take one of the following actions: 
a.  Approve the plat vacation; 
b.  Approve the plat vacation with conditions, which shall mean that the plat vacation shall be considered to have been approved once such conditions are fulfilled; or 
c.  Deny the plat vacation. 
(f)  Approval of plat vacations. The planning and zoning commission is authorized to approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove plat vacations. Upon approval, a certificate stating that the plat vacation has been reviewed and approved by the planning and zoning commission shall be provided to the applicant, as required in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.0115(b). 
(g)  Procedures for recordation following approval. If the planning and zoning commission adopts a resolution vacating a plat in whole, it shall record a copy of the resolution in the Denton County Clerk's Office. If the planning and zoning commission adopts a resolution vacating a plat in part, it shall cause a revised final plat to be recorded along with the resolution which shows that portion of the original plat that has been vacated and that portion that has not been vacated. 
(h)  Effect of approval. 
(1)  On the execution and recording of the vacating instrument, the previously filed plat shall have no effect. Regardless of the planning and zoning commission's action on the petition, the property owner(s) or developer will have no right to a refund of any monies, fees or charges paid to the town nor to the return of any property or consideration dedicated or delivered to the town except as may have previously been agreed to by the planning and zoning commission. 
(2)  The plat is vacated when a signed, acknowledged instrument declaring the plat vacated is approved and recorded in the manner prescribed for the original plat. 
(3)  The planning and zoning commission, at its discretion, shall have the right to retain all or specific portions of road rights-of-way or easements shown on the plat being considered for vacation. However, the planning and zoning commission shall consider plat vacation upon satisfactory conveyance of easements and/or rights-of-way in a separate legal document using forms provided by the town attorney's office. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Secs. 107.04.10-107.04.20 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 107.05 - CONTRUCTION PLANS AND PROCEDURES 

Sec. 107.05.01 - Construction plans. 
(a)  Purpose. This construction plan section which includes design criteria and standards for the Town of Little Elm is intended primarily for use by the developer's engineer. These criteria and standards should enable the engineer to design the required community facilities in a manner acceptable to the town. There may be special circumstances which would call for requirements in excess of those outlined. In most cases, additional requirements will be apparent to the developer's engineer while preparing the plans for the subdivision or during conferences/discussions with the town staff. 
(b)  Submitting plans. Plans shall be submitted in accordance with the policies of the engineering department. A checklist of necessary items and exhibits to be included in the construction plans is available online on the engineering webpage. Incomplete plans will not be accepted and such plans shall be returned to the applicant. 
(c)  Responsible official and decision. The town engineer shall be the responsible official for review and approval of construction plans. The town engineer shall also be the initial decision-maker for construction plans. In this capacity, therefore, the town engineer shall approve, approve subject to modifications, or deny the construction plans. 
(d)  Approval required and timing of construction. Construction plans must be approved in accordance with this section prior to the approval and/or recordation of the final plat, unless otherwise stated within the subdivision ordinance or a development agreement. 
(e)  Criteria for approval. The town engineer shall approve construction plans if: 
(1)  Compliance required. Prior to the commission's approval of the final plat, the subdivider shall comply or provide for compliance with the policies and procedures set forth in these regulations and the engineering design standards for construction of street improvements and utilities. No building, sewer, electrical or plumbing permit shall be issued by the town as to any property in the subdivision until: 
a.  The plans are consistent with the approved preliminary plat or the proposed final plat; 
b.  The plans conform to the subject property's zoning and planned development standards, if applicable, and to the standards for adequate public facilities, contained in this subdivision ordinance, and all other applicable Code of Ordinances. 
c.  The working drawings, specifications and agreements required herein have been reviewed and approved by the affected town departments and, as required, by the town attorney. 
(2)  Engineering design standards. The engineering design standards are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of these regulations design criteria and standards which shall be controlling in design, construction and installation of street paving, curbs and gutters, sidewalks, utilities and other public improvements required herein. All references to engineering design standards shall mean and include those standards and specifications, together with all exhibits, charts, drawings and diagrams appertaining thereto, which have been approved by the town engineer, adopted by the town council, and placed on file in the office of the town secretary and displayed on the engineering webpage. 
(3)  Installation and financing. The subdivider shall arrange with the town and with utility companies franchised to serve the area in which the subdivision is located for the construction costs of streets and alleys, utility lines and other public improvements. The subdivider shall also arrange for the sequence of work so that underground utilities shall be installed in those portions of streets intended for vehicular traffic before such streets shall be surfaced. If the several improvements required herein have not been installed or constructed prior to submission of the final plat, then the final plat shall bear a restriction that no lot shall be occupied and that no municipal services shall be extended thereto until the specified utilities and improvements have been constructed as required. 
(f)  Effect. Approval of construction plans authorizes the applicant to schedule a preconstruction meeting in accordance with section 107.05.02, preconstruction meeting, and apply for construction release in accordance with section 107.05.01(i), construction release. 
(g)  Expiration. The approval of construction plans shall remain in effect for a period of one year from the date of approval, or for the duration of construction of the project, provided that progress toward completion of the project continues to be demonstrated, unless the plans are extended in accordance with section 107.05.01(h), extension of expiration date. 
(h)  Extension of expiration date. Construction plans may be extended for a period of six additional months beyond the expiration date. A request must be made in writing to the town engineer for such extension prior to expiration of the plans, and shall include reasons why the plans should be extended. 
(1)  Decision by the town engineer. 
a.  The town engineer will review the extension request, and shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the extension request within 30 calendar days following the date the request for extension is received. 
b.  Should the town engineer fail to act on an extension request within 30 calendar days, the extension shall be deemed to be approved. 
(2)  Consideration. The town engineer shall extend construction plans approval for a period of six additional months beyond the plans' expiration date if all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The final plat has been submitted, approved or filed of record for any portion of the property shown on the construction plans; 
b.  The construction plans comply with new ordinances that impact the health, safety and general welfare of the community; 
c.  Demonstrable forward progress has been made to proceed with construction or required improvements; and 
d.  A development agreement (section 107.05.04, development agreements), if applicable, is still valid and in full effect. 
(3)  Conditions. In granting an extension, the town engineer may impose such conditions as are needed to ensure that the land will be developed in a timely manner and that the public interest is served. Any extension may be predicated upon compliance with new development regulations and/or the applicant waiving any vested rights. 
(4)  Additional extension. A second, six-month extension may be requested using the same process outlined above. 
(i)  Construction release. Upon approval of the preliminary plat and the construction plans, receipt of all documentation (e.g., insurance information, bonds, etc.) receipt of required fees and park land dedication, if applicable, and after the preconstruction meeting with town staff, the town engineer may release the plans for construction if all town requirements pertaining to construction have been met. The construction release shall remain in effect for a period of one year from the date of issuance, or for the duration of construction of the project, provided that progress toward completion of the project continues to be demonstrated. Expiration, and possible extension, of the construction release shall be the same as for the construction plans. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.05.02 - Preconstruction meeting. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the preconstruction meeting is to discuss administrative, communication, and operating procedures for the project prior to the onset of construction. A list of typical inspection items, procedures and acceptance criteria for items in public right-of-way and easements will also be furnished to the applicant prior to the meeting. 
(b)  Notice. The applicant shall receive written notice from the town engineer that construction plans have been approved and that the project is eligible for a preconstruction meeting. 
(c)  Required attendance. The applicant, along with key construction managers, must attend a preconstruction meeting with the town engineer and other appropriate town officials following the approval of construction plans, the approval of the final plat, and prior to commencement of any construction on the property. 
(d)  Effect. Following the preconstruction meeting and upon approval of the construction plans and full compliance with all preconstruction requirements, the town engineer shall authorize construction release, allowing the applicant to commence with construction of the project. The applicant may also be issued a building permit, if appropriate, provided that a building permit application has been submitted and approved and all other building permit requirements have also been met. 
(e)  Fees due. Fees for the development application and any associated permits are due prior to the preconstruction meeting. These include, but are not limited to, roadway and utility impact fees and park land dedication fees-in-lieu of land. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.05.03 - Timing of public improvements. 
(a)  Completion prior to final plat recordation. Completion of all required public improvements, in accordance with the approved final plat and the approved construction plans, may occur prior to final plat recordation with Denton County. Final plat exhibits will not be accepted for filing with the county prior to completion of such improvements except as provided below. 
(b)  Completion after final plat recordation. The town engineer, upon written request by the applicant, may allow construction of public improvements after final plat recordation. Such postponement shall be conditioned on execution of a development agreement and provision of security. It shall be at the town engineer's discretion to determine whether postponing construction of public improvements until after final plat recordation is appropriate, and therefore, whether financial guarantee is acceptable through a development agreement. 
(c)  Deferral of obligation. The town engineer may defer the developer's obligation to dedicate rights-of-way or easements for, or to construct, public improvements to serve a new development upon execution of a development agreement and upon provision of adequate security. 
(d)  Phased development. If the development is being platted and constructed in phases, improvements shall be completed as platted areas are approved and phases are constructed. Also refer to section 107.04.03(k), expiration, for details regarding phased development and preliminary plat validity. 
(e)  Easements for utility providers. The applicant is responsible for contacting all utility providers prior to beginning construction, and for securing all necessary easements for same prior to final plat approval and recordation. The applicant's engineer shall provide the town engineer with written certification that all necessary easements are secured for the various utility providers, and such easements shall be shown on the final plat with the recording information for each (if previously platted) or established through the recordation of the final plat. 
(f)  Off-site easements. All necessary off-site easements required for installation of required off-site public improvements to serve the development shall be acquired by the applicant prior to the preconstruction meeting, or prior to approval and recordation of the final plat, whichever occurs first. Off-site easements shall be conveyed and recorded in Denton County by filing the off-site easement in a conveyance plat prior to filing the final plat. At the discretion of the town engineer, a separate instrument may be used for the purposes of recording off-site easements. If the property on which the off-site easement is required has been platted prior to the granting of the easement, a replat is required to dedicate the easement. 
(g)  Oversized facilities. When the town sees fit to request that the developer upsize any required infrastructure for the use of future development within the town, the difference in cost of the required infrastructure for the development and the cost of upsizing shall be borne by the town. (see section 107.05.04(b)(2), oversizing of infrastructure, below). 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.05.04 - Development agreements. 
(a)  Purpose. A subdivider shall be required to enter into a development agreement with the town, which shall govern his subdivision if there are pro rata payments or other financial agreements, subject to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code [ch. 212] subch. C, developer participation in Contract for public improvements. Town participation in cost, escrow deposits or other future considerations, other nonstandard development regulations or if all improvements required to be dedicated to the town will be not completed prior to filing the final plat or subsequent replats in the Denton County records. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  Improvements delayed. When any of the required public improvements will be postponed and constructed after final plat recordation, the final plat shall not be accepted for filing for recordation with Denton County unless and until the applicant enters into a development agreement to ensure the completion of all required public improvements. 
(2)  Oversizing of infrastructure. The town will require a development agreement pertaining to any public improvement for which the developer may request reimbursement from the town for oversize costs as for water and sewer improvements or all other required improvements not necessitated by the project itself. The town council may authorize the approval of such agreement as meeting the town's future requirements, and the town will not withhold approval as a means of avoiding compensation due under the terms of this Code. 
(c)  Authority of the town to complete work. This agreement shall be based upon the requirements of this chapter, and shall provide the town with specific authority to complete the improvements required in the agreement in the event of default by the subdivider, and to recover the full legal costs of such measures. The town may subordinate its development agreement to the prime lender if provided for in said agreement. 
(d)  Joint obligations. The development agreement shall be a legally binding agreement between the town and the subdivider specifying the individual and joint responsibilities of both the town and the subdivider. Unusual circumstances relating to the subdivision shall be considered in the development agreements such that the purpose of this chapter is best served for each particular subdivision. The subdivider shall include in such an agreement a hold harmless and indemnity clause agreeing to hold the town harmless against any claim arising out of the subdivision of the property or any actions taken therein. 
(e)  Security for completion of improvements. 
(1)  Type of security. When any of the required public improvements will be constructed after approval and recordation of the final plat, the applicant shall guarantee proper construction of such postponed improvements, in accordance with the town's design standards and with this subdivision ordinance, by a bond executed by a surety company holding a license to do business in the State of Texas, and acceptable to the town, on the form provided by the town. The performance bond shall be approved as to form by the town attorney. 
(2)  Estimated cost and security approval. 
a.  Security shall be issued in the amount of 110 percent of the cost to construct, complete, and maintain all required public improvements to the town's standards as estimated by the applicant's professional engineer, and as approved by the town engineer. 
b.  Security shall be subject to the review and approval of the town attorney. The applicant shall reimburse the town for all related legal costs for the town's legal review prior to filing the final plat. 
c.  Upon the dedication of and acceptance by the town of all required public improvements, the town shall authorize a reduction in the cash security to ten percent of the original amount if the property owner is not in breach of the development agreement. The remaining cash security shall ensure that the owner will warrant that the required public improvements are free from defect for a period of two years following acceptance by the town. 
(3)  Letter of credit. In certain circumstances and at the discretion of the town engineer, an applicant may submit a letter of credit in lieu of cash security. In this case, the letter of credit shall: 
a.  Be irrevocable. 
b.  Be for a term sufficient to cover the completion, maintenance and warranty periods of the improvements covered by the letter of credit, but in no event less than two years. 
c.  As portions of the public improvements are completed in accordance with the engineering design standards and the approved engineering plans, the applicant may request that the town engineer reduce the amount of the original letter of credit. If the town engineer is satisfied that such portion of the improvements has been completed in accordance with town standards, the town engineer may (but is not required to) cause the amount of the letter of credit to be reduced by such amount that the town engineer deems appropriate, so that the remaining amount of the letter of credit adequately ensures the completion of the remaining public improvements. 
(4)  Security for construction in extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ). Where all or some portion of the proposed development is located in the town's ETJ, the security shall be in a form and shall contain such terms as are consistent with the town's interlocal agreements with Denton County under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 242. In cases where the requirements governing the form and terms of the security are defined in such an agreement, they will supersede any conflicting provisions within this subdivision ordinance. 
(f)  Escrow policies and procedures. 
(1)  Request for escrow. The town may require or the developer may petition the town to defer required improvements in exchange for a deposit of escrow. An example may include a timing issue due to pending street improvements by another agency such as Texas DOT. The town engineer may require studies and other information to support the developer's request to escrow. 
(2)  Escrow deposit with the town. When the town engineer requires or agrees to accept escrow deposits, the developer shall deposit in escrow with the town an amount equal to 110 percent of the total costs including, but not limited to, the design, construction, any required studies performed by a third party, permitting, acceptance and inflation costs related to the improvements. The town engineer shall review and approve the amount, which shall be approved and paid to the town prior to recordation of the final plat. 
(3)  Town usage of escrowed funds. The town may also use the escrowed funds in participation with another entity (such as Texas DOT, Denton County, etc.) to jointly construct the public improvements. 
(4)  Termination of escrow. Escrows, or portions of escrowed amounts, which remain unused after a period of ten years following the date of such payment shall, upon written request, be refunded to the developer. Such refund of escrowed funds does not remove any obligations of the developer for construction of the required improvements. 
(5)  Refund. If all or a portion of a street or other type of public improvement for which escrow is deposited is constructed by a party other than the town, the remaining unused escrowed funds, upon written request, shall be refunded to the developer after completion and town acceptance of the street or public improvement. 
(6)  Interest on escrowed funds. When escrowed funds are returned or refunded to the escrowing developer, the town shall retain all of the interest accrued by the funds, if any. 
(7)  Escrow fee agreement. The town engineer, at his discretion, may require an escrow fee agreement be executed. 
(g)  Authority of town council. The town council has the sole authority to approve development agreements. 
(h)  Agreement to run with the land. The development agreement shall provide that the covenants and other terms of agreement contained therein shall run with the land and shall bind all successors, heirs and assignees of the current applicant. All existing owners shall be required to execute the agreement or provide written consent to the covenants and other terms contained in the agreement. 
(i)  Termination of agreement. The subdivider shall have a continuing responsibility under the development agreement after the filing of any final plat with Denton County until all facilities and improvements required under the development agreement have been completed, inspected and accepted by the town. When the construction of required improvements has proceeded to the point that certain parts of the subdivision are adequately served, the town engineer may release specified portions of the subdivision for use prior to the completion of all improvements, unless the release of such improvements will jeopardize or hinder the continued construction of required improvements. Any development agreement shall remain in force for all portions of the subdivision for which a release has not been executed. 
(j)  Development agreement fee. The town shall impose a fee for processing development agreements. The amount of the fee shall be as specified in the town's fee schedule which may be amended from time to time by ordinance. The direct cost of the town attorney review of the development agreement shall be passed through to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.05.05 - Pro rata payments. 
(a)  Developer responsibility. The developer shall be fully responsible for the construction of utilities necessary for the subdivision and the surrounding area, unless other provisions are approved by the town council. Provisions for reimbursement of costs required by the town but exceeding those necessary to serve the subdivision, and any other provisions, shall be made a part of a facilities agreement (see section 107.05.04(b)(2), oversizing of infrastructure). For any subsequent subdivision utilizing such facilities, any costs due to previous developers shall be prorated by the use the new subdivision bears to the amount due. Such prorated amounts will be made a part of any subsequent development agreement, collected by the town, and repaid to the original developer making such improvements. 
(b)  Prorated funds based on actual costs. All such reimbursements or prorated funds shall be based on the actual cost of the improvements at the time of their construction, subject to comparison with other current unit and/or project costs. The original developer shall therefore provide the town with acceptable documentation for inclusion in a development agreement of actual construction costs from which calculation of reimbursable amounts will be made. 
(c)  Reimbursement for existing utilities. In the case that the subdivision shall utilize utilities already constructed through the use of town funds, the developer shall pay to the town for the use of such facilities an amount equal to that which would be required to serve the subdivision under the requirements of this chapter, based upon policies developed and approved by the town council. 
(d)  Rebates. Any rebates or other payments to the developer by the town for the cost of oversized improvements or off-site improvements required as a part of the subdivision or development and necessary for the adequate and efficient development of surrounding areas of the town, shall be paid only from monies received by the town from the subdividing or development of surrounding areas, and such rebates or payments shall not be made until such monies are received by the town, unless other provisions are approved by the town council. 
(e)  Costs of acquiring easements. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the developer shall pay 100 percent of the costs incurred to acquire an easement from the adjacent owner. The pro rata share paid by the adjacent owner to the town will be forwarded to the developer within 60 days of receipt by the town. All pro rata payments levied are a personal liability and charge against the real and true owners of the premises described, notwithstanding such owners may not be named, or may be incorrectly named. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.05.06 - Inspection, maintenance and acceptance of public improvements. 
(a)  Inspections. 
(1)  The town engineer shall inspect the construction of improvements while in progress, as well as upon completion. The applicant, or his contractor, shall maintain contact with the town engineer during all phases of construction. 
(2)  Construction shall be in accordance with the approved construction plans. Any significant change in design required during construction shall be made by the applicant's engineer, and shall be subject to approval by the town engineer. 
(3)  Any changes in design required during construction should be made by the engineer whose signature and seal are shown on the plans. Another engineer may make revisions to the original engineering plans if so authorized by the owner of the plans and if those revisions are noted on the plans or documents. All revisions must be approved by the town engineer. 
(4)  If the town engineer finds, upon inspection, that any of the required public improvements have not been constructed properly and in accordance with the approved construction plans, the applicant shall be responsible for completing and/or correcting the public improvements to bring such into compliance. 
(b)  Maintenance during construction . The applicant shall maintain all required public improvements during construction of the development phases or until the town approves the improvements and accepts same. 
(c)  Submission of record drawings for filing. The town shall accept required public improvements when the applicant's engineer has certified to the town engineer, through submission of detailed "record" or "as built" drawings of the project and filed copies of any off-site easements, unless otherwise noted within the subdivision ordinance, that the public improvements have been built in accordance with the approved construction plans. The town will not submit the approved final plat for recordation in Denton County until all required improvements have been accepted by the town engineer. 
(d)  Revisions documented on plat. Each record drawing sheet shall document all changes made in the plans during construction, and on each sheet, there shall be a "record" stamp bearing the signature of the engineer and date. Detailed requirements for such drawings and stamps are available on the Little Elm engineering website. 
(e)  Acceptance or rejection of improvements by town engineer. 
(1)  Responsible official. Using the final acceptance checklist, the town engineer shall be responsible for inspecting all required public improvements shown in the construction plans, and for accepting completed subdivision improvements intended for dedication to the town. 
(2)  Final inspection. After completion of all improvements, franchise utilities, grading, and erosion control, the town engineer and other designated representatives (as applicable) will perform a final inspection before recommending acceptance of the improvements. 
(3)  Letter of final acceptance. If all improvements are completed, inspected, tested (when applicable), and determined by the town to be in conformance with this subdivision ordinance and with the town's engineering design standards, then the town engineer shall issue a letter of final acceptance to the applicant, thereby notifying the applicant of the town's acceptance. 
(4)  Effect of acceptance. Acceptance of the improvements shall mean that the applicant has transferred all rights to all the public improvements to the town for title, use, and maintenance. 
(5)  Rejection. If any portion of the construction plans fails to comply with the town's standards and specifications, the town engineer shall reject the complete set until the failure is remedied. 
(f)  Disclaimer. Approval of a preliminary plat or final plat by the commission, or construction plans by the town engineer, shall not constitute acceptance of any of the public improvements required to serve the subdivision or development. No public improvements shall be accepted for dedication by the town except in accordance with this section. 
(g)  Acceptance or rejection of improvements in extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ). Where the improvements to be constructed under a development agreement are located within the town's ETJ and are to be dedicated to Denton County, the town engineer shall inform the county officials that the public improvements have been constructed in accordance with approved construction plans, and are ready for acceptance by the county. 
(h)  Maintenance bond following acceptance. The applicant shall furnish to the town engineer a sufficient maintenance bond with a reputable and solvent corporate surety registered with the State of Texas, in favor of the town, to indemnify the town against any repairs. The bond shall be in effect for two years from the date of final acceptance of the entire project. The bond, which is a part of the requirements for final acceptance, shall be a minimum of ten percent of the value of the work constructed. The applicant shall reimburse the town for all related legal costs for review (this reimbursement shall be paid in full prior to filing of the final plat). 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.05.07 - Concept plan. 
(a)  Purpose and applicability. When a subdivision is a portion of a tract that is five acres or greater in size and is to be subdivided later in its entirety, a concept plan shall be required as a condition precedent to approval of any application for any initial plat (i.e. conveyance plat or preliminary plat). The purpose of a concept plan is to illustrate that the portion of the tract in question that is not being immediately developed is of a size, shape and character to support future development. 
(b)  General requirements. A concept plan may be reviewed concurrently with the conveyance plat or preliminary plat. The concept plan shall show the schematic layout of the entire tract and its relationship to adjacent property. The concept plan shall delineate the proposed characteristics of the area in terms of major categories of land use, dwelling units, general layout of lots and streets, access and fire lanes, drainageways, utility trunk lines, location of sites for parks, schools and other public uses, present and proposed zoning, and such other information as the commission finds to be necessary for making a decision on the approval of any associated plat. 
(c)  Preliminary plat in lieu of concept plan. In certain circumstances, the director of development services shall have the authority to allow a preliminary plat to satisfy the requirement for a concept plan, if such plan complies with the requirements of a concept plan. 
(d)  Compliance with comprehensive plan. A concept plan shall be considered to be a detailing of the comprehensive plan and shall become effective upon adoption by the commission; providing, however, that no concept plan shall be approved other than in substantial conformity with the comprehensive plan. Every concept plan adopted by the commission shall be so certified by the chairman of the commission and a copy thereof shall be placed on file with the town secretary as part of the public record. A concept plan is to continue in force until amended or rescinded by the commission and shall be the official guide to the owners of all property within its area of coverage. Where multiple ownerships preclude the preparation of a concept plan by a single owner, the commission is authorized to prepare or to cause such plan to be prepared. No plat within an area for which a concept plan has been adopted shall be approved except in substantial conformity with such adopted plan. 
(e)  Contents. The concept plan shall include: 
(1)  A proposed layout drawn to a scale of one inch equals 100 feet or larger. 
(2)  True north shall be clearly indicated. 
(3)  Arrangement and dimensions of proposed streets and their relation to existing streets in adjacent properties. 
(4)  The names of adjacent additions or subdivisions or the name of record of owners of adjoining parcels of unplatted land. 
(5)  Location of all existing and proposed structures and land uses. 
(6)  Proposals for water, sewer, and drainage systems in relation to master plans where they exist for these facilities. 
(7)  Identification of any flood zone areas and general proposals for such areas. 
(8)  The plan shall include existing and approved driveways within 200 feet of the site. 
(9)  Existing and/or proposed median openings with 500 feet of the site. 
(10)  Hike and bike trails per the open space and park master plan. 
(11)  Summary of all uses by type, number, and acreage, and other details, shown on table A, below (add columns for additional lots): 
TABLE A - SITE DATA SUMMARY TABLE Item Source/Level of Detail Lot 1 Lot 2 Total, 
All Lots GENERAL SITE DATAExisting zoning Official zoning map Proposed zoning Land use Zoning ordinance Gross acreage Net acreage Percentage of open space Percentage of pervious coverage Building footprint area Square footage Total building area Square footage Building height Number of stories Building height Feet 
(to tallest building element) Lot coverage Percent of total Floor area ratio (FAR) Ratio Area of outside storage/display PARKING Parking ratio per land use Zoning ordinance Required parking Number of spaces Parking provided Standard spaces Number of spaces Accessible parking Number of spaces Total all parking Number of spaces LOADINGRequired loading Number and size of spaces Provided loading Number and size of spaces CONSTRUCTION TIMETABLEStart of construction Month/year End of construction Month/year  
(f)  Standards for approval. No concept plan shall be approved by the commission unless it conforms to the comprehensive plan and development regulations of the town. 
(g)  Acceptance of concept plan. 
(1)  The commission shall review the concept plan for consistency with the comprehensive plan, the major thoroughfare plan, zoning regulations and other requirements of this Code. The commission may permit the development to be platted in phases, provided each phase satisfies the requirements of this Code. The commission may also impose conditions such as temporary street and alley connections or temporary paved cul-de-sacs where streets are to be continued in a subsequent phase to assure orderly development. 
(2)  The commission shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove a concept plan. The approval of a concept plan constitutes authorization by the town for the property owner to submit application for a conveyance plat or preliminary plat, subject to compliance with any conditions attached to the approval of the concept plan. 
(h)  Approval. Planning and zoning commission is authorized to approve concept plans. Approval shall include approval of the sequence of development and construction of phrases of the project as can reasonably be determined. It may include such stipulations or conditions as the commission deems necessary in order to accomplish the purposes of this chapter and to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(i)  Amendments to the concept plan. The concept plan shall be updated and submitted for commission review if the proposed plat is not in accordance with the current concept plan. The director of development services shall determine if the concept plan application is or is not in accordance with the proposed conveyance plat or preliminary plat. 
(j)  Lapse of approval. The approval of any phase or phases of a concept plan shall automatically expire unless such phase or phases have been submitted and approved by the commission as a construction plan within 18 months. 
(k)  Extension or reinstatement of approval. Applicant may request one extension of approval provided such application is filed not less than 60 days prior to or following expiration. Any extension shall not extend beyond six months from the time that the concept plan would otherwise have expired. The request for extension shall be filed with the director of development services and presented to the commission at the next regular meeting. The application for extension shall include an explanation for the reasons for the delay. The commission shall consider reasons for the delay, the effect of any new regulations on the concept plan, and the ability of the property owner to comply with the original conditions in determining whether to approve the extension. The commission's approval or disapproval of an extension for a concept plan shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.05.08 - Building permits and certificates of occupancy. 
(a)  No building permit shall be issued for a lot or building site unless the associated final plat has been approved by the Town of Little Elm and all public improvements as required for the final plat approval have been completed, except as permitted below: 
(1)  Building permits may be issued for nonresidential and multiple-family development provided that a final plat is approved by the planning and zoning commission and construction plans have been released by the town engineer. Building construction will not be allowed to surpass the construction of fire protection improvements. 
(2)  The director of development services may authorize residential building permits for a portion of a subdivision, provided that a final plat has been approved by the planning and zoning commission and all public improvements have been completed for that portion of the development, including but not limited to those required for fire and emergency protection. Notwithstanding, no lot may be sold or title conveyed until a final plat approved by the planning and zoning commission has been recorded. 
(3)  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a building permit or the use of a property unless all subdivision improvements have been completed and the final plat approved by the planning and zoning commission has been recorded in the county. Notwithstanding the above, the director of development services may authorize the temporary occupancy of a structure provided that an agreement providing cash escrow, a letter of credit, or other sufficient surety is approved by the town for the completion of all remaining public improvements. The certificate of occupancy may be revoked if the final plat approval and filing process is not completed. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Secs. 107.05.09, 107.05.10 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 107.07 - SPECIAL EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION POLICIES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 107.07.01 - General policies in the extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ). 
(a)  Application of requirements. Unless otherwise stated within this subdivision ordinance, all standards, specifications and regulations herein shall apply to development within the town's extra-territorial jurisdiction (ETJ). 
(b)  Extension of town services. Given that land proposed for development in the town's ETJ must be served adequately by essential public facilities and services, including those related to adequate water distribution, wastewater collection and treatment, streets, pedestrian circulation, storm drainage conveyance, and park and recreational facilities, the following policies for the provision of infrastructure services provided by the Town of Little Elm into the town's ETJ shall apply: 
(1)  It is in the town's best interest to encourage development in areas adjacent to compatible development already receiving town services, and particularly where those services have excess capacity. 
(2)  It is in the town's best interest to annex areas that: 
a.  Need to be protected in order to prevent or reduce flood damage in existing urban areas; 
b.  Possess unique physical characteristics; 
c.  Have requested town services; or 
d.  Minimize the town's fiscal liability. 
(3)  It is in the town's best interest to withhold all water and sewer extensions outside the town's limits except in instances where the extension will serve a large-volume user who has agreed in writing to annexation at a predetermined date, and who has demonstrated that a significant community benefit will accrue to the town if it provides such service outside the town's limits, and where no significant fiscal liabilities will be incurred by the town. 
(4)  It is in the town's best interest to provide services, other than water and wastewater service, to individual users beyond the town's limits: 
a.  Upon request and under contracts or cost-sharing arrangements that minimize future town fiscal liability; 
b.  Upon request and under contracts or cost-sharing arrangements that encourage compact development; 
c.  Upon request and under contracts or cost-sharing arrangements that ensure compliance with town subdivision, building, electrical, plumbing and fire codes; and 
d.  When it is not in the town's best interest to annex the areas to be served. 
(5)  The town shall therefore provide for extension of public facilities and services only under the following circumstances: 
a.  Such extension is part of an annexation agreement that provides for development consistent with established town objectives and policies, as described and illustrated in the comprehensive plan; 
b.  Such extension allows the town to retain its right under state law to annex the property in the future; 
c.  The quality of the development that is occurring or will be occurring is consistent with town standards; 
d.  The use or development offers significant public benefits to the town; and 
e.  The proposed development and land uses comply with town building and fire codes (as agreed to in an annexation agreement with the town). 
(c)  Design and construction standards for public improvements in the town's extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ). All public improvements constructed in conjunction with a new development in the town's ETJ shall be designed, engineered and constructed in accordance with the town's standards and all other applicable town master plans (e.g., water reuse master plan, the comprehensive plan, etc.). 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.07.02 - Denton County regulations. 
(a)  The town has executed an interlocal cooperation agreement, as authorized under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 242 with Denton County (Ordinance No. 741, adopted November 15, 2005). 
(b)  Denton County has assigned to the town its authority to approve plats in the town's ETJ. The agreement also provides for the town to enforce its subdivision regulations, together with specified regulations of Denton County, within the town's ETJ via interlocal cooperation agreement adopted by Ordinance No. 741. 
(c)  In the event that the subdivision rules and regulations of Denton County provide a more stringent standard than those of the town, then the more stringent standards shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.07.03 - Town participation in improvements in the extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ). 
(a)  Improvements. The town shall not be required to participate in the cost of any improvements where such improvements required by this ordinance are outside the corporate limits of the town (i.e., they are within the town's ETJ area). 
(b)  Certificates of occupancy/utility connections. 
(1)  A certificate of occupancy for nonresidential and multiple-family projects within the town's ETJ shall not be issued until a letter of final acceptance has been issued by the town, and a copy of such letter has been submitted to the building official by the developer, unless otherwise authorized by the town manager or designee (refer to section 107.05.06(d), acceptance or rejection of improvements by the town engineer). 
(2)  Utility connections for all developments in the town's ETJ shall not be issued until a letter of final acceptance has been issued by the town or appropriate utility district, as applicable, and a copy of such letter has been submitted to the building official by the developer, unless otherwise authorized by the town manager (refer to section 107.05.06(f), acceptance or rejection of improvements by the town engineer in ETJ). 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.07.04-107.07.10 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 107.08 - SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 107.08.01 - General subdivision policies. 
(a)  Conformance to plans. 
(1)  Public improvements. Proposed public improvements serving new development shall conform to and be properly related to the public facility elements of the comprehensive plan, other adopted master plans for public facilities and services, and applicable capital improvements plans, and shall at a minimum meet the service levels specified in such plans. 
(2)  Conformance with master thoroughfare plan. All plats within the town and its ETJ, and corresponding construction plans, shall provide for thoroughfares as shown in the master thoroughfare plan. Minor adjustments to thoroughfare alignments may be allowed without amending the master thoroughfare plan if the town engineer determines the new alignment meets the spirit and intent of the master thoroughfare plan and will not compromise public safety or traffic efficiency. The design and construction of all proposed thoroughfares shall be in conformance with the town's engineering design standards, and is subject to approval by the town engineer. Such approvals shall be required prior to any plat approval. 
(3)  Master thoroughfare plan amendment. If a significantly different roadway alignment or a road type from what is shown on the master thoroughfare plan is proposed, then the master thoroughfare plan shall be amended prior to any plat approval. Submission of a traffic impact analysis (TIA) of the proposed amendment by the developer may be required if the director of development services and the town engineer determine that such an analysis is necessary to fully assess the impact of the proposal upon the town's overall thoroughfare network. 
(4)  Water and wastewater plans. The design and construction of the water system and wastewater system to serve the development shall be in conformance with the town's master plans for water and wastewater facilities and with the engineering design standards. The design is subject to approval by the town engineer prior to approval of the construction plans and the final plat. 
(5)  Storm drainage standards. The design and construction of the storm drainage system to serve the development shall be in conformance with, but not limited to, the town's master plans for stormwater drainage, with the town's storm drainage policies (water reuse master plan), and with the engineering design standards. The design is subject to approval by the town engineer prior to approval of the construction plans and the final plat. 
(b)  Adequate public facilities. 
(1)  Adequate services for areas proposed for development. Land proposed for development in the town and in the town's ETJ shall be served adequately by essential public facilities and services, including, but not limited to, water distribution, wastewater collection and treatment, roadways, pedestrian circulation, storm drainage conveyance, and park and recreational facilities. Land shall not be approved for platting or development until adequate public facilities necessary to serve the development exist or provisions have been made for the facilities, whether the facilities are to be located within the property being developed or offsite. 
a.  Street access. A plat will not be approved unless all of the proposed lots have safe and reliable street access for daily use and emergency purposes. 
1.  A plat will not be approved unless all of the proposed lots have access to an improved public street (or a public street that will be improved during construction of the proposed development) that meets the town's minimum design and paving standards, or to an approved public way or mutual access easement that is connected to an improved public street. 
2.  Except for lots that are provided access from an approved cul-de-sac, all lots within a development shall have at least two means of access or approach. Where development phasing or constraints of the land prevent the provision of a second, separate means of access, the town may accept a temporary, paved street connection provided that a second permanent access point can be reasonably anticipated with future development of adjacent properties. 
3.  In certain circumstances where providing two means of access to a site is not feasible, the planning and zoning commission may waive this requirement if staff can demonstrate that the site can be adequately served by emergency vehicles and that life and safety issues have not been compromised. 
4.  For properties situated adjacent to an existing or planned median-divided thoroughfare, at least one of the required access points shall occur at, or through access easement connection to, a median opening (see diagram 107.13.01, median and cross access). 
b.  Water. A plat will not be approved unless all of the proposed lots are connected to a public water system which is capable of providing adequate water for health and emergency purposes. 
1.  Except for lots along an approved cul-de-sac, all lots shall be provided service connections from a looped water main providing water flow from two directions or sources. 
2.  Water service shall be sufficient to meet the fire flow requirements of the proposed development, except where a suitable alternative means of fire protection is approved by the fire chief. 
3.  The town may require the phasing of development and/or improvements to the water system to ensure adequate fire protection. 
4.  Plats for residential lots greater than one acre in size may use private well water, at the discretion of the town engineer. 
c.  Wastewater. A plat will not be approved unless all of the proposed lots are served by an approved means of wastewater collection and treatment. 
1.  The projected wastewater discharge of a proposed development shall not exceed the proposed capacity of the wastewater system. 
2.  The town may require the phasing of development and/or improvements to the sanitary sewer system so as to maintain adequate wastewater capacity. 
3.  Plats for residential lots greater than one acre in size may use private septic systems, at the discretion of the town engineer. 
d.  Storm drainage. Increased stormwater runoff attributable to new development shall not cause impacts to adjoining, upstream or downstream properties. Impacts are defined as an increase in runoff between pre- and post-development. Where the projected runoff from a new development exceeds runoff from pre-development conditions, the town may require the phasing of development, the use of control methods such as retention or detention, obtaining off-site drainage easements, and/or the construction of off-site drainage improvements as means of mitigation. All designs shall comply with the engineering design standards, as it exists or may be amended. 
(2)  Town's cost of review. Should the town deem that adequate review of the roadway, water, wastewater, or drainage submittal should be outsourced to a third party, the cost of such review shall be passed through to the developer or applicant. 
(3)  Property owner's responsibilities. The property owner shall be responsible for, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  Dedication and construction of improvements. The property owner shall dedicate all rights-of-way and easements for, and shall construct and extend, all necessary on-site and off-site public improvements for water distribution, wastewater collection and treatment, streets, storm drainage conveyance, and other improvements that are necessary to adequately serve each phase of a proposed development at service levels that are consistent with the town's applicable master facilities plans and engineering design standards. 
b.  Abutting substandard streets. Where a substandard street abuts or traverses a proposed development, the town may require the property owner to dedicate additional right-of-way and to improve the street to the current town design and construction standards as set forth in the engineering design standards. Such requirements to improve the substandard street to the town's current standards shall only be imposed following careful review of factors including, but not limited to: 
1.  The impact of the new development on the street; 
2.  The timing of the development in relation to need for the street; and 
3.  The likelihood that adjoining property will develop in a timely manner. 
c.  In the case of frontage or service roads for state or federally designated highways, the entire abutting right-of-way shall be dedicated to the town and improved to the county, state or federal agency's applicable construction design standards if such improvement is approved by the agency. 
d.  Right-turn lanes mandatory. The town reserves the right to require free right turn lanes into any development from a roadway whose posted speed limit is 40 miles per hour or greater. Should the applicant request a waiver from this requirement, the applicant must provide to the town a study by an acceptable third party that justifies the elimination of the required free right turn lane. 
e.  Facilities impact studies. The town may require that a developer prepare a comprehensive traffic impact analysis (TIA), flood or drainage study or downstream assessment, or other facilities impact studies in order to assist the town in determining whether a proposed development will be supported with adequate levels of public facilities and services concurrent with the demand for the facilities created by the development. The cost of such study or studies shall be borne by the applicant. 
f.  Timing and approval of studies. Any outside study shall be subject to approval by the town engineer prior to approval of the preliminary plat and the construction plans. The town also may require, at the time of approval of a subsequent applications (e.g., final plat), an update of a facilities impact studies that were approved in conjunction with a prior application (e.g., preliminary plat). 
g.  Future extension of public facilities. The property owner shall make provisions for future expansion of the public facilities as needed to serve future developments, subject to the town's oversize participation policies, if applicable. 
h.  Operations and maintenance of the public facilities. The property owner shall provide for all operations and maintenance of the public facilities, or shall provide proof that a separate entity will be responsible for the operations and maintenance of the facilities. 
i.  Fiscal security. The property owner shall provide all fiscal security required for the construction of the public facilities. 
j.  Approvals from utility providers. The property owner shall obtain all necessary approvals from the applicable utility providers other than the town, and shall submit written verification of such approvals to the town with the construction plans. 
k.  Compliance with utility providers. The property owner shall comply with all requirements of the utility providers, including the town and applicable utility districts. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.08.02 - Water, wastewater and drainage requirements and environmental standards. 
(a)  Water and wastewater basic policy. 
(1)  Construction requirements. 
a.  All public water and wastewater mains shall be located in the frontage of the property along streets, or in easements adjacent to the development in order to provide service to adjacent property. 
b.  Public water and/or wastewater mains shall not be located within a private street, drive or access easement unless a public utility easement is provided. 
c.  The minimum easement width for water or wastewater mains shall be 15 feet, or as determined by the town engineer. Where it is necessary for water and wastewater facilities to be located within the same easement, the easement shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width, or as determined by the town engineer. 
d.  No portion of a structure (including, but not limited to, walls, foundations, porches/patios and porch/patio covers, canopies, roof extensions/overhangs, chimneys, fire flues, etc.) shall encroach over or into any easement, except that wall-attached window awnings, "bay" style windows, and roof eaves shall be allowed to encroach into an easement a maximum of 24 inches upon approval of the town engineer. 
e.  A water or wastewater easement between two lots must fall entirely on a single lot and shall not straddle the lot line unless specifically approved by the town engineer for cause. 
f.  Easements shall be dedicated for exclusive use for water and wastewater facilities and shall be shown on the final plat for the specific purpose intended. When it is necessary for additional utilities to be placed within such utility easement, additional width shall be provided and the easement shall be labeled for its additional intended purpose on the final plat. 
g.  When it is necessary to relocate or replace an existing water or sewer facility to accommodate a proposed subdivision, the developer is responsible for all costs associated with the relocation, except as agreed to by town council for oversize participation. 
(2)  Construction plans. Plans for construction of all water and wastewater facilities required by these regulations shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements and specifications contained in the engineering design standards, the regulations of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), National Sanitation Foundations (NSF), Texas Department of Insurance, Insurance Services Office, and the town's current adopted fire code, which are incorporated by reference and made a part hereof. Plans for the improvements must be prepared by a licensed engineer and accepted by the town engineer. 
(3)  Acquisition of easements. The developer shall be responsible for the acquisition of all required off-site easements. If the developer is unable to acquire the necessary off-site easement, the town shall be provided with easement or right-of-way survey documents and exhibits, documentation, including evidence of a reasonable offer made to the affected property owner. Upon receiving a written request for assistance, the town may, at its option, acquire these easements either through negotiations or through condemnation in appropriate situations. The developer shall reimburse the town for the costs of acquiring the necessary easements including but not limited to attorney fees, expert fees, and title searches. 
(b)  Preliminary utility plan. 
(1)  Submittal of plans. Concurrent with the submission of a preliminary plat, final plat, replat or minor plat, the developer shall submit a plan showing the location and size of water, wastewater, and storm drainage mains that will be required to provide adequate service and fire protection to the lots specified in the proposed plat. Plans and specifications for fire hydrant systems shall be submitted to the fire marshal for review prior to construction. 
(2)  Plan document. The plan shall conform to the engineering design standards. 
(3)  Coordination with other utility providers. 
a.  Preliminary plat. When the subdivision is located in an area served by a utility provider other than the town, the developer must provide a water system analysis. 
b.  Minor plat, replat. When a subdivision is located in an area served by a utility provider other than the town, the developer must provide a letter from the utility provider stating that the existing facilities provide adequate domestic service and fire protection. If the town has reason to believe that there may be water supply or pressure concerns, a water system analysis may be required. 
c.  Final plat. The final plat will not be filed with Denton County until a letter has been provided from the utility provider stating that they have accepted the plans for construction. 
(c)  Miscellaneous requirements. 
(1)  No building, sign, or structure shall be constructed within or over an existing wastewater, lateral, water main or storm drain easement unless approved in writing by the town engineer in a signed and executed development agreement, approved by town council, stating that any damage to the lines within or over the easement caused by the erection of the sign or construction of any building or structure shall be repaired to town standards at the property owner's expense. Additionally, should the town, the county and/or franchise utility company require access to said easement that any repairs to the affected building, sign or structure shall be solely at the expense of the property owner. 
(2)  Ownership and maintenance of water and wastewater mains and service connections shall be regulated as follows: 
a.  The title to all wastewater lines constructed, including wastewater service connections located in a right-of-way or dedicated easement, shall be vested in the town or the applicable utility provider. 
b.  The developer, or single customer, shall be responsible for all maintenance of the wastewater service connection, unless replacement of the service is required under the public roadway or pavement. When replacement is determined to be necessary by the town engineer, the town shall assume the responsibility for replacement of that portion under the pavement. 
c.  The title to all water mains and water meters constructed, and installed, including the title to service connections, shall be vested in the town or the applicable utility provider. 
(3)  The town makes no guarantee that water supply or wastewater capacity will be available at any particular time or place. 
(4)  The service lines shall extend across the lot in question to provide future service connections to the adjacent lot. 
(5)  Water and wastewater service lines shall be maintained by the property owner. 
(6)  Public water and wastewater mains adjacent to federal, state, or county roadways shall be constructed outside the right-of-way in a separate easement unless otherwise agreed upon by those agencies and approved by the town engineer. 
(d)  Water. 
(1)  Design and construction. 
a.  Installation of water facilities. Where water is to be provided through the town system, the property owner shall install adequate water facilities, including fire hydrants, in accordance with the town's engineering design standards, the adopted fire code, the current rules and regulations for public water systems of the Texas Commission of Environmental Quality (TCEQ), and the firefighting standards of the Texas Board of Insurance. If any such requirements conflict, the most stringent requirement shall apply. 
b.  Facilities for health and safety emergencies; alternative water sources. All water facilities connected to the town's water system shall be capable of providing water for health and emergency purposes, including fire protection and suppression. Water supply facilities shall be in accordance with the engineering design standards. The design and construction of water system improvements and alternative water sources shall also comply with the following standards: 
1.  Design and construction of a water source on the site shall be in accordance with applicable regulations of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). 
2.  Design and construction of water service from the town shall be in accordance with the standards in the town's engineering design standards. 
3.  Design and construction of a fire protection and suppression system shall be in accordance with the standards in the engineering design standards, and in accordance with the town's fire department and adopted fire code. 
(2)  Location. 
a.  Shown on construction plans. The location and design of all fire hydrants, all water supply improvements and the boundary lines of special districts, private systems and certified water service areas, indicating all improvements proposed to be served, shall be shown on the construction plans. 
b.  Extension of lines. Extension of water lines shall be made along the entire frontage of the development adjacent to a street. If the subdivision is not adjacent to a street, the extension of water lines shall be accomplished in such a manner as to allow convenient future connections to said lines by new subdivisions and the developer shall provide stub out connections at the property line at the time of water infrastructure installation. 
c.  Variance from requirement. If new subdivisions will never be constructed beyond a developing subdivision due to physical constraints, the town engineer may approve a minor variance for this requirement in accordance with section 107.10.01, variances, of this ordinance prior to action on the construction plans or prior to action on any plat. 
(3)  Cost of installation. The cost of installing all water supply improvements to be made by the developer, including off-site improvements, shall be included in the performance guarantees and development agreement, if applicable (refer to section 107.05.04, development agreements). 
(4)  Cost of extension for single customer. 
a.  When it is necessary to extend a water line to serve a new single customer where only one meter will be installed, the town at its own expense will extend the said water line up to 100 feet. 
b.  If a distance is equal to or greater than 100 feet is required to reach the nearest property line of the new single customer, the said single customer shall pay 100 percent of cost extension in excess of 100 feet. 
c.  If more than one single customer is served by the main extension, 100 feet of main will be allowed for each single customer thus served, and any excess footage will be paid for at 100 percent. 
d.  No more than one single customer credit of 100 feet will be allowed each lot or tract of record so served regardless of the number of buildings, occupied or otherwise, which might be located on said lot or tract. 
e.  Payment will be made in advance of construction. 
(5)  Cost of extension to serve developers. 
a.  Where the town's water distribution system is not planned to be extended in time to serve a proposed new development, all necessary water facilities to serve such development shall be provided by and at the expense of the developer. If oversizing of a water facility is deemed necessary by the town engineer for future developments, then the town may participate in such oversizing costs as part of a development agreement. 
b.  The developer will pay 100 percent of the construction cost of the size mains required to serve his development, including the design, construction, and town inspection of the approach main. 
c.  When the developer desires that water mains be extended to serve his property, he will submit a request in writing to the town engineer. The property to be served shall be listed showing the lot, block and subdivision. If the area to be served is a part of a larger area that is owned or controlled by the developer and which is reasonably expected to be served by water in the future, a tentative design of a main layout will be made of the entire area. The cost estimate will be made on that portion of the subdivision to be served immediately. 
(6)  Individual wells in ETJ. 
a.  Well approval. Individual wells within the town's ETJ shall be subject to approval by the Denton County health official, and this approval shall be documented by the health official's signature on the water system statement on the preliminary and final plat. The property owner must submit with the preliminary and final plat applications a certificate from a professional engineer who is registered or a geoscientist who is licensed to practice in the State of Texas verifying the adequacy of the proposed well water supply and potability prior to preliminary plat and construction plans approvals. 
b.  Compliance with other regulations. Installation, operations and maintenance of individual wells shall comply with town standards, regulations of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), and any other applicable county or state rules and regulations. In the event of conflict among these regulations, whichever is the most stringent shall apply. 
(7)  Alternative water systems. Developments may be approved with alternative water facilities according to the following criteria: 
a.  Water well operation and quality shall meet the minimum requirements of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), Denton County, town health ordinances, and all other regulatory agencies, as applicable. 
b.  Water wells may not be used for commercial sale of water. 
c.  The cost to tie onto the public water system must exceed the certified initial capital cost of a well by 25 percent. All costs and engineering designs shall be submitted by a licensed professional engineer and are subject to review and approval by the town engineer. If a residence is located within 1,000 feet of a domestic water supply, that residence must connect to that service. 
(e)  Wastewater. 
(1)  Extension of and connection to the town's wastewater collection system. Extension of, and connection to, the town's sanitary sewer system shall be required for all new developments within the town limits. Extension of, and connection to, the municipal sewer system shall also be required for new developments within the town's ETJ for any proposed development, lot, tract or parcel that is less than one acre in size. The town is not in any way obligated to allow extension of municipal sewers outside the town limits. The required extension of, and connection to, the municipal sewer system may be waived as a minor variance, in accordance with section 107.10.01, variances, by the town engineer if the town engineer determines that such extension would require unreasonable expenditures and that an on-site wastewater disposal system (see section 107.08.02(e)(5), on-site wastewater disposal systems) will function properly and safely. 
(2)  Design and construction. It is the policy of the town to require all wastewater collection lines to have gravity flow. The use of lift stations and force mains is prohibited unless a gravity design is impractical, as determined by the town engineer. The location, design and sizing of all wastewater improvements shall be shown on the construction plans and are subject to approval by the town engineer. 
(3)  Cost of installation. The cost of installing all wastewater improvements to be made by the developer, including off-site improvements, shall be included in the performance guarantees and development agreement, if applicable. 
(4)  Community sanitary sewerage collection systems. All subdivisions developed subsequent to this ordinance must be served by community sanitary sewerage collection, treatment and disposal systems approved by the town with exceptions granted only if all of the following conditions exist: 
a.  The subdivision in question is less than five parcels of land; 
b.  The existing community type collection, treatment and disposal system is not and cannot feasibly, in the opinion of the town engineer, be made available to the area of development; and, 
c.  Percolation tests run by an independent testing laboratory are submitted to both the town and county health department with results showing that a septic tank and spreader field can be developed to provide adequate disposal of the sewage. 
(5)  Sewer extensions, generally. All sewer extensions shall be designed in accordance with the latest applicable rules and regulations as published by the Texas State Department of Health and Texas Commission for Environmental Quality (TCEQ). All sewers shall be designed with consideration for serving the full drainage area subject to collection by the sewer in question except as modified with the concurrence of the town engineer because of the projected rate of development or the financial feasibility of the proposed extension. 
(6)  Sewer extensions for single customers. 
a.  Where it is necessary to extend a sewer line to serve a new single customer, the town, at its own expense, will extend said sewer up to 100 feet. 
b.  If a distance is equal to or greater than 100 feet should be required to extend the line to the nearest property line of the customer, said single customer shall pay the excess over the 100 feet allowable at the rate of 100 percent of cost. 
c.  If more than one single customer is served by the main extension, 100 lineal feet of sewer will be allowed for each single customer thus served, and any excess footage will be paid for at 100 percent of cost. 
d.  No more than one single customer credit of 100 feet will be allowed for each lot or tract of record so served regardless of the number of buildings, occupied or otherwise, which might be located on said lot or tract. 
e.  Payment will be made in advance of construction. 
f.  All service lines shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the wastewater master plan. 
(7)  Extensions to serve developers. The developer shall pay 100 percent of the construction cost of all sewers including the design and construction of "approach mains," but excepting "service lines." 
a.  The developer will also pay 100 percent of the cost of service lines to all lots to be served by a sewer located in the street. Said service lines will be constructed at the same time as a part of the same contract as all other sewers in the developer's addition. If the sewers are being constructed by town forces, the service lines will be constructed by town forces at the time all other sewers within the addition are constructed. 
b.  The town engineer shall determine the size of the approach main required to serve developer's property and the actual size to be constructed. Should the town elect to construct a main larger than the developer's required approach main, the developer will not be charged for the additional upsizing. 
c.  The amount of developer's payment shall be determined using unit bid prices contained in the award contract. 
d.  All service lines shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the wastewater master plan. 
(8)  Required stub-out to adjacent properties. All lateral and sewer mains installed within a subdivision must extend to the borders of the subdivision as required for future extensions of the collecting system regardless of whether or not such extensions are required for service within the subdivision. 
(9)  Lift stations or separate treatment facilities. The provision for lift stations or separate treatment facilities will not be permitted unless the cost of constructing such lift stations or separate facilities is at least 20 percent less than the costs of constructing an adequate outfall or approach sewer from the existing system. 
(10)  Connections. No connection shall be made to any sanitary sewerage system within the town which will permit the entrance of surface water or waste of other than domestic sewage characteristics without the specific authorization by the town council. 
(11)  On-site wastewater disposal systems. 
a.  In cases where the town engineer determines that extension of and connection to the town's sewer system is impractical or not feasible, and where the town engineer approves the use of an on-site wastewater disposal systems, such on-site systems shall provide adequate sewage disposal for all lots, tracts, parcels and structures in the development that cannot be connected to the town's sewer system. 
b.  All on-site wastewater disposal systems shall be designed, permitted, constructed, operated and maintained in compliance with all applicable local, county and state regulations, and a permit for such system shall be acquired prior to preliminary plat and construction plans approvals. 
c.  On-site wastewater disposal facilities requiring soil absorption systems may be prohibited where such systems will not function properly in conditions of high ground water, flooding, unsuitable soil characteristics, or other topographical or environmental issue. 
d.  Each lot, tract, parcel and structure that utilizes an on-site wastewater disposal system shall have a minimum land area of at least one acre. 
e.  No portion of any on-site wastewater disposal system shall be constructed within a minimum 150-foot radius around any water well either on-site or on other properties. 
f.  In order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, an existing on-site wastewater disposal system shall be upgraded, or reconstructed if necessary, to comply with the town's standards by the owner, at the owner's expense, if the operation of the facility does not comply with government regulations or if it causes objectionable odors, unsanitary conditions, pollution, etc. 
(f)  Stormwater. 
(1)  Adoption. This ordinance is hereby adopted and shall be known as the "Official Drainage and Flood Control Ordinance" of the Town of Little Elm. 
(2)  Purpose and scope. The purpose of policies and design standards set forth herein is to ensure adequate stormwater drainage and flood control within the Town of Little Elm. The policies and standards are included in the engineering design standards and are intended to protect public health and safety, to prevent property damage due to flooding, to equitably distribute the cost of necessary drainage improvements, and to minimize the maintenance cost of drainage facilities constructed. Any development or improvement of property affecting storm drainage and flood control in the Town of Little Elm is subject to the provisions of this ordinance. 
a.  The development of land shall consider all drainage elements normally used in the engineering standards of design. 
b.  Stormwater design shall consider the maximum results from a 100-year frequency storm. The release rate of stormwater shall be such that the flows of runoff water after the land development is completed shall not exceed the flows existing before land development is started. In cases where the land considered for development is adjacent to Lake Lewisville and a direct discharge system can be directed into the lake area, then the increased runoff may be allowed to flow without consideration of detention systems. 
c.  Where existing development is in place upstream of the land area under consideration for development, provisions shall be made within the engineering design to provide capacities for the potential full flows which may be created by the upstream properties based on the result of a 100-year rainfall event. 
d.  All standards of the United States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) established around Lake Lewisville will be followed. The developer or his designee shall certify that all standards of the corps of engineers around Lake Lewisville have been met and approved by the USACE, as required. 
(3)  Standard provisions for storm drainage. All construction for storm drainage in the development or improvement of real property within the Town of Little Elm shall conform to the adopted engineering design standards. 
(4)  Responsibility of owner or developer for storm drainage. 
a.  The owner or developer of property to be developed or used shall be responsible for all storm drainage flowing through or abutting such property. This responsibility includes the drainage directed to that property by prior development as well as the drainage naturally flowing through the property by reason of topography. It is the intent of this ordinance that provision be made for storm drainage in accordance with subsection (3) above, at such time as any property effected is proposed for development use. 
b.  Where the improvement or construction of a storm drainage facility is required along a property line common to two or more owners, the owner hereafter proposing development or use of his property, shall be responsible for the required improvements at the time of development, including the dedication of all necessary right-of-way or easements, to accommodate the improvements. 
c.  Where a property owner proposed development or use of only a portion of his property, provision for storm drainage in accordance with subsection (3) above shall only be required in that portion of the property proposed for immediate development or use, except as construction or improvements of a drainage facility outside that designated portion of the property is deemed essential to the development or use of that designated portion. 
d.  The owner or owners shall dedicate to the town the required drainage easements. Determination of minimum easement required shall be made by the town engineer. 
e.  In the event that an owner or developer desires to impound stormwater by excavation, filling or construction of a dam within a property, thereby creating a lake, pond, or lagoon as a part of the planned development of that property, the standard provisions for storm drainage as established in [subsection (f)(3) of this section] shall not be applicable, provided: 
1.  That an engineering plan for such construction, accompanied by complete drainage design information, prepared by a registered professional engineer, shall have been approved by the Town of Little Elm; 
2.  That the owner or developer shall have agreed to retain under private ownership the lake, pond, or lagoon constructed, and to assume full responsibility for the protection of the general public from any health or safety hazards related to the lake, pond, or lagoon constructed; 
3.  That the owner or developer shall have agreed to assume full responsibility for the maintenance of the lake, pond, or lagoon constructed; 
4.  That the obligations herein shall run with the land and shall be a continuing obligation of the owner or owners of such land; 
5.  That the requirements of the Texas Water Code pertaining to impoundment of surface water are complied with including the design construction and safety of the impounding structure; 
6.  On any existing structure, the owner will furnish a study proposed by a professional engineer for the town for approval. 
(5)  Responsibility and participation of the town in storm drainage improvements. 
a.  The town may, in its sound discretion, participate in the cost of such improvements as are required by this ordinance in an amount not to exceed 20 percent. 
b.  The town may, in its sound discretion, participate in any project of improvements by the levy of a special assessment against the lands to be enhanced in value by such improvements. 
c.  The town may acquire drainage easement necessary for such improvements by acceptance of dedication, purchase, or condemnation. 
d.  The town shall, upon acquisition of the drainage easement and the completion of improvements as hereinabove provided, assume full responsibility for the maintenance of such drainage facilities. 
(6)  Engineering design. The design of all storm drainage facilities shall be in accordance with the engineering design standards. 
(7)  Easements. Drainage easements shall be dedicated for public drainage features in accordance with requirements of this ordinance. Drainage easements and features shall be included as a portion of buildable (habitable structure) lot(s) and not as a lot by itself unless specifically authorized by the town engineer. If a large development related feature is authorized on a separate lot, a home owners' or property owners' association is required. Storm drainage easements shall be located along side property lines, and such easements shall be contained fully on one lot or tract, and shall not be split across the property line between two lots or tracts. 
(8)  Stormwater quality. Designs for new development shall manage stormwater in a manner that protects water quality by addressing the development's potential to cause erosion, pollution, siltation, and sedimentation in the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) and natural major creeks. The goal is to maintain after development, to the maximum extent practicable, the predevelopment characteristics in the major creek, which ultimately receives stormwater runoff from the development. It is the developer's responsibility to ensure that designs for new development meet the stormwater management requirements in the general permit for stormwater discharges from construction activities issued by the TCEQ and its successor agencies. This permit includes the requirement for measures that will be installed during construction to control pollutants in stormwater discharges after construction operations have been completed. 
(9)  Stormwater runoff. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated anticipating a fully developed watershed. The comprehensive plan, engineering design standards, existing land use, and zoning maps shall be used to determine fully developed conditions. The town engineer may require a hydrology and hydraulic analysis and reserves the right to review. 
(10)  Minimum finish floor elevations. The town engineer may require minimum finish floor elevations (MFF) to provide flood protection on certain lots contained within the subdivision. The MFFs shall be shown on the plat. These elevations shall incorporate the most current floodplain management criteria or other criteria as necessary to avoid damages. The minimum finish floor elevation shall be two feet above the fully developed 100-year water surface elevation where the MFF is associated with a natural major creek or open channel. When the MFF is necessitated by situations other than a natural major creek or open channel, the MFF shall be set by the developer's engineer and agreed upon by the town. The following note or an amended version appropriate to the specific plat shall be added to any plat upon which the town engineer requires the establishment of minimum finish floor elevations: 
"The town reserves the right to require minimum finish floor elevations on any lot contained within this addition. The minimum elevations shown are based on the most current information available at the time the plat is filed and are subject to change." 
(11)  Off-site drainage. When any proposed development requires off-site grading where stormwater runoff has been collected or concentrated, it shall not be permitted to drain onto adjacent property except in existing major creeks, channels, storm sewers or streets. In such a case, a drainage easement shall be dedicated for major creeks, ditches, or drainage channels and shall be of a width sufficient to comply with the criteria outlined in the engineering design standards. 
(g)  Preliminary stormwater management plan. 
(1)  A preliminary stormwater management plan (SWMP) shall be prepared for all developments in accordance with the engineering design standards. The purpose of the SWMP is to identify permanent water quality feature opportunities for the development. 
(2)  The preliminary SWMP shall be prepared in coordination with the preliminary drainage plan on all projects where both are required. The preliminary SWMP and the preliminary drainage plan may be shown on the same sheet. 
(3)  The preliminary SWMP must comply with the standards and criteria outlined in this ordinance, the engineering design standards, and the flood damage prevention ordinance. The plan may satisfy the stormwater management portion of the SWPPP that is required for construction activities; however, the SWMP is not a substitution for the SWPPP. The town's review of the preliminary SWMP does not constitute acceptance of the final SWMP or the final development plans. 
(4)  The developer shall provide a preliminary SWMP for the area proposed for development. For amended plats or plats with a previously accepted preliminary SWMP, the accepted preliminary SWMP shall be enforced unless a revised preliminary SWMP is required. 
(5)  Electronic copies of the preliminary SWMP plan shall be submitted with the submittal of a preliminary plat, replat, or minor plat for review and acceptance. The plan shall be labeled as "preliminary." Upon acceptance of the plan, the plan shall be signed, sealed, and dated by the engineer, or shall contain a statement showing the engineer's name and license number and affirming the plan was prepared under the direction of the engineer and that the plan is preliminary. At the discretion of the town engineer, an earthwork permit may be issued prior to the plat being filed so long as a floodplain development permit, if necessary, and a SWPPP have been approved. The developer takes the financial risk of grading the tract prior to final approval of the plat and construction plans. 
(h)  Preliminary drainage plan-Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis. 
(1)  This plan shall show the watershed affecting the development and how the runoff from the fully-developed watershed will be conveyed to, through, and from the development. It must comply with the standards outlined in this ordinance and the drainage design criteria found in the engineering design standards. The preliminary drainage plan is a guide for the detailed drainage design. The review of the preliminary drainage plan does not constitute final drainage plan approval or authorize a variance to this subdivision ordinance. 
(2)  For any property involved in the development process, a preliminary drainage plan shall be provided, at the developer's expense, for the area proposed for development. For property with a previously accepted preliminary drainage plan, the accepted preliminary drainage plan may be submitted and enforced unless a revised preliminary drainage plan is required by the town due to lot reconfiguration or other conditions created by the new plat. The town engineer may waive the requirement for a preliminary drainage plan if the submitted plat is not anticipated to cause any significant change in runoff characteristics from a previously accepted drainage study or for single residential properties where no drainage problems are anticipated. If the applicant requests a variance in writing, a copy of any previous drainage plan shall be provided. 
(3)  Electronic copies of the preliminary drainage plan shall be submitted with the submittal of a preliminary plat, replat, or minor plat for review and acceptance. The plan shall be labeled as "preliminary." The plan shall be stamped by and dated by the engineer and be accompanied by a floodplain development application describing the hydrologic and hydraulic impacts of the development and all associated supporting data files. 
(i)  Floodplain development requirements. 
(1)  Construction in areas subject to flooding. 
a.  No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or relocated within the 100-year floodplains or floodways of the major drainageways, unless the finished floor elevation of such a building or structure is a minimum of two feet above the high water elevation calculated for the runoff from a rainfall having a design frequency of 100 years. In all other areas subject to flooding, the finished floor elevation shall be a minimum of the high water elevation calculated for the runoff from a rainfall having a design frequency of 50 years and shall not flood within the 100-year frequency. The owner or developer shall furnish, at their expense, to the town engineer sufficient engineering design information to confirm that the minimum floor elevation proposed is as required by this paragraph. 
b.  No building or structure shall be erected or relocated within a floodplain of drainage channel which will obstruct the natural flow of water within that floodplain or channel. 
c.  No excavation, filling, or construction of embankment, or landscaping shall be permitted within a floodplain or channel which will obstruct the natural flow of the water within that floodplain or channel, unless sufficient engineering design information is furnished to the town engineer in order that they may determine that same will not adversely affect flow characteristics within that floodplain or channel, resulting in damage to that or any other property nearby. 
(2)  Building or structure set-back requirement. No building or structure shall hereafter be constructed, reconstructed, or relocated within 20 feet of any open drainage channel. It is the intent of this section to ensure that an unobstructed width of at least 20 feet is maintained between the top side slope of any such drainage channel and any building or structure. 
(3)  Construction over drainage facilities. No building or structure shall hereafter be constructed, reconstructed, or relocated over or across any storm drainage facility, unless specifically approved by the town engineer pursuant to that criteria established in paragraphs a. and b. below: 
a.  Construction of buildings, roadways, or structures may be permitted over or across closed drainage systems, to include concrete box culverts or reinforced concrete pipe. Engineering plans and specifications shall be prepared by a professional engineer registered in the State of Texas and experienced in civil engineering work. The total cost for such engineering plans and specifications shall be borne by the owner or the developer and shall be furnished to the town engineer for their review and approval. 
b.  Construction of pedestrian bridges or small vehicular crossings may be permitted by the town engineer. Engineering plans and specifications shall be prepared by a professional engineer registered in the State of Texas and experienced in civil engineering work. The total cost for such engineering plans and specifications shall be borne by the developer and shall be furnished to the town engineer for their review and approval. 
c.  Any fencing that is proposed to cross a drainage facility shall be designed in such a way that does not impede water flow or create a de facto dam. Fencing across drainage facilities is subject to review and approval by the town engineer. 
(4)  Storage, general. Stormwater management programs aimed at controlling increased stream water runoff generated by development are a top priority in urban watershed planning. More frequent flooding, increased rates and volumes of stormwater runoff, increased stream channel erosion and degradation, increased sedimentation, and increased water pollution are all problems intensified by increased stormwater runoff resulting from development. Storage of excess urban storm runoff is one of the most promising methods available in preventing urban flood damage. 
a.  Storm runoff storage with reduced release rates can hold downstream flood flows to within the safe conveyance capacity of the storm sewer and stream system. In most cases it can be shown that storage is more economical than increasing downstream conveyance capacity. Storage facilities should be planned and designed to ensure an effective and efficient operation and maintenance program. 
b.  Retention and detention are two generalized types of storm runoff storage used to control flooding. Retention storage refers to storm runoff collected and stored for a significant period and released or used after storm runoff has ended. Retention storage usually consists of "wet reservoirs" which often have agricultural, recreational, and/or aesthetic value. Detention storage consists of reducing the rate of runoff for a short period of time to reduce peak flows by controlling the discharge through an outlet structure and by extending the period of runoff. 
c.  Skillful use of the procedures outlined in this section will provide reasonable solutions to drainage policy requirements. Individual and community experience in the use of these techniques will evolve into a methodology which will allow urban growth without the attendant drainage problems. 
(5)  Storage classification. Storage can be classified by location as follows: 
a.  Rainfall storage. The storage of water near the point of rainfall occurrence or before storm runoff accumulates significantly. Rainfall storage is usually accomplished by roof top ponding, parking lot ponding, property line swale ponding, and small on-site ponds. 
b.  Runoff storage. Water stored after storm runoff has accumulated significantly and begun to flow in a drainage system. Runoff storage is usually accomplished by off stream storage, channel storage, or on-stream storage. 
(6)  Rainfall storage. 
a.  Rooftops. The building codes require roof load design for rain and snow and its subsequent removal, drainage, or evaporation from the roof. Under no circumstances shall the design for a nonresidential flat roof allow planned ponding. 
b.  Parking lots. Bioswales are encouraged for use in parking lots rather than curb and gutter between the parking spaces. Water moving across the parking area shall be filtered before entering the sewer system. 
c.  Recreation areas. Recreation areas, such as sports fields, generally have a substantial area of grass cover which often has a high infiltration rate. Storm runoff from such fields is minimal. A secondary use of such recreation fields can be made by providing for limited detention storage of runoff from adjacent areas. 
d.  [Periods of precipitation.] Since these areas are not used during periods of precipitation, detention ponding should not seriously impede their primary use. To minimize after effects, the recreation area should be designed so that it will thoroughly drain. In addition, the vegetation used on the area should be tolerant of periodic inundation and wetness. 
e.  Property line swales. Subdivision planning and layout requires adequate surface drainage away from buildings. This is obtained by sloping the finished grade in all directions away from the building. The layout often calls for a swale to be located along the back property line, which then drains longitudinally through the block. The use of natural swales for drainage is allowed; concrete flumes are not allowed. 
f.  Ponding. Temporary ponding facilities along the rear lot line may include small controlled discharges along the back property line or, if the subsoil conditions are favorable, several inches of rainfall could be expected to percolate into the ground during and after a storm. 
g.  [Subsoil.] Prior to planning for property line swale ponding, the engineer should determine that saturation of the subsoil will not have an adverse effect on building foundations. In cases where significant subsoil problems exist, water should not be ponded or percolated into the ground. 
h.  Combinations. In many instances, one on-site detention method cannot conveniently or economically satisfy the required or needed amount of stormwater storage. Limitations in storage capacities, site development conditions, soils limitations and other related constraints may require that more than one method be utilized. For example, roof top, parking lot, and surface pond storage might all be required to compensate for the increase in runoff due to development of a particular site. Whatever combinations are suitable may be incorporated into a site development plan. 
(7)  Runoff storage. 
a.  Off-stream storage. The storage of water in depressed open areas, in reservoirs, and on low lying recreation fields to which storm peak flows are routed in usually termed off-stream storage. It is usually characterized by a side channel spillway or overflow from the main channel. 
b.  On-stream storage. The construction of an embankment across a channel so that a storage pond is formed represents on-stream storage. Spillway considerations are important to pass large floods exceeding the storage capacity. Properly protected roadway embankments are well suited for this purpose. 
c.  Channel storage. Although all channels inherently store water, channels can be made to attenuate runoff by altering their hydraulic characteristics in a way that will reduce peak flows. Side channels that run essentially parallel to the main stream channel are also a means of temporarily storing water during excessive rainfall events. 
(8)  Multipurpose use. 
a.  Rainfall storage and runoff storage systems are most practical when designed for multi-purpose use. For maximum land use efficiency the design engineer must consult early with the planning department and the parks and recreation department of the town. 
b.  Lower cost recreation. Using detention storage areas as parks and greenbelts, ballfields and playing fields is an efficient use of unbuildable land and reduces the town's cost of open space facilities. 
c.  Multi-use criteria. The multiple use of floodway storage areas is a desirable manner in meeting the recreation needs of the local community. Both detention and retention storage may provide recreation areas in addition to their primary function in the reduction of flooding. 
(9)  All development proposed adjacent to or within the 100-year floodplain shall be in accordance with the town's flood damage prevention ordinance, the subdivision ordinance, and the engineering design standards. A floodplain development permit and earthwork permit must be submitted and approved by the town engineer prior to any construction on the site. 
(j)  Shoreline and major creeks. 
(1)  One-hundred-year floodplain restrictions. For the health, safety, and welfare of the town's residents and for the conservation of water, storm drainage, and sanitary sewer facilities, the town prohibits vertical development of any portion of a property that lies within the 100-year floodplain of any shoreline or major creek. Shorelines and major creeks shall be protected from destruction or damage resulting from clearing, grading, and dumping of earth, waste or other foreign materials. Clearing, grading, excavation or filling of any area within the 100-year floodplain, shoreline, or within any major creek shall be prohibited unless authorized in writing by the town. 
(2)  Shoreline and major creek restrictions. All shorelines and major creeks shall be maintained in an open natural condition. All shoreline and each major creek is subject to the following requirements for all types of development: 
a.  The 100-year floodplain and erosion hazard setback shall be dedicated on the final plat to the town as a single lot or shall be owned and maintained by an HOA or POA, pursuant to section 107.08.09, HOA requirements, of this ordinance. 
b.  At no time shall any portion of the 100-year floodplain exist or be included within any single-family or two-family residential lot. 
c.  The commission may waive any of these dedication requirements for a replat that was originally platted prior to the adoption of this subdivision ordinance. 
(3)  Access. Public access to parks and open space shall be dedicated for maintenance purposes as required by the town engineer. 
(4)  Retaining walls. Retaining walls may be allowed between a house and the shoreline or major creek as approved by the town engineer, subject to building department standards. In addition, the footings shall be wholly located within private property and may not encroach into easements, rights-of-way, floodplain, erosion hazard setbacks, or any other town-maintained property. Retaining wall maintenance is the sole responsibility of the property owner. 
(5)  Retaining walls dividing properties. When a retaining wall is placed along a shared property line, the maintenance of the retaining wall shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner whose land is located at the higher elevation of the adjacent properties. 
(6)  Adjacent streets widths. The streets adjacent to the shoreline or a major creek shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 60 feet. Where the roadway required by the adjacent development is narrower than a 60 foot collector thoroughfare, the town may participate in a portion of the paving costs when the town determines that a collector thoroughfare is necessary for traffic safety, public access, and/or public on-street parking and park access. 
(7)  Adjacent street types. (see diagram 107.04.04). 
a.  Parallel streets. A minimum 60 percent of the linear frontage of a shoreline or major creek shall be adjacent to a parallel street. If the subdivision is developed in phases, this requirement shall be applied to the linear frontage within each individual phase. 
b.  Cul-de-sac streets. Cul-de-sacs shall comply with the following criteria (see diagram 107.13.05). Cul-de-sacs shall comply with the following criteria: 
1.  No more than one cul-de-sac in a row. 
2.  A minimum 50 percent of an adjacent cul-de-sac bulb shall be open to the shoreline or major creek and no residential lot shall encroach within the area between this line and the major creek. 
3.  An entry monument or feature as well as landscaping shall be provided at the end of the cul-de-sac and a pathway of a minimum 12 feet in width shall be provided to the major creek as approved by the director of development services. 
4.  Two or more cul-de-sacs cannot be placed immediately next to each other along a major creek. 
(8)  Setbacks. Any side lot line adjacent to a shoreline or major creek shall provide a 25-foot building setback. 
(9)  Fences. Fences adjacent to a shoreline or major creek shall comply with the following criteria: 
a.  Have a maximum height of eight feet as measured from grade at that location; 
b.  Ornamental metal fences shall be located along the rear and side of the lots; and 
c.  The property owner is responsible for the maintenance of the fence. 
(10)  Additional studies. At the request of the town, the property owner shall submit additional studies, including but not limited to the following, as deemed appropriate and necessary by the town, as part of the preliminary plat submittal requirements. These studies shall be considered during review and approval of the preliminary plat. For any study required by the town that is outsourced to a third party, the cost of such study shall be passed through to the developer or applicant. 
a.  Environmental assessment; 
b.  Wetland delineation study; 
c.  Habitat study; 
d.  Vegetative study; 
e.  Erosion hazard setback study; 
f.  Storm drainage study; 
g.  Riparian (i.e., tributary) study; 
h.  Flood study; and 
i.  Downstream assessment study. 
(k)  Detention facilities. 
(1)  Intent. The Town of Little Elm encourages the use of detention basins based for the benefits of the community outlined below: 
a.  Control of flood discharges. The intent of detention basin design shall be to reduce flood discharges for the ultimate watershed development conditions without increasing peak discharges above the peak discharges for undeveloped watershed conditions. This storage method serves as a key strategy of the stormwater management plan. 
b.  Environment. As development occurs, there is a loss of wildlife and bird life habitat. It is possible to create a natural micro-environment around ponds that can offset this loss of habitat. These "natural" environmental pockets in conjunction with natural open space areas can help maintain the rural setting of the town. Detention ponds also benefit downstream water quality by allowing the sedimentation of pollutants. 
c.  Recreation. Detention basins offer many recreational opportunities in an urban setting; for example, a normally dry detention basin could be used for athletic fields or picnic areas, while the banks of a pond offer valuable park space. 
d.  Aesthetics. As an integral part of the Town of Little Elm, a detention basin needs to blend into the landscape and into the community. Measures such as gentle side slopes, planting of trees and shrubs, and other landscaping features can transform the detention facility into an attractive amenity for the neighborhood. 
(2)  Requirements. 
a.  Detailed engineering studies of the entire basin shall be required to evaluate the timing of hydrographs from regional and on-site facilities, as well as backwater calculations to determine the effect of the detention/retention facilities on upstream water surface elevations. 
b.  All detention facility designs shall be performed by a professional engineer registered in the State of Texas and shall meet the requirements of Permanent Rule 31, Texas Administration Code (TAC) Chapter 299, and other requirements, as applicable. 
c.  The minimum amount of storage volume of the detention basin shall be that volume required to reduce runoff rate to the undeveloped condition rate. The volume of runoff storage for drainage areas greater than 160 acres shall be compared using unit hydrograph procedures. The current best practices for the calculation of runoff hydrograph computation and flood routings shall be utilized, unless another program is specifically approved by the town engineer. The criteria contained in this section shall serve as the minimum requirements for detention basin design. For drainage areas less than 160 acres, the above methods are recommended; however, an approximate routing method may be used subject to approval of the town engineer. 
d.  The maximum allowable release rate from any site shall be equal to the 100-year peak runoff rate prior to site development. The maximum design release rate may be less. 
e.  Where stormwater management improvements are required in the natural floodway or a permanent greenbelt or open space area, they should be incorporated into existing lakes, or they should be designed in as small an area as feasible to create natural contours. Note, however, that detention basins or retention ponds shall be a minimum of one acre in size to allow for proper maintenance, side slopes and outlet work operation. 
f.  Retention/detention ponds shall resemble natural ponds; in addition: 
1.  The detention pond should expand gradually from the inlet towards the outlet, ensuring that there are no "dead zones." That is, water entering the pond should gradually spread out and uniformly displace the water already present in the pond to avoid stagnation. 
2.  The average permanent pond depth should be greater than five feet, where possible. 
3.  The maximum slope of any detention pond shall be one-to-six (1:6). 
4.  Fences are not allowed on or around detention ponds that are within public view. 
5.  Ponds within public view must be designed in such a way that enhance the aesthetics and have slopes that do not create an undue hazard to the public. 
6.  Detention ponds that are visible from public view are required to be a community asset, either as a detention pond of predominantly grassy expanse that is generally usable by the public and that only occasionally fills with water or as an aerated retention pond with a fountain. 
7.  Landscaping shall be provided surrounding the pond to create a more natural appearance, as per the town's landscape ordinance. 
g.  If several ponds are required, they should vary in size and shape, and be separated by tree groves, vegetated berms, or similar screening that creates a natural appearance. 
h.  Landscape materials should enhance wildlife habitat where feasible. 
i.  Rock or geotextiles are required where slope erosion protection is needed for the side slopes of a pond. Exposed concrete is not allowed. 
j.  Detention facilities of less than ten acre-feet of flood storage shall have outlet structures designed for the 100-year frequency storm. Facilities that are ten acre-feet of flood storage or greater shall have outlet structures designed for the ten-year and 100-year frequency storms. The release rates shall be such that the flows after land development are no larger than the flows before land development. 
k.  Outlets should be provided with a debris separator to prevent plugging with debris and to provide safety to the public. Due to unique design considerations, the town engineer may approve alternative outlet design. 
l.  All federal, state and county laws pertaining to the impoundment of surface water shall have been compiled with, including the design, construction and safety of the impounding structure. Copies of any federal, state or county permits issued for the proposed impoundments shall be submitted to the town engineer. 
m.  All detention/retention facilities shall include an additional one foot of freeboard and two feet of sediment in determining the design flood elevation. 
n.  Provisions (such as emergency spillways or reinforcing of embankments) shall be made for the occurrence of overtopping or failure of the outlet structure. Under no circumstances should the emergency overflow have a direct path to any buildings or other structures used for human occupancy, commerce, or industry. Details of these provisions shall be supplied to the town engineer for approval. 
o.  The flood storage volume of detention/retention facilities shall be designed to empty in a maximum of 12 hours if said facilities are to be considered an erosion/pollution control facility. 
p.  Consideration should be given to the stocking of retention ponds with fish to control algae growth. 
q.  Inlet structures shall be designed to both dissipate the flow energy and drop the inflow elevation to below that of the pond's water surface or basin's flow line. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.08.03 - Streets and alleys. 
(a)  Streets basic policy. 
(1)  Street improvements. In platting a new development, the property owner shall provide additional right-of-way needed for existing or future streets as required by the engineering design standards and as shown on the thoroughfare plan (see table B, thoroughfare types and standards). 
(2)  Existing substandard streets. 
a.  When a proposed residential or nonresidential development abuts one or both sides of an existing substandard street, the developer shall be required to improve the substandard street and its appurtenances (such as curbs and gutters, sidewalks, barrier-free ramps, street trees, etc.) to bring the same to town standards, or to replace it with a standard town street, at no cost to the town other than as may be provided in the town's cost-sharing policies, including any ordinances that are in effect at the time of final plat approval. 
b.  If the proposed development is located along only one side of a substandard street, and if the town makes a determination that it is not feasible to improve the full width of said substandard street at that time the town may require the developer to pay into escrow, in accordance with section 107.05.04, development agreements, funds for the future improvement of the street as a condition of final plat approval for the development. 
c.  When a traffic impact analysis (TIA) is required or voluntarily submitted, the findings determined shall not be imposed on the requirements, alignment, rights-of-way, and number of lanes shown on the master thoroughfare plan, as it exists or may be amended. The TIA may be used to justify amendments to the thoroughfare plan, but in no case shall dictate such amendments. 
(3)  New perimeter streets. 
a.  When a proposed residential or nonresidential development is developed abutting an existing or planned major thoroughfare, minor thoroughfare or collector street as shown on the master thoroughfare plan, the developer shall construct a portion of the abutting street and its appurtenances (such as curbs and gutters, sidewalks, barrier-free ramps, street trees, etc.) to the town's standards for that type of street (per the engineering design standards). If the town engineer determines that it is not feasible to construct the abutting street and its appurtenances at the time of development, the town may require the developer to pay into escrow, in accordance with section 107.05.04, development agreements, funds for the future construction of the street as a condition of final plat approval for the development. The funds placed in escrow or the value of the lanes constructed shall be roughly proportional to the amount of traffic estimated to be generated by the development itself. 
b.  When a proposed residential or nonresidential development is constructed and has designed an unplanned perimeter street in order to provide access to the site and/or adjacent land, the developer shall construct a portion of the abutting street as described in section 107.08.03(a)(4), new internal streets, below, and under the same conditions. 
(4)  New internal streets. 
a.  All new streets and their appurtenances internal to a proposed residential or nonresidential development shall, at a minimum, be built to a width and design that will adequately serve the development, and shall conform to the town's standards as described in the engineering design standards. If oversizing of an internal street is deemed necessary by the town engineer for traffic safety or efficiency (such as adjacent to a school or park site), then the town and/or the applicable entity may participate in such oversizing costs as part of a development agreement/facilities agreement with the developer. 
b.  Streets which temporarily dead-end at power lines, railroads or similar rights-of-way shall be constructed for at least one-half the distance across these rights-of-way, or provision shall be made to place the construction cost for said improvements in escrow with the town in accordance with section 107.05.04, development agreements. 
c.  When, in the judgment of the town engineer, it is not feasible to construct an internal street or appurtenances at the time of development of the subdivision, the town may require the developer to pay into escrow funds for the future construction of the street or its appurtenances as a condition of final plat approval for the development, in accordance with section 107.05.04, development agreements. 
(5)  Impact fees. All fees due on the project shall be paid in accordance with the town's impact fee ordinance and/or executed development agreement/facilities agreement. 
(b)  Street design and appurtenances. 
(1)  Application of requirements. Street design requirements are subject to the provisions included in the engineering design standards, development agreements and planned development ordinance (if applicable to the subject property) as well as the regulations contained within this subdivision ordinance. 
(2)  Conformity to the master thoroughfare plan. The general location of streets shall conform to the master thoroughfare plan. For streets that are not shown on the master thoroughfare plan, such as local residential streets, the arrangement of such streets shall: 
a.  Provide for the continuation or appropriate continuation of existing streets or street stubs from or into surrounding areas - refer to street stub requirements outlined in section 107.08.03(b)(8), stub streets, and connectivity requirements in section 107.08.03(b)(9), street connectivity; 
b.  Conform to any plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the town to address a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformity to existing streets impractical; and 
c.  Not conflict with existing or proposed streets or driveway openings, including those on the opposite side of an existing or planned thoroughfare, as described within the engineering design standards. 
d.  New streets that cross divided arterials shall align to the greatest extent possible with opposite streets such that median openings can be shared. 
(3)  Relation to adjoining street system. The proposed street system shall extend all existing major and minor arterials and such existing collector and local streets as may be necessary for convenience of traffic circulation and emergency ingress and egress. 
(4)  Maximum cul-de-sac street length. No cul-de-sac street shall be longer than 600 feet. 
(5)  Maximum street length. No street shall be more than 1,000 feet in length without an intersection with another street which will provide some degree of flexibility in traffic patterns and public convenience. 
a.  See the engineering design standards for specific design requirements. 
b.  In certain circumstances, the town may consider minor exemptions to the maximum street lengths if sought by the applicant. These circumstances include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Rerouting of streets; 
2.  Increasing the lot count by five percent or more from the previously approved preliminary plat or final plat; or 
3.  Approval by the planning and zoning commission through a subdivision ordinance variance. Any variance approved by the planning and zoning commission shall include the curvilinear requirement and street calming methods, described below. 
(6)  Curvilinear requirement. When a residential street length exceeds 500 feet but is less than 1,000 feet in length, the design of the street shall include a curve of between 100 to 200 feet radius for a length equal to the curve radius. 
(7)  Street calming methods. When a residential street length exceeds 500 feet but is less than 1,000 feet in length, one or more of the following street calming methods shall be incorporated into the design in addition to the curvilinear requirement (above) in order to reduce traffic velocity and increase safety to pedestrians and cyclists, subject to the review and approval of the town engineer: 
a.  Street width narrowing with landscaped islands placed approximately every 400 feet; 
b.  Roundabouts placed approximately in the center of the street length; and/or 
c.  Landscaped medians that include pedestrian crossing oases included for a minimum of one-third of the street length. 
(8)  Street widths and rights-of-way. Street widths and related rights-of-way shall be designed in accordance with the following: 
a.  Master thoroughfare plan (adopted on March 24, 2016, and as amended); 
b.  Planned development ordinance (if applicable to the subject property); and 
c.  All streets shall be paved with a permanent type of pavement in accordance with the engineering design standards. 
TABLE B - THOROUGHFARE TYPES AND STANDARDS Criteria Primary 
Arterial-1 Primary 
Arterial-2 Primary 
Arterial-3 Minor 
Arterial-1 Minor 
Arterial-2 Minor 
Arterial-3 Collector Urban Mix 
Residential Designation P6D-1 P6D-2 P6D-3 M4D-1 M5U-2 M4U-3 C2U R Limited to: (US 380) (FM 423, 720 and 2931) Town and ETJ roadways Right-of-way 160' 140' 124' 100' 100' 100' 60' 50' ROW at intersections Per Texas DOT 134' 110' 100' 100' 60' 50' Lanes/division 6LD 4LD 5LU 4LU 2LU 2LU Roadway width (B-B) 37' 37' 63' 49' 37' 31' Median width 20' 20' - - - - Parkway width 15' 15' 9' 25' 11.5' 9.5' Parking No No No No Yes Yes  
(9)  Street names, street name signs, and traffic control signs. 
a.  Street names. New streets shall be named so as to provide naming continuity with existing streets, and so as to prevent conflict or "sound-alike" confusion with similar street names. All street names shall be approved by the director of development services prior to any plat approval, and prior to approval of the construction plans and should comply with the town's approved street name policy, as it exists or may be amended. 
b.  Cost of signs. The cost of street name signs and traffic control signs shall be paid for and installed by the developer. 
c.  Town standards. All street name signs and traffic control signs shall conform to the town's details for street name sign design and the latest edition of the Texas "Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (TMUTCD). 
(10)  Traffic studies. The town engineer may require a traffic impact analysis (TIA) or other type of engineering study from the developer prior to any approval for plats or construction plans to ascertain technical data pertaining to the potential traffic impact of the proposed development on the town's street system. For any study required by the town that is outsourced to a third party, the cost of such study shall be passed through to the developer or applicant. 
(11)  Stub streets. 
a.  See the engineering design standards for all design requirements. 
b.  Future connections are required to adjacent vacant properties at locations as approved by the director of development services and the town engineer. 
c.  When a residential development is constructed in phases requiring a temporary stubbed street, a paved temporary turn-around shall be provided for maneuvering by emergency equipment. 
d.  A note shall be clearly placed on the final plat indicating that the stub street will be extended with future development (see requirements for temporary turn-arounds in the engineering design standards). 
e.  All stub streets shall have barricades that meet TMUTCD standards. 
f.  All stub streets shall have a sign prominently posted at the terminus of the street to indicate no through traffic and that the street will be extended in the future. 
1.  The sign shall comply with standards established by the town engineer, and 
2.  Installation and cost of the signs shall be the responsibility of the developer. 
(12)  Connectivity. 
a.  New residential developments shall provide street connections to adjacent developments, as determined by the director of development services, allowing access between developments for neighborhood traffic and to enhance pedestrian and bicycle connectivity as recommended in the comprehensive plan. 
b.  Residential developments shall not have direct vehicular access to adjacent commercial or retail developments. Pedestrian and/or bicycle access may be provided, as approved by the director of development services. 
(13)  Street lighting required. Street lighting shall be provided by the developer along all streets and thoroughfares in accordance with the engineering design standards. The developer is responsible for the installation of street lighting and they shall be installed to town standards prior to the town accepting responsibility for the future provision of electricity to the street lights. The town engineer shall be the responsible official for decisions related to street lighting, and may authorize a minor variance to these regulations, in accordance with section 107.10.01, variances, for a street lighting requirement if such variance will not compromise public health, safety, security and convenience. 
(14)  Street lighting placement. 
a.  Street lights shall be placed at every street intersection. 
b.  In addition to intersection placement, street lights shall be spaced no greater than 500 feet apart. 
c.  Street lighting shall be placed within the right-of-way, either the median or the parkway, or if not practical, within a utility easement. 
d.  Street lighting shall be placed in such a manner to avoid interference of nearby trees or signs with the intended illumination field. 
e.  Street lighting shall be chosen and installed according to the engineering design standards and shall conform to the Dark Sky Ordinance (Ordinance No. 703 adopted June 7, 2005), and as amended. 
(c)  Private streets. 
(1)  Private streets. Private streets within the town and/or the ETJ may be allowed in accordance with the zoning ordinance. Private streets shall be designed and constructed to the same standards as for public streets, in accordance with the engineering design standards. 
(2)  Town council action required. Dedicated streets and rights-of-way shall not be designated or used as private streets and such use is prohibited, except where specific approval is given by action of the town council for properties within the town's extraterritorial jurisdiction and upon approval of a specific use permit for properties within the town limits. The town council may add any conditions as deemed appropriate as part of the approval of a private street development. 
(3)  Private street development generally. Private street developments are subject to provisions of the master thoroughfare plan and the subdivision ordinance, as it exists or may be amended. Private street developments shall only be permitted by the approval of a specific use permit or through a planned development district. Private street developments shall be restricted to an area that is surrounded on at least three sides, and in any event no less than approximately 75 percent of the perimeter, by natural barriers or similar physical barriers created by man. Examples of natural barriers would be creeks and floodplains. Examples of similar barriers created by man would be a golf course, school location, park, railroad tracks or a limited access roadway. Non-qualifying man-made barriers include screening walls, local roadways, man-made drainage ditches, detention ponds, landscape buffers, earthen berms, utility easements and rights-of-way. Private street developments may not cross an existing or proposed thoroughfare as shown on the town's adopted master thoroughfare plan nor shall a private street development disrupt an existing or proposed hike and bike route. 
(4)  Connectivity. The comprehensive plan calls for all plans for development in the town to include a high degree of connectivity within developments and between one development and another. Any proposed private street development adjacent to an existing public street subdivision that can be reasonable connected, including by constructing a bridge or culvert, for example, should not be approved as a private street development. The two adjacent subdivisions should allow cross-connectivity using public streets. This is especially important when one of the two adjacent subdivisions has a school site within the development that will be accessed by both developments. 
(5)  Criteria for approval for private streets in new developments. Private street developments within the town may be considered through the specific use permit (SUP) process or through a planned development district. The planning and zoning commission and town council shall use any of the following criteria: 
a.  Non-disruption of planned public roadways or facilities/projects (thoroughfares, parks, park trails, public pedestrian pathways, etc.); 
b.  Non-disruption to and from properties of future developments either on-site or off-site to the proposed subdivision; 
c.  No negative effect on traffic circulation on nearby public streets; 
d.  Not less than 100 feet of street frontage on which to locate the main entrance gate; 
e.  No more than two gated street entrances, subject to approval by the town engineer, may face the same thoroughfare; 
f.  No impairment of access to and from public facilities including schools or public parks; 
g.  No impairment of the adequate and timely provision of essential municipal services (emergency services, water/sewer improvements or maintenance, etc.); 
h.  The main entrance to the private street development shall have adequate throat depth to provide for residents, their guests and any accidental access and have an escape aisle for those vehicles not admitted into the subdivision, as determined by the town engineer; 
i.  Existence of natural and/or qualifying manmade boundaries around 75 percent of the development; and/or 
j.  Absence of a concentration of private street developments in the vicinity of the requested private street development. 
(6)  Conversion of public streets to private streets. The criteria for converting existing public streets to private streets includes all the criteria, issues and procedures involved with new developments, listed above, plus: 
a.  Submittal of a petition signed by 100 percent of the owners in the existing subdivision requesting conversion to private streets; 
b.  Existence of a property owners association that would be responsible for owning and maintaining the converted streets and rights-of-way; 
c.  Applicants must agree to contract with the town for the purchase of the installed infrastructure and rights-of-way from the Town of Little Elm at fair market appraised value for cash in full payment, and agree to maintain the infrastructure and rights-of-way at town standards thereafter prior to the approval of the specific use permit; 
d.  All documents are subject to the review and approval of the town attorney; and/or 
e.  Subsequent to the approval of the private street designation, the entire subdivision affected shall be re-platted to reflect the right-of-way ownership changes. 
(7)  Conversion of private streets to public streets. The town may, but is in no way obligated to, accept private streets for public access and maintenance. Requests to convert private streets to public streets shall be subject to all of the following provisions: 
a.  The homeowners' association (HOA) shall submit a petition signed by at least 67 percent of its members/lot owners (or a greater number of signatures, if required by the HOA documents or declarations). 
b.  All of the infrastructure shall be in a condition that is acceptable to the town engineer. 
c.  All security stations and other structures not consistent with a public street development shall be removed by the HOA, at its cost, prior to acceptance of the streets and appurtenances by the town. 
d.  All monies in the reserve fund for private street maintenance shall be delivered to the town. Money in the reserve fund in excess of what is needed to bring the streets and appurtenances up to town standards will be refunded to the HOA. Private street developments that exist as of the adoption of this ordinance are not required to deliver a reserve fund balance to the town. 
e.  The HOA shall prepare and submit a replat to development services for review. Upon approval, the HOA shall file the replat to dedicate the streets and appurtenances to the town. 
f.  The HOA shall modify and re-file, at its cost, the HOA documents to remove requirements specific to private street developments. The town attorney shall review the modified HOA documents prior to their filing. The HOA shall be responsible for the cost of review by the town attorney. 
(8)  HOA requirements. Private street developments and the related HOA shall meet all requirements of section 107.08.09, HOA requirements, of this ordinance. 
(d)  Alleys. 
(1)  Alleys optional. Alleys are optional for all single-family and two-family residential lots that are greater than 40 feet in width at the front building line. 
(2)  Alleys required. Alleys are required for residential lots that are equal to or less than 40 feet in width at the front building line. When so utilized, alleys shall be constructed according to design criteria in the engineering design standards. 
(3)  Alley design. Permanent dead-end and "hammerhead" alleys are prohibited. All alleys shall have adequate turnouts and street entrances such that vehicular traffic flow is continuous and efficient. Where a temporary dead-end alley situation is unavoidable (such as due to project phasing), a temporary, paved turn-around bulb or turnout onto a street, either of which will require a temporary alley easement, shall be shown on the plat. 
(4)  Street access when alleys are present. No driveway shall access a street when an alley is available unless specifically allowed in writing by the town engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.08.04 - Sidewalks and trails. 
    Sidewalks are required adjacent to all public streets and shall be provided according to the regulations in the engineering design standards. Sidewalk widths are typically a minimum of five feet in residential neighborhoods and six feet adjacent to arterial streets. No meter valves or drainage inlets may encroach into sidewalks. Bicycle and pedestrian trails shall be a minimum of ten feet in width and be constructed of an improved surface. Any portion of a sidewalk or trail located on private property shall be shown on the filed plat. See also section 107.09.04, hike and bike trail requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.08.05 - Driveways, fire lanes and access easements. 
(a)  Standard requirements. All driveway approaches, curbs, gutters, pavements and appurtenances necessary to provide access to properties shall be provided by the developer, shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with standards in the town's engineering design standards, zoning ordinance, and planned development ordinance (if applicable to the subject property), and shall be subject to approval by the town engineer. 
(b)  Fire lanes. Fire lanes are to be designed in accordance with the town's adopted fire code and engineering design standards. Fire lane easements shall be shown on the site plan (see the zoning ordinance) and on any conveyance plat, preliminary plat, or final plat, and shall be maintained to the town's standards by the property owner. For safety and emergency accessibility reasons during construction, developments other than single-family detached or two-family residential subdivisions shall not be allowed to proceed with vertical structural construction above the foundation prior to: 
(1)  Completion and town inspection of all fire lanes and fire hydrants on the site (unless otherwise approved by the fire chief); and 
(2)  Issuance of a building permit for the structure. 
(c)  Access easements. Access easements shall be provided as directed by the town engineer and director of development services. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.08.06 - Other subdivision regulations. 
(a)  Easements. 
(1)  The type, size, and location of easements shall be determined by the town engineer. All existing and proposed easements shall be shown on the preliminary, final plats, and replats. All easements shall be labeled on the plat and dedicated for the specific purpose intended (e.g., "town utility easement," "town drainage easement," "CoServ electric easement," etc.). 
(2)  Off-site easements that are necessary to fulfill town requirements or are required by the town shall be dedicated to the town by the conveyance plat or final plat and shall be approved as to size and location by the town engineer. In certain circumstances, a separate instrument may be accepted to dedicate required off-site easements, if approved by the town engineer. If the abutting property is already platted, then a replat of that property shall be required to establish the new off-site easement. 
(b)  Reservations. 
(1)  Permitted uses. No land contained in the proposed subdivision shall be reserved for any use other than a use permitted by the zoning ordinance for the district in which the land to be reserved is located or for future roadways as shown on the master thoroughfare plan. 
(2)  Designation on plat. The specific use for which each parcel of land is to be reserved must be shown on the plat by an appropriate label or description. Provision for abandonment of a reservation in the future as may be appropriate must likewise be shown on said plat. 
(3)  Parks and open space. The location and size of parks and open space areas shall be in conformance with this article 107.09, parks and open space, and the zoning ordinance. All areas retained as floodway shall be reserved for public use, unless other provisions are approved by the town council. 
(4)  Schools. The location and size of school sites shall be in conformance with the comprehensive plan and the recommendations of the applicable school district. 
(5)  Public facilities. The location and size of sites for public buildings, major utility facilities, and related community facilities shall be in conformance with the comprehensive plan and the recommendations of the director of development services. 
(c)  Monuments and markers. 
(1)  General placement. Monuments consisting of a minimum three-eighths-inch diameter steel rods, at least 24 inches in length shall be placed at all: 
a.  Lot and block corners (wherever a lot line bearing changes); 
b.  Intersection points of alley and block lines; and 
c.  Curve and tangent points along block, lot, and right-of-way lines within the subdivision. 
(2)  Subdivision monumentation. At least two property corners shall be marked with monuments of three dimensional coordinates established from the town's engineering design standards. The corners so marked should be at opposing ends of the property unless otherwise approved by the town engineer. 
(d)  Subdivision names. New subdivisions shall be named so as to prevent conflict or "sound-alike" confusion with the names of other subdivisions. Subdivisions with similar names (e.g., Eldorado Lakes and Eldorado Hills) shall be located in proximity to each other, not in different areas of the town. Subdivision names shall be reviewed and approved by the director of development services to ensure that the proposed subdivision name will not cause confusion or misdirection, especially for emergency responders. 
(e)  Franchise utility policy. 
(1)  General requirements. The town engineer may require easements for poles, wires, conduits, gas, telephone, cable TV, internet, or other utility lines if necessary or advisable in the opinion of the town engineer. 
(2)  Locations. Utility easements may be located as follows: 
a.  Utilities shall be located in the alley rights-of-way along the rear property lines of lots or tracts whenever an alley is provided. 
b.  Utilities shall be located in easements adjacent to the street rights-of-way along the front of lots or tracts whenever an alley is not provided. Utility easements shall be a minimum width of seven and one-half feet unless specifically reduced by the town engineer. 
(3)  Ground-mounted equipment. Ground-mounted equipment shall not be placed in visibility, access or maintenance easements. 
a.  All ground-mounted equipment within view of a public street right-of-way shall be screened from the adjacent street by minimum five-gallon evergreen shrubs, or larger, placed three feet on center on the side facing the right-of-way, as well as along both sides of the equipment such that it will be fully screened from view from the street. 
b.  Planting materials selected shall be such that will grow at least to the height of the equipment height, and will provide a continuous and generally solid/opaque living screen, within two growing seasons from the date planted. The planting material shall be selected from the list of approved materials set forth in the town's zoning ordinance. 
(4)  Installation and financing. The subdivider shall arrange with the town and with utility companies franchised to serve the area in which the subdivision is located for the construction costs of streets and alleys, utility lines and other public improvements. The subdivider shall also arrange for the sequence of work so that underground utilities shall be installed in those portions of streets intended for vehicular traffic before such streets shall be surfaced. If the several improvements required herein have not been installed or constructed prior to submission of the final plat, then the final plat shall bear a restriction that no lot shall be occupied and that no municipal services shall be extended thereto until the specified utilities and improvements have been constructed as required. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.08.07 - Lot and block design. 
(a)  Zoning compliance. All lots shall conform to the zoning district requirements, unless located in the ETJ in which they shall comply with any interlocal agreements between the town and Denton County. 
(b)  Residential lots adjacent to drainage areas. Lots shall be exclusive of any portion of a natural drainage area (i.e., major creek, stream, tributary, etc.), maintenance access, and/or erosion hazard setback. Retaining walls may be allowed on lots adjacent to natural drainage areas, as approved by the town engineer. 
(c)  Lot shape. The town reserves the right to disapprove any lot which, in its opinion, will not be suitable or desirable for the purpose intended, or which is so oddly shaped as to create a hindrance to the logical lot layout of surrounding properties and/or create an irregular building envelope. The following requirements shall also apply: 
(1)  Lots shall be generally rectangular in shape; sharp angles between lot lines shall be avoided. 
(2)  Flag lots are prohibited (see diagram 107.13.02). 
(3)  Irregularly shaped lots shall have sufficient width at the building line to meet minimum lot width and frontage requirements for the appropriate zoning district (if applicable), and shall provide the minimum building pad required by zoning without encroachment into front, side or rear yard setbacks or into any type of easement. 
(d)  Lot lines and legal buildable lots. 
(1)  Side lot lines. Side lot lines shall be generally perpendicular to street right-of-way lines to the greatest extent possible (side lot lines may vary from 80° to 100° angles from the street frontage-See diagrams 107.13.04 and 107.13.05). The director of development services may grant a minor variance, in accordance with section 107.10.01, variances, if unusual circumstances exist on the subject property or on adjacent property that make it difficult to comply with this requirement. 
(2)  Lot lines and jurisdictional boundaries. All lot lines, to the greatest extent possible, shall align along county, school district, and other jurisdictional boundary lines such that lots are fully within one county, school district, or other jurisdiction. The director of development services may grant a minor variance, in accordance with section 107.10.01, variances, to this requirement if a county, school district or other jurisdictional boundary line will bisect a lot, provided that the entire residential dwelling or main structure is constructed entirely within one county, school district or other jurisdiction (i.e., the structure does not "straddle" school district or jurisdictional boundary line even though the lot line may straddle the jurisdictional line). 
(3)  Legal buildable lots. Any portion of a lot that is non-buildable for any reason shall be clearly shown as such on the preliminary and final plats. A typical detail shall be submitted along with the preliminary and final plats, and shall verify that the buildable portion of such a lot can accommodate a dwelling or main structure that complies with applicable town zoning regulations (if located within the town limits) and building codes (if located either within the town limits or the ETJ). 
(e)  Lot orientation restrictions. 
(1)  Major and minor arterials. No single-family, two-family, or townhome lots shall front onto or have a driveway onto major or minor arterials or any street with a right-of-way of 60 feet or greater, as described within the engineering design standards, unless the house was existing prior to the roadway being designated as such on the town's master thoroughfare plan. 
(2)  Collector streets. When a residential lot or lots must back to a collector street, the rear of the lots shall be screened with a masonry wall or a board-on-board fence with shall be cedar, board-on-board, with a decorative cap and masonry columns placed no greater than 40 feet on center so that a finished fence side faces the street. No residential lots shall face a collector street. 
(f)  Lot frontages. 
(1)  Street frontage. 
a.  Adequate frontage. Each lot shall have adequate access to a street (or an approved public way) by having frontage on such a street that is not less than 40 feet at the street right-of-way line, or as otherwise specified in the zoning ordinance or a planned development (PD) ordinance, if applicable. Lots fronting onto an eyebrow or bulb portion of a cul-de-sac shall also have a minimum frontage 40 feet at the building setback line, unless approved by the town engineer. 
b.  Frontage exception. For nonresidential developments ten acres or greater, the lots may be platted to a private street or access easement instead of a dedicated street upon approval by the town engineer. 
(2)  Double frontage. 
a.  Single-family, two-family and townhome lots. Double frontage lots are prohibited, except that single-family, two-family or townhome lots may back or side onto a collector street or larger thoroughfare, as described within the engineering design standards, with appropriate screening. Where lots back or side onto a collector street or larger thoroughfare, no driveway access is allowed onto the thoroughfare from the rear or side of the lot. 
b.  Establishment of building lines. Where any lot has frontage on more than one street, a front building line shall be established for each street, regardless of orientation of the structure. 
(3)  Lots facing other lots. Whenever feasible, each residential lot shall face the front of a similar lot, or shall face or side onto a park or open space if one exists or is planned (see section 107.09.01, applicability and general requirements. In general, an arrangement placing adjacent lots at right angles to each other should be avoided. The director of development services may grant a minor variance, in accordance with section 107.10.01, variances, if unusual circumstances exist on the subject property or on adjacent property that make it difficult to comply with this requirement. 
(g)  Lots in relation to parks/open space. All lots that are located directly across a street from a park/open space shall face or side onto the park/open space, where feasible. 
(h)  Large lots and tracts. If the lots or tracts of land in a proposed development are large enough to suggest possible further subdivision in the future, or if portions of the property are not subdivided or developed immediately, then the preliminary plat shall show how such large tracts or remainder portions of the property can be subdivided into conforming lots at a later time, and shall also show how streets can be extended and how median openings can be aligned and shared in the future. 
(i)  Lot and block numbering. 
(1)  All lots within each phase of a development are to be numbered consecutively within each block. Each block shall have an alphabetical designation (e.g., "Block A, B, C" etc.). Each lot shall have a numeric designation (e.g. Lot 1, 2, 3, etc.). 
(2)  Different phases shall begin with different block numbers, in other words, a single block may not straddle more than one construction phase. 
(3)  Subsequent replat numbering shall be indicated with an "R" suffix for the first revision (e.g. from Lot 3 to Lot 3R) and any additional replatting changes to the lot shall be indicated with a numeric suffix following the "R" designation (e.g. Lot 3R-1) and continue numerically as changes occur (Lot 3R-2, Lot 3R-3, etc.). 
(j)  Building setback lines. Building setback lines shall be shown on residential preliminary and final plats and shall conform with the minimum setbacks for front, side and rear yards as required by the zoning ordinance (if within the town limits) on the basis of the respective zoning districts (e.g., single-family, two-family/duplex, multi-family, commercial, retail, office, mobile home, industrial, etc.). Building setback lines need not be shown on plats for commercial development. 
(k)  Addressing. the director of development services, in conjunction with the geographic information systems department, shall assign addresses that are in compliance with standards established by the U.S. Postal Service. 
(l)  Other block requirements. See the engineering design standards. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.08.08 - Required subdivision amenities. 
(a)  Description and definition. The term "amenity" is defined within section 107.12.02, definitions, of this ordinance. 
(b)  Requirements. Where amenities are proposed in conjunction with a development, such amenities shall be reviewed and approved in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Preliminary plans and illustrations, along with a written statement of such concepts, shall be submitted for review and approval with the construction plans. 
(2)  Plans for amenities shall be incorporated into the screening plan, when applicable, for submittal as part of the construction plans. 
(3)  Structural elements shall be sealed by a licensed professional engineer and shall be approved by the town. 
(4)  A site plan, reviewed and approved in accordance with the zoning ordinance, is required for private recreational facilities, amenity centers and parks. 
(5)  Town review and approval of plans for amenities shall be required prior to issuance of a letter of final acceptance for the subdivision improvements (refer to section 107.05.06, inspection, maintenance and acceptance of public improvements). 
(6)  All open space, landscaped areas, common areas, screening walls, subdivision signs, and other amenities proposed and/or built with a residential development shall be owned and maintained by the HOA. Should any private/public financing partnership be in place, the common areas, open space, and amenities may benefit from such lawful financing reimbursements or payments. At no time shall the ownership of any open space, landscaped areas, entry features, common areas or other amenities associated with the development pass to the town, unless specifically approved by the town council. 
(c)  Design of amenities. The design of amenities shall conform to the following: 
(1)  Entry features shall be constructed entirely on privately owned property (i.e., not within public right-of-way), and shall not suspend over a public right-of-way, unless otherwise approved by the town engineer and the fire chief. An entry feature with identifying sign may be placed within an entry street median upon planning and zoning commission approval of the plat showing the feature, provided that such street median is platted as a common area lot and dedicated to an HOA for private ownership and maintenance. An entry feature having a water pond, fountain or other water feature shall only be allowed if approved by the town engineer and the fire chief. 
(2)  No entry feature, other than screening walls or extensions of screening walls, may be constructed on any portion of a single-family, two-family, or townhome lots. All such features shall be constructed on lots that are platted as "non-buildable" common-area lots and dedicated to an HOA for private ownership and maintenance. 
(3)  Entry features shall not encroach into visibility easements or otherwise impair pedestrian, cyclist or driver visibility. 
(4)  Private recreation facilities, if provided in a development, shall, to the greatest extent possible, be centrally located within the overall development (see diagram 107.13.06). 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.08.09 - Homeowners association (HOA) requirements. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose for the establishment of an HOA (also referred to as "association") for residential developments is to create an organization that owns and is responsible for maintaining commonly owned properties and amenities including, but not limited to, private rights-of-way, club houses, recreational facilities, open space lots, and riparian areas used for the communal good of the development's property owners and residents. The ownership and maintenance of said property and amenities shall be organized and established to exist in perpetuity. 
(b)  Applicability. An HOA shall be established for any development that contains any of the following: a private amenity (such as a clubhouse or pool), private street, a major creek or tributary, or thoroughfare screening. For purposes of this section, the terms "homeowners association," "HOA," and "association" are interchangeable with the term "property owners association" for multi-family and nonresidential developments. 
(c)  Elements requiring an HOA. Any one or more of the following elements created as part of a development shall require formation and continued operation of a mandatory HOA: 
(1)  Amenity. Where proposed in conjunction with a development, the word "amenity" shall be as defined in section 107.12.02, definitions, and shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  Amenity center (e.g., private swimming pool, club house, conference or assembly rooms, tennis courts, etc.); 
b.  Private recreational facility; 
c.  Entry features, including signage and screening walls and other perimeter fencing; 
d.  Open space; 
e.  Ponds and detention features; 
f.  Water fountains or features; 
g.  Hike and bike trails; and 
h.  Other commonly owned facilities. 
(2)  Shoreline and major creeks. As defined in section 107.12.02, definitions, and as generally regulated by section 107.08.02(j), shorelines and major creeks, of this ordinance, shorelines and major creeks that run adjacent to or within a subdivision shall be maintained by the HOA. 
(3)  Private street. As defined in section 107.12.02, definitions, and as generally regulated by section 107.08.03(c), private streets, of this ordinance, private streets shall be owned and maintained by the HOA. This shall include all infrastructure including streets, alleys, sidewalks and other appurtenances within designated access easements, as well as associated structures as follows: 
a.  Security station structures and equipment (including gates, access card readers, perimeter security fencing, etc.); 
b.  Greenbelts; and 
c.  Other infrastructure necessary for vehicular circulation and neighborhood security. 
(d)  Procedure for establishing an HOA. The establishment of a required HOA shall occur in conjunction with the recordation of the subdivision final plat, and shall generally be established as follows: 
(1)  Documents submitted for review. The declaration, covenants and other necessary documents establishing the HOA shall be submitted to the town for conformance with this and other applicable ordinances prior to submission of the final plat, and prior to issuance of a letter of final acceptance for the development. HOA documents shall include descriptions of any amenities, private streets, stub streets, thoroughfare screening, major creeks or tributaries, and other areas or structures for which the association has maintenance responsibility, and shall outline the organization and board of the association. 
(2)  Approval by town attorney. All HOA documents shall be reviewed by the town attorney prior to recordation of the final plat. The applicant shall reimburse the town for all related legal costs incurred by the town for review of the HOA documents. This reimbursement shall be paid in full prior to recordation of the final plat. 
(3)  Recordation. All HOA documents shall be recorded in Denton County prior to the recordation of the final plat. All copies of the HOA documents shall be submitted to development services along with the appropriate county fees and current tax certificates (with raised seals) for staff to complete the final plat recordation process. 
(4)  Additional phases. An additional phase to an existing subdivision is not required to establish a separate and distinct HOA, provided that: 
a.  The existing, recorded association documents are amended to incorporate the area of the new subdivision phase and to adopt the responsibility of its amenities, private streets, major creeks and tributaries, thoroughfare screening, and other areas for which the HOA is responsible for maintenance. 
b.  The applicant shall provide a draft of the amended covenants to the town attorney for review prior to the recordation of the associated plat. 
(5)  Revisions to HOA documents. As revisions are made to the HOA documents, a copy of the revised documents shall be forwarded to the director of development services for the town's files. 
(e)  Notice to purchasers. The developer shall be required to post notice in a prominent place at all model homes and sales offices stating the following: 
(1)  That an HOA has been established for the subdivision; 
(2)  That membership in the HOA is mandatory for all lot owners; and 
(3)  That the developer is required to provide to any potential buyer, upon their request, a complete copy of the association documents and a five-year projection (at a minimum) of HOA dues, income, and expenses, as well as any other assessment on the property which may have resulted from a PID, TIRZ, or other public/private financial agreement with the town. 
(f)  General requirements. The following shall be set forth in the HOA documents: 
(1)  A statement that membership in the association is mandatory for all owners of property within the subdivision; 
(2)  A listing of all required maintenance responsibilities, and where possible, the lot numbers, legal descriptions, street names, etc. as shown on the approved plat for areas to be the responsibility of the association; 
(3)  By-laws related to the governance of the association; 
(4)  Covenants for maintenance assessments, which shall run with the land; 
(5)  Responsibility for liability insurance and local taxes; 
(6)  Statement that the authority for enforcement of association rules and regulations is solely the responsibility of the association and is not, in any way, the responsibility of the town; 
(7)  Authority for the association to secure funds from its members sufficient to meet its responsibilities. This authority shall include the ability to collect dues, to increase dues, to charge special assessments, and to place liens against property for failing to pay dues, assessments, and fines. 
a.  Dues shall be calculated based on a cost projection for the maintenance of all amenities and based on eventual build-out of the subdivision; 
b.  Dues shall not be based on calculations which include monies from the developer which will not be provided following the transfer of the association from the developer to the lot owners. 
c.  Dues shall be required to be disclosed to all lot owners at the time of property purchase by the lot owners. 
(8)  Provision that no amendment of the association documents relating to maintenance of amenities, private streets, major creeks and tributaries, thoroughfare screening, any other association-maintained area or facility, or related reserve funds (as applicable) shall occur without prior town approval; 
(9)  Written release of liability for maintenance to benefit the town; written indemnification of the town outlining that under no circumstances shall the town be liable to the association or any individual property owner or their respective heirs, executors, administrators, devisees, personal representatives, successors or assigns for any damages, injuries (including death), and/or liability resulting from any amenity, on the private streets, within or adjacent to any major creek or tributary, associated with any thoroughfare screening or common landscaping, or from any other Association-owned and maintained area or facility; 
(10)  Written assurance of adequate funds based on an accredited cost projection analysis within a specific reserve account of the association for the maintenance and removal of amenities as determined by the town; and 
(11)  Written consent giving the town the authority to take appropriate actions for violations as set forth in section 107.08.09(h), violations, revocations and liens. 
(12)  Other town requirements as applicable. 
(g)  Supplementary requirements. The HOA shall also comply with the following regulations, where applicable: 
(1)  Compliance with the zoning ordinance. Association documents shall not overrule the landscaping or other provisions of the zoning ordinance by penalizing or restricting water conserving landscapes, or by requiring landscape materials that do not comply with zoning ordinance landscape requirements. 
(2)  Amenities. The following regulations shall apply to any subdivision that includes an amenity, as described in section 107.08.08, required subdivision amenities, and defined in section 107.12.02, definitions: 
a.  Where amenities are proposed in conjunction with a development, the applicant shall comply with those regulations outlined in section 107.08.08, required subdivision amenities, of this ordinance. 
b.  All developments that require the provision of common open space shall submit covenants to maintain open space, recreational areas, and other commonly owned facilities for review with the final plat application. 
(3)  Private streets. Whenever a public street becomes private following plat recordation, an HOA is required to be established, if not already in existence, that would be responsible for owning and maintaining the converted streets and rights-of-way. The following regulations shall apply to any subdivision that includes private streets, except those that exist prior to the effective date of this ordinance. 
a.  The association shall own and be responsible for the maintenance of private streets and appurtenances (such as alleys, storm sewers, sidewalks, barrier-free ramps, street lights and signs, etc.) and shall provide for the payment of dues and assessments required to maintain the private streets and appurtenances. 
b.  The association documents shall state that if the approval of the specific use permit for the private street development is revoked or the private streets are otherwise converted to public streets, the reserve fund shall become the property of the town (see the town's engineering design standards for conversion process). 
c.  In addition to any other requirements set forth in this section, the HOA's documents shall specify the following: 
1.  That the streets within the development are private, that they are owned and maintained by the association, and that the town has no obligation to maintain, repair or reconstruct the private streets. 
2.  A statement that the town may, but is not obligated to, inspect private streets and require repairs necessary to ensure that the same are safe for travel and are being maintained to town standards. 
3.  A statement that the association may not be dissolved without the prior written consent of the town council, which consent shall not be withheld by the town if it determines that an adequate reserve fund exists, and the streets and alleys are in satisfactory condition for conversion to public streets, as determined by the town engineer. 
4.  That failure to bring the subdivision into compliance with these regulations may cause the town to revoke the approval or the specific use permit for the private street development and take appropriate action. 
d.  The HOA's documents shall note that certain town services may not be provided in private street developments. The services that may not be provided include, but are not limited to: police enforcement of traffic and parking ordinances and preparation of accident reports. Depending on the characteristics of the proposed development, other services may not be provided. 
e.  The HOA's documents shall contain a provision that requires the association to provide unrestricted access to emergency vehicles, utility personnel, the U.S. Postal Service, and governmental employees, agents or representatives in the performance of their official duties. All access gates shall be designed and constructed in accordance with emergency access design standards listed in the engineering design standards, and shall be equipped with an emergency access controlled gate opening system (e.g. Opticom&reg; or Knox-Box&reg;) or with another emergency operating system that is acceptable to the fire chief. 
(4)  Major creeks, tributaries, ponds and water features (100-year floodplain). For single-family and two-family residential developments, the area within the 100-year floodplain shall be owned and maintained by a homeowners association, subject to town approval. The final plat shall reflect, and the association's documents shall provide: 
a.  Town access for emergency vehicles, equipment and personnel and for the improvement and maintenance of the 100-year floodplain in the event they are not being properly maintained, as determined by the town engineer; and 
b.  Should the association fail to maintain the floodplain area to the standards of the town, the association shall reimburse the town for all costs incurred by the town for adequate maintenance. 
(h)  Violations, revocations and liens. 
(1)  The town will notify the HOA of violations of any of the regulations specified within this section. 
(2)  Failure to bring the subdivision into compliance with these regulations may cause the town to revoke the specific approval of the association or take other remedies outlined in this section. 
(3)  The town shall have all liens, assessments and enforcement rights granted therein to the association, and the town shall have the ability to enforce the liens and assessments, and avail itself of any other enforcement actions available to the town pursuant to state law and/or town regulations. 
(4)  Should the association fail to carry out its duties as specified in this ordinance, the town shall have the right and ability, after due notice to the association, to perform the duties required by this or any other ordinance, regulation or agreement with the town in order to bring the association into compliance therewith. The town shall have the right and ability, after due notice to the association, to assess the association for the full amount owed and/or assess the property owners on a pro rata basis for all costs incurred by the town in performing said duties if the association fails to do so. Said assessment shall constitute a lien, in favor of the town, upon the properties for which the assessment is made. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
ARTICLE 107.09 - PARKS AND OPEN SPACE 

Sec. 107.09.01 - Applicability and general requirements. 
(a)  Applicability. This section shall apply to all land within the Town of Little Elm except that it will not apply to shorelines and major creeks as set forth in section 107.08.02(j), shorelines and major creeks, of this ordinance. 
(b)  General requirements. Parks shall be easy to access and open to public view so as to benefit area developments, enhance the visual character of the town, protect public safety, and minimize conflict with adjacent land uses. The following guidelines and regulations shall be used in designing development around or adjacent to parks and adjacent development: 
(1)  Parks, trails, and open space within residential subdivisions. All open space, trails, and neighborhood parks within residential subdivisions shall be designated on the final plat as "X" lots and shall be owned and maintained by the homeowners association (e.g. Lot 1X, Block A). 
(2)  Parks and open space orientation. Parks and open space shall be bounded by a street or by other public uses (e.g. school, library, recreation center) unless otherwise specified in this ordinance, the zoning ordinance, or a planned development (PD). 
(3)  Orientation of residential lots. 
a.  Single-family and two-family residential lots shall be oriented such that they front or side onto parks and open space and they do not back to them, in accordance with diagram 107.13.07. 
b.  Residential lots shall only be allowed to back onto a park or open space when the site's physical character (e.g., shape, topography, drainage) does not reasonably accommodate an alternative design or the layout of the subdivision complements the use of the park or open space (e.g., lots backing to a golf course). Lots backing to a park or open space shall only be allowed upon approval from the director of development services and the director of parks and recreation. 
(4)  Access to parks and open space. A proposed development adjacent to a park or open space shall be designed to enhance public visibility or allow reasonable public access to the park or open space. Street connections to existing or future adjoining subdivisions shall be required to provide reasonable access to parks and open space areas. 
(5)  Non-residential uses adjacent to parks. Where a nonresidential use must directly abut a park or open space area, the use shall be oriented such that it sides, and does not back, onto the park or open space area if at all possible. The use shall be separated from the park or open space by a minimum six-foot tall decorative metal fence with an irrigated living screen unless otherwise approved as a minor variance, in accordance with section 107.10.01, variances, by the director of development services and the director of parks and recreation. Access points to the park or open space area may be required by the town if a public benefit is established. 
(6)  Streets abutting a park. Streets abutting a park or open space area shall be built in accordance with the comprehensive plan, the standards of this ordinance, and all other applicable construction standards and/or ordinances. The town may, however, require any residential street built adjacent to a park or open space to be constructed to collector-street width (minimum of 37-foot wide pavement within 60 feet of right-of-way) to provide access, to accommodate possible on-street parking for park users, and to reduce traffic congestion. 
(7)  Alleys adjacent to parks. Alleys shall not be utilized as the sole means of access to a park by vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian travel. 
(8)  Public access points into parks. Public access into parks and open spaces shall not be less than 37 feet in width at the public right-of-way line, at the street curb, and at any other public access point (such as along major creeks, etc.). Such access shall not be part of a residential lot or other private property, and shall be kept open and unobstructed at all times. 
(9)  Parks or open space owned by the town. When park or open space land is acquired by the town, the town shall require at least 60 feet of right-of-way be dedicated to provide for an abutting collector-sized street, unless otherwise approved by the town. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.09.02 - Park reservation and dedication. 
(a)  Required for residential development. Any person, firm, or corporation offering a preliminary or final plat for development of any area zoned and to be used for single family, duplex, or multi-family residential purposes in the town, shall include in such preliminary or final plat a dedication to the Town of Little Elm of land for public park purposes, calculated at a rate of not less than 4.5 acres of park land per 1,000 ultimate residents of such residential subdivision. The calculation of land required to be dedicated is based on accepted population counts and estimates of the density levels of certain types of residential development (see table C, estimated persons per dwelling unit type). The following formula shall be used to determine the amount of park land to be dedicated: 
4.5 acres x (number of units) x (persons per unit) ÷ 1,000 = number of acres to be dedicated 
(b)  Determination of density. The planning and zoning commission shall determine the number of persons per unit based upon data compiled by the Town of Little Elm from time to time, which shall be reviewed and adjusted by the town council as necessary to reflect current estimated figures. The town council finds that table C represents the average number of persons per unit by estimated density categories at this time: 
TABLE C - ESTIMATED PERSONS PER DWELLING UNIT TYPE Gross Density Per Residential Land Area Estimated Persons Per Unit 0-6 dwelling units per acre 2.8 7-12 dwelling units per acre 2.2 Over 12 dwelling units per acre 1.7  
The developer has the duty to submit, with the subdivision plat for a multi-family residential development, information concerning the number of units and should he fail to do so, the planning and zoning commission shall assume the highest density allowed in such multi-family residential district. 
(c)  Park land dedication to be shown on plats. The preliminary and final plat (or any subsequent replat) shall clearly show the area proposed to be dedicated as park land under the provisions of this section. 
(d)  Location of land for dedication. At least 50 percent of the dedicated land required hereby shall be well drained, level, and suitable for open play. No part of such 50 percent of the dedicated land shall be within any designated flood plan or floodway of the town. All park land offered for dedication or purchased under this section shall meet the requirements for location outlined in the parks, recreation, and open space master plan adopted by the town. Areas of unusual topography or slope which render the site unusable are not acceptable. Drainage areas may be accepted if the recommended channel improvements, walkways, landscaping, and irrigation systems are constructed in accordance with town standards and conform to the parks, recreation, and open space master plan. The director of parks and recreation shall make the final decision on whether land is suitable for dedication. 
(e)  Location to be approved by town council. The location and size of public parks within the town shall be approved in all instances by the town council of the Town of Little Elm, with recommendations from the community development corporation (acting as the park board). That determination shall be based on existing circumstances at the time, upon recommendation from the planning and zoning commission, and in accordance with the parks, recreation, and open space master plan adopted by the town. Park sites shall be a minimum of five acres. 
(f)  Town council decision on dedication of land vs. cash-in-lieu. The town council declares that development of an area smaller than five acres for public park purposes is impractical. Therefore, if a development would require less than five acres to be dedicated as park land, the developer shall be required to pay cash-in-lieu of land in an amount determined as set out above. In instances where an area of greater than five acres is required to be dedicated, the planning and zoning commission shall have the right to refuse dedication of land and, instead require payment of cash-in-lieu of land if the section of the town in which the development is situated has sufficient park area as required by the town's parks, recreation, and open space master plan, and the public health, safety, and general welfare would be better served by requiring cash payment into the fund described below. 
(g)  Park dedication fund. In instances where an area of less than five acres is required to be dedicated using the above formula, or in instances where required as provided in section 107.09.02(d) above, cash-in-lieu of land shall be paid into a "park dedication fund" to be established by the Town of Little Elm. In certain cases, a hybrid approach utilizing cash-in-lieu and land dedication may be calculated, as recommended by the director of parks and recreation and approved by the town council. 
(h)  Administration of park dedication fund. The park dedication fund will be administered by the director of parks and recreation. The amount paid by the developer may be expended on such park site, park improvements or amenities, parking spaces adjacent to park land, or other park related items deemed appropriate by the director of parks and recreation and town council. All sums deposited to the fund shall be accounted for by the director of parks and recreation. No refunds of park fees shall be made. 
(i)  Valuation. The value of the park land to be used in the calculation of the cash-in-lieu shall be based on the current Denton County Appraisal District land value. Should the Denton County appraisal be deemed to be insufficient to determine the "fair market value" of the acreage required to be dedicated under the above formula, either the town or the applicant may, at the instigator's expense, provide an independent appraisal of the property to be considered in addition to the appraisal valuation. The decision on the "fair market value" shall be determined by the planning and zoning commission using the current Denton County Appraisal District land valuation and the appraisals provided by the town and/or the applicant. 
(j)  Appeal of valuation. If the "fair market value," determined by the planning and zoning commission, is further challenged by the developer, the applicant may appeal the valuation determined by the planning and zoning commission to the town council. The town council shall, by a super majority of three-fourths of its members, and using the current Denton County Appraisal District land valuation and the appraisal provided by the town and/or the applicant, along with any additional information deemed pertinent to determining a "fair market value," make the final decision in determining the final "fair market value." 
(k)  Dedication of land or cash-in-lieu due prior to the issuance of a building permit. Park land shall be dedicated or cash-in-lieu of dedication shall be remitted to the town prior to the issuance of a building permit. All improvements specified in the development agreement, if applicable, shall be completed prior to the filing for record of the final plat, except where future performance is provided for in the development agreement. 
(l)  County participation. Specific regional parks, neighborhood parks, linear park sites, hike and bike trails and other improvements in which the county is participating in cost sharing shall be dedicated to the town upon approval of the final plat and upon issuance of a letter of final acceptance. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.09.03 - Park improvements. 
(a)  Minimum park improvements. Unless waived by the community development corporation, neighborhood and linear parks to be dedicated to the town shall be improved by the developer prior to a letter of final acceptance being issued by the town. Minimum park improvements, as determined by the town, shall include: 
(1)  Grading and clearance of unwanted vegetation, structures or improvements; 
(2)  Installation of storm drainage and stream erosion controls; 
(3)  Establishment of turf and planting of trees; 
(4)  Installation of perimeter streets and street lights; and 
(5)  Provision of water and sewer service to any location on the park site as determined to be required by the director of parks and recreation and by the town engineer. 
(b)  Additional voluntary park improvements. A developer may request permission to construct, at his own expense, additional park improvements to town-owned parks, open space or trails. The town shall accept voluntary dedications of park land and/or additional park improvements only if approved for inclusion in the town's parks, recreation, and open space master plan by the community development corporation and the director of parks and recreation. All improvements in public parks and open spaces shall be consistent with town objectives and shall, upon installation, become the property of the town. Prior to constructing such additional park improvements, the developer shall enter into a development agreement with the town that defines, among other things, the work to be performed, construction schedules, improvement costs, performance surety, the amount to be reimbursed by the town (if any), and the timing of such reimbursement (if any). The town's community development corporation shall assess and submit its recommendation to the town council, and the council shall consider and act upon the proposed development agreement for park improvements. 
(c)  Site criteria. Neighborhood and linear park sites shall be of a suitable size, dimension, topography and general character to be practical for usage by the general public. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.09.04 - Hike and bike trail requirements. 
(a)  Hike and bicycle trail master plan. Hike-and-bike trails located within or adjacent to the development shall be constructed at the developer's expense in accordance with the parks, recreation, and open space master plan, as amended. 
(b)  Requirements. Hike and bike trails, especially those providing access to and along the shoreline, major creeks, and other open spaces, shall be in accordance with the following design criteria unless otherwise approved by the director of parks and recreation and the director of development services: 
(1)  A minimum 25-foot wide level ground surface shall be provided for a 12-foot wide public hike and bike trail, where required. The 25-foot wide, level ground surface may be provided within and/or outside of the 100-year floodplain. 
(2)  The parkway of a public street may count toward the 25-foot wide, level ground surface, upon approval of the director of parks and recreation. 
(3)  Low water crossings for the hike and bike trail may be allowed upon approval from the town engineer and the director of parks and recreation. 
(4)  The hike and bike trail shall be designed so as to minimize visibility blind spots from public streets for public safety purposes. 
(5)  Construction plans for the development shall include engineered drawings of trail cross-sections in accordance with the town's engineering design standards. 
(6)  Hike and bike trails shall be shown on the final plat and dedicated as "trail easements." 
(c)  Locations. Locations of all trails shall be consistent with the locations designated in the parks, recreation, and open space master plan, and are subject to approval by the director of parks and recreation and the director of development services. 
(1)  The director of parks and recreation and the director of development services shall have the authority to determine the placement of a public hike and bike trails at the time of conveyance plat or preliminary plat review and approval. 
(2)  The location of such trails shall be safe and economical. 
(3)  No development shall interrupt future trail routes or otherwise hinder efficient public access to or from an existing or future planned trail. Gated and other limited access developments shall be designed such that they facilitate, and do not impede, through public access, emergency ingress and egress, usage, and enjoyment of public trails. 
(d)  Trails along shorelines, major creeks, and greenways. 
(1)  The location of trails within developments adjacent to shorelines, major creeks or greenway trails recognized in the parks, recreation, and open space master plan shall be coordinated with the parks and recreation department, and shall be staked in the field by the developer and approved by the director of parks and recreation and the director of development services prior to the submittal of a conveyance plat or preliminary plat. 
(2)  The location of the trail shall be specified on the conveyance plat or preliminary plat as the approved location for the hike and bike trail, and an easement for such shall be shown on the conveyance or preliminary plat and the associated final plat for any portions of the trail that traverse private property. 
(e)  Trails in relation to golf courses. When a trail system is extended through a golf course, improvements shall be made to protect and provide separation between users of the trail system and the golfers, at the developer's expense. Such improvements include, but are not limited to, a series of berms and trees to help protect trail users from airborne golf balls. Upon approval of the director of parks and recreation and the director of development services, a golf cart path of sufficient width to accommodate both golf carts and bicycles may serve as a trail. 
(f)  Future trails and access for new developments. When development is adjacent to an undeveloped property, a pedestrian access stub-out in conjunction with a street connection to the edge of the development shall be required to allow for future access between developments. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Secs. 107.09.05-107.09.10 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 107.10 - RELIEF PROCEDURES 

Sec. 107.10.01 - Variances. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of a variance is to allow an applicant to seek relief from a particular standard or requirement of this ordinance that would substantially limit the applicant's ability to utilize the land in a manner requested. 
(1)  The rules and regulations of this subdivision ordinance are the standard requirements of the town. Suspension of any of these rules and regulations may be granted upon a good and sufficient showing by the applicant that there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property in question, or that enforcement of the provisions of this article will deprive the applicant of a substantial property right and that such suspension, if granted, will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property or property rights in the vicinity. 
(2)  Each and every application for variance shall be decided solely and entirely on its own merits and the disposition of any prior or pending application for variance shall not be allowed to enter into or affect any decision on the application in question. 
(3)  Pecuniary interests standing alone shall not be justification for the granting of a variance. 
(b)  Definitions of levels of variances. Variances shall be classified as "minor" or "major," as defined in section 107.12.02, definitions, of this ordinance. 
(c)  Decision-makers. 
(1)  Minor variance decision-maker. A minor variance is acted upon by the director of development services or the town engineer. 
Minor variance appeal. An appeal to a decision on a minor variance by the director of development services or the town engineer (as applicable) may be considered by the planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning commission will be the final decision maker (see section 107.10.01(j), appeal process). 
(2)  Major variance decision-maker. A major variance is acted upon by the planning and zoning commission. 
Major variance appeal. An appeal to a decision on a major variance by the planning and zoning commission may be considered by the town council. 
(d)  Applicability. 
(1)  An applicant may request a variance of a particular standard or requirement applicable to a conveyance plat, preliminary plat, to construction plans, or where no conveyance plat or preliminary plat application has been submitted for approval, to a final plat or a replat. A variance petition shall be specific in nature, and shall only involve relief consideration for one particular standard or requirement. An applicant may, if desired, submit more than one variance petition if there are several standards or requirements at issue. 
(2)  A petition for a variance shall not be accepted in lieu of a vested rights petition (section 107.10.02, vested rights). If there is a question as to whether a vested rights petition is required instead of a petition for a variance, such determination shall be made by the director of development services. 
(e)  Variance submission procedures. 
(1)  A request for a variance shall be submitted in writing by the applicant with the submittal of a conveyance plat, preliminary plat, construction plans, final plat, or replat, as applicable. No variance may be considered or granted unless the applicant has made such written request and paid the applicable fee. 
(2)  The applicant's request shall state the grounds for the variance request and all of the facts relied upon by the applicant. Failure to do so will result in denial of the associated plat application unless the applicant submits a waiver in accordance with section 107.03.03(d), waiver of right to 30-day action. 
(f)  Variance criteria. 
(1)  A variance to regulations within this ordinance may be approved only when, in the decision-maker's opinion, undue hardship will result from strict compliance to the regulations. 
(2)  The decision-maker shall take into account the following factors: 
a.  The nature of the proposed land use involved and existing uses of the land in the vicinity; 
b.  The number of persons who will reside or work in the proposed development; and 
c.  The effect such variance might have upon traffic conditions and upon the public health, safety, convenience and welfare in the vicinity. 
(3)  No Variance shall be granted unless the decision-maker finds: 
a.  That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land involved or other constraints such that the strict application of the provisions of this ordinance would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of the land; and 
b.  That the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant, and that the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or injurious to other property in the area; and 
c.  That the granting of the variance will not have the effect of preventing the orderly subdivision of other lands in the area in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(4)  A variance may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this ordinance so that the public health, safety and welfare may be secured and substantial justice done. Financial hardship to the applicant shall not be deemed to constitute undue hardship. 
(5)  No variance shall be granted unless it represents the minimum degree of variation of requirements necessary to meet the needs of the applicant. 
(6)  The decision-maker shall not authorize a variance that would constitute a violation of, or conflict with, any other valid ordinance, code, regulation, master plan or comprehensive plan of the town. 
(7)  Any falsification of information by the applicant shall be cause for the variance request to be denied. If the variance request is approved based upon false information, whether intentional or not, discovery of such false information shall nullify prior approval of the variance, and shall be grounds for reconsideration of the variance request. 
(g)  Burden of proof. The applicant bears the burden of proof to demonstrate that the requirement for which a variance is requested, if uniformly applied, imposes an undue hardship or disproportionate burden on the applicant. The applicant shall submit the burden of proof with the original submittal. 
(h)  Decision. The decision-maker shall consider the variance petition and, based upon the criteria set forth in section 107.10.01(f), variance criteria, shall take one of the following actions: 
(1)  Deny the petition, and impose the standard or requirement as it is stated in this subdivision ordinance; or 
(2)  Grant the petition, and waive in whole or in part the standard or requirement as it is stated in this ordinance. 
(i)  Notification of decision on petition. The applicant shall be notified of the decision on the variance by the applicable decision-maker (e.g., the director of development services, town engineer, or commission, as applicable), within 14 calendar days following the decision. 
(j)  Appeal process. 
(1)  Initiation of an appeal. The applicant may appeal a variance decision of the director of development services or town engineer, as allowed within the subdivision ordinance. A written letter of appeal shall be submitted to the director of development services within 14 calendar days following the denial decision. 
(2)  Appeal to planning and zoning commission. The commission shall schedule the appeal at the earliest regular public meeting that will accommodate required public notification. At this meeting, new information may be presented and considered, if available, that might alter the previous decision to deny the variance. The commission may affirm, modify, or reverse the previous decision by simple majority vote. 
(3)  Appeal to town council. The applicant, the director of development services or four voting members of town council may appeal the planning and zoning commission's decision by submitting a written notice of appeal to the director of development services within 14 calendar days following the commission's decision. The town council shall consider the appeal at a public meeting at the next regular or specially called meeting following the date when the notice of appeal is submitted to the director of development services. The town council may affirm, modify, or reverse the commission's decision by a simple majority vote. The decision of the town council is final. 
(k)  Effect of approval. Following the granting of a variance, the applicant may submit or continue the processing of a plat or construction plans, as applicable. The variance granted shall remain in effect for the period the plat, concept plan, or construction plans are in effect, and shall expire upon expiration of any of those applications. Extension of those applications shall also result in extension of the variance. The approval of a variance relieves the applicant of the imposition of the particular standard or requirement for which a variance was sought following the finding of just cause for such variance to be allowed. A variance shall not be approved solely based on monetary interests. Variances are heard on a case-by-case basis and do not establish precedent. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.10.02 - Vested rights. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of a vested rights petition is to determine whether an application should be processed under the terms of a previous ordinance, to provide a process for determination of possible vested status, and to determine when certain permits are subject to expiration. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  A vested rights petition may be submitted for any application authorized under this ordinance. 
(2)  A vested rights petition cannot be submitted by an applicant along with submission of a request for a text amendment to this ordinance, a zoning map amendment, or any other request for a legislative decision by the town council. 
(c)  Submission. A vested rights petition shall be submitted to and officially filed with the town's responsible official (see section 107.03.03(g), official filing date) in accordance with the V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 245 or successor statute. Submission of a vested rights petition shall be deemed as an automatic variance of the applicant's right, and the town's obligation, to process and act upon applications as required by state law (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 212), and as provided in section 107.10.02(e), form of petition, of this ordinance. Submission of such petition shall stay further proceedings on the related application until a final decision is reached on the vested rights petition. 
(d)  Effect. If a properly submitted vested rights petition is approved in whole or in part, the responsible official shall then process the original application and the decision-maker shall decide the application in accordance with the standards specified in the relief order based on prior ordinance requirements or development standards existing at the date vesting is established, or shall extend the validity of the original application that would otherwise be subject to expiration pursuant to this ordinance. 
(e)  Form of petition. The vested rights petition shall allege in writing that the applicant has a vested right for some or all of the land subject to the application under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 245 or successor statute, or pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 43.002 or successor statute, that requires the town to review and decide the application under standards that were in effect prior to the effective date of the currently applicable standards. The petition shall include the following information and documents: 
(1)  A written vested rights petition form, with a notarized original signature of the property owner; 
(2)  A narrative description of the grounds for the petition, including a statement as to whether the petition asserts a vested right related to a specific standard or to an entire project; 
(3)  A copy of each approved or pending application which is the basis for the contention that the town may not apply current standards to the application which is the subject of the petition; 
(4)  The official filing date of the application; 
(5)  The date the subdivision for which the application was submitted was commenced; 
(6)  Identification of all standards otherwise applicable to the application from which relief is sought; 
(7)  Identification of any current standards which applicant agrees can be applied to the application at issue; 
(8)  A narrative description of how the application of current standards affect proposed landscaping, open space or park dedication, shown on the application for which the petition is filed; 
(9)  A copy of any prior vested rights determination involving the same land; and 
(10)  Whenever the applicant alleges that an application subject to expiration should not be terminated, a description of the events constituting progress toward completion of the subdivision for which the application was approved. The applicant shall reimburse the town for all related legal costs for review of the vested rights petition. This reimbursement shall be paid in full prior to any decision on the petition. 
(f)  Timing for filing petition. A vested rights petition shall be filed with an application for which a vested right is claimed, except that the petition may be filed before the date of expiration of any already approved application when filed pursuant to section 107.10.03, dormant projects. Where more than one application is authorized to be filed simultaneously by this ordinance, the petition may be filed simultaneously for each application. 
(g)  Processing and decision. 
(1)  Responsible official. The responsible official for a vested rights petition is the same as that for processing the application with which the petition is associated, except where a petition is submitted pursuant to section 107.03.07, expiration for projects approved prior to the adoption of subdivision ordinance. Where multiple applications are submitted, and there is more than one responsible official, the decision of each responsible official shall be coordinated with that of any other responsible official on the vested rights petition. The town attorney shall also be notified of the vested rights petition following its filing and acceptance for processing. The applicant shall reimburse the town for all related legal costs for review of a vested rights petition. This reimbursement shall be paid in full prior to filing of the final plat. 
(2)  Action and/or decision by responsible official. 
a.  If the responsible official is the decision-maker on the original related application, that official shall determine whether the relief requested in the vested rights petition should be granted in whole or in part, and shall formulate a written report summarizing the official's reasoning and recommendation. 
b.  The applicant shall be notified of the decision within 14 calendar days following the date the vested rights petition was filed at the town. 
c.  The responsible official may defer making a decision on the vested rights petition and instead forward the petition to the commission for a decision, in accordance with the process outlined in section 107.10.02(g)(3), decision by planning and zoning commission. 
(3)  Decision by planning and zoning commission. If the original application is to be decided by the commission, or if the responsible official defers making a decision on a vested rights petition, the responsible official for that type of application shall submit a report in the form of a recommendation on the vested rights petition to the planning and zoning commission. The commission shall render a decision on the vested rights petition within 30 calendar days following the date the petition was filed at the town. The commission's decision on a vested rights petition shall be upon a simple majority vote of the full commission's voting members. 
(4)  Decision by town council. Where the town council is the final decision-maker on the related application, or for any petition submitted pursuant to section 107.10.03, dormant projects, the responsible official for that type of application shall submit a report in the form of a recommendation on the vested rights petition to the town council. The council shall render a decision on the vested rights petition within 30 calendar days following the date the petition was filed at the town. The town council's decision on a vested rights petition shall be upon a simple majority vote of the full council's voting members, and shall be final. 
(5)  Appeal of decision. The applicant may appeal to town council the responsible official's or commission's decision on the vested rights petition by submitting written notice of appeal to the applicable responsible official within 14 calendar days following the date of such decision. The town council shall hear and decide the appeal within 30 calendar days following receipt of the notice of appeal by the town. Approval of an appeal by the town council shall only be upon a favorable vote of at least four of the council's voting members, and shall be final (see section 107.10.02(k), appeal). 
(6)  Effect on related applications. A final decision on the vested rights petition or appeal under this section must be achieved prior to further processing, and prior to any consideration of, or decision on, the related application. Upon such final resolution and decision on a vested rights petition, the responsible official shall commence processing, review and consideration for the related application as provided in this ordinance. 
(h)  Criteria for approval. 
(1)  Factors. The decision-maker shall decide the vested rights petition based upon the following factors: 
a.  The nature and extent of prior applications filed for the land subject to the petition; 
b.  Whether any prior vested rights determinations have been made with respect to the property subject to the petition; 
c.  Whether any prior approved applications for the property have expired or have been terminated in accordance with state law or local ordinances; 
d.  Whether current standards adopted after commencement of the project affect proposed use of the land, landscaping or tree preservation, open space or park dedication, lot size, lot dimensions, lot coverage or building size based upon the proposed application; 
e.  Whether any statutory exception applies to the standards in the current subdivision ordinance from which the applicant seeks relief; 
f.  Whether any prior approved applications relied upon by the applicant have expired; 
g.  For petitions filed pursuant to section 107.03.07 of this ordinance, expiration for projects approved prior to the adoption of subdivision ordinance, whether any of the events in section 107.03.07 have occurred; 
h.  Any other applicable provisions outlined in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 245 or § 43.002 or successor statutes. 
(2)  Conditions. If the claim of vested rights is based upon a pending application, subject to standards that have been superseded by current standards of this ordinance, the decision-maker may condition any relief granted on the vested rights petition on the approval of the pending application. 
(i)  Action and record of action. 
(1)  Action. The decision-maker may take any of the following actions: 
a.  Deny the relief requested in the petition, and direct that the application shall be reviewed and decided under currently applicable standards; or 
b.  Grant the relief requested in the petition, and direct that the related application be reviewed and decided in accordance with the standards contained in identified prior regulations; or 
c.  Grant the relief requested in part, and direct that certain identified current standards be applied to the related application, while standards contained in identified prior regulations also shall be applied; or 
d.  For petitions filed pursuant to section 107.03.07, expiration for projects approved prior to the adoption of subdivision ordinance, specify the expiration date or the conditions of expiration for the related application(s). 
(2)  Record. The responsible official's report and the decision on the vested rights petition shall be recorded in writing in an order identifying the following: 
a.  The nature of the relief granted, if any; 
b.  The related applications upon which relief is premised under the petition; 
c.  Current standards which shall apply to the related application for which relief is sought, if applicable; 
d.  Prior standards which shall apply to the related application for which relief is sought, including any procedural standards, if applicable; 
e.  The statutory exception or other grounds upon which relief is denied in whole or in part on the petition; 
f.  To the extent feasible, subsequent related applications that are subject to the same relief granted on the petition; and 
g.  For petitions filed pursuant to section 107.03.07, expiration for projects approved prior to the adoption of subdivision ordinance, the date of expiration of the related application. 
(j)  Associated applications following final decision. 
(1)  Following the town's final decision on the vested rights petition, the applicant shall, if necessary, revise the related application such that it conforms to the town's decision on the vested rights petition. 
(2)  The decision-maker on the related application shall review and consider the revised application in accordance with the procedures for deciding that type of application, as outlined in this ordinance, and in conformity with any relief granted. 
(3)  If the relief granted on the vested rights petition is consistent with the related application on file, no revisions shall be necessary, and the related application shall be deemed officially filed at the time of the final decision on the vested rights petition. 
(k)  Appeal. 
(1)  Initiation of an appeal. The applicant or no less than four voting members of town council may appeal the decision of the commission by submitting a written notice of appeal to the director of planning and development services within 14 calendar days following the date of the commission's decision. 
a.  For a town council-initiated appeal, the council shall consider and act on whether it will appeal the commission's decision at its first regular meeting (for which there is time to include such appeal on its posted agenda, as required by state law) that occurs after the commission meeting at which the decision was made. 
b.  Written notice of the town council's vote to appeal shall be submitted to the director of planning and development services within seven calendar days following the town council's vote to appeal the decision. 
c.  For an applicant-initiated appeal, a letter stating the reasons for the appeal, citing the specific applicable sections of the subdivision ordinance, shall be submitted by the applicant. 
d.  The director of planning and development services may, on his/her own initiative, appeal the decision of the commission by scheduling an appeal on the town council's next regular meeting (for which there is time to include such appeal on its posted agenda as required by state law) that occurs after the commission meeting at which the decision was made. 
(2)  Council decision. The town council shall consider the appeal at a public meeting no later than 30 calendar days after the date on which the notice of appeal is submitted to the director of planning and development services. The town council may affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the commission by simple majority vote. The decision of the town council is final. 
(l)  Expiration and extension. 
(1)  Expiration. Relief granted on a vested rights petition shall expire on occurrence of one of the following events: 
a.  The applicant fails to submit a revised application that is consistent with the relief granted, if any, within 60 calendar days following the final decision on the vested rights petition; 
b.  The application for which relief was granted on the vested rights petition is denied; or 
c.  The application for which relief was granted on the vested rights petition expires. 
(2)  Extension. Extension of the date of expiration for the application for which relief was granted on a vested rights petition shall result in extension of the relief granted on the vested rights petition for the same time period. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.10.03 - Dormant projects. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this chapter only: 
(1)  Initial permit means any of the following types of approvals granted under this subdivision ordinance, or any predecessor subdivision or development-related ordinance that was in effect prior to the adoption of this ordinance: preliminary plat, construction plans, construction release, variances to any requirement in this subdivision ordinance, or any other application that was approved subject to a schematic drawing illustrating the location, arrangement, orientation or design of development, lots or improvements on a site intended for development. 
(2)  Final permit means a final plat approved under this subdivision ordinance, or any predecessor subdivision or development-related ordinance that was in effect prior to the adoption of this ordinance. 
(b)  Expiration of permits. Any application for an initial permit that was approved or filed before, but that was not subject to an expiration date, two years prior to the adoption date of this subdivision ordinance shall expire on the effective date of this subdivision ordinance. 
(c)  Reinstatement. The property owner of the land subject to an initial permit that expires under section 107.10.03, dormant projects, may petition the commission to reinstate such permit by filing a written petition within 60 calendar days following the effective date of this subdivision ordinance. The petition shall clearly state the grounds for reinstatement, and shall be accompanied by documentation of one of the following: 
(1)  As of two years prior to the effective date of this subdivision ordinance, one of the following events had occurred: 
a.  A final permit to continue toward completion of the project was submitted to the town for all or part of the land subject to the approved initial permit and was approved by the town, or was filed and was subsequently approved by the town; 
b.  An application for a final permit to continue toward completion of the project was submitted to the town for all or part of the land subject to the expired initial permit, but such application was rejected on grounds of incompleteness (consistent with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 245.005(c)(2)). 
c.  Costs for development of the land subject to the initial permit, including costs associated with roadway, utility and other infrastructure facilities designed to serve the land in whole or in part, but exclusive of land acquisition costs, were incurred in the aggregate amount of five percent of the most recent appraised market value of the land; 
d.  Fiscal security was posted with the town to guarantee performance of obligations required under this subdivision ordinance, including the construction of required improvements associated with the proposed development, for all or a part of the land subject to the approved initial permit; or 
e.  Utility connection fees or impact fees for all or part of the land subject to the approved initial permit were paid to the town. 
(2)  After two years prior to the adoption date of this subdivision ordinance, but before the expiration date specified in section 107.10.03(b), expiration of permits, one of the following events had occurred: 
a.  A final permit was approved for all or part of the land subject to the approved application, and remained in effect for such land on such expiration date; or 
b.  A complete application for approval of a final permit for all or part of the land subject to the approved initial permit was pending for decision on such expiration date. 
(d)  Commission action on reinstatement. The commission may take one of the following actions: 
(1)  Reinstate the expired initial permit without an expiration date, if it finds that the applicant has met any of the criteria listed in section 107.10.03(c), reinstatement; 
(2)  Reinstate the initial permit for all or part of the land subject thereto, if it finds that the applicant has met any of the criteria listed in section 107.10.03(c), reinstatement, subject to such expiration dates or other conditions that ensure that the remaining land that is not subject to an approved or pending final permit application will be developed in a timely fashion. In granting relief under this provision, the commission may require that development of such remaining land is subject to standards enacted after approval of the initial permit; 
(3)  Deny the reinstatement petition, if it finds that the applicant has failed to meet any of the criteria in section 107.10.03(c), reinstatement, or 
(4)  Reinstate the permit for only that part of the land subject to a pending final permit application, if it finds that the applicant has met the criteria in section 107.10.03(c), reinstatement and the pending application subsequently was approved, and deny the reinstatement petition for the remaining land subject to the expired initial permit. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Secs. 107.10.04-107.10.10 - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 107.11 - AMENDMENTS; FEES; VIOLATIONS; CONFLICTS 

Sec. 107.11.01 - Text amendments. 
    The commission or town council, by majority vote, may initiate changes to the subdivision ordinance through a call for public hearing. The case to consider amending the subdivision ordinance is considered in a public hearing by the commission which will make a recommendation to town council. Town council will consider the commission's recommendation at a public hearing, upon which the town council will make a decision whether to direct staff to prepare an ordinance amending the subdivision ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.11.02 - Filing fees and charges. 
(a)  General. Fees shall be paid to the town when any application authorized by this ordinance is submitted to development services. Each of the fees, as provided in section 107.11.02(b), calculations and charges, shall be paid in advance, and no action of the commission, the town council, or any other town board or commission shall be valid until all required fees have been paid. Fees paid for the review and consideration of plats and applications under this ordinance are non-refundable. 
(b)  Calculations and charges. Fees and charges shall be calculated in accordance with the following. 
(1)  All fees shall be as established by town ordinance, as amended. 
(2)  These fees shall be charged on all plats and applications authorized by this ordinance, regardless of the action taken by the decision-making authority and whether the application is approved, denied, withdrawn, or otherwise closed. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
ARTICLE 107.12 - DEFINITIONS, USAGE AND INTERPRETATION 

Sec. 107.12.01 - Usage and interpretation. 
(a)  Usage. The definitions within this article 107.12 are intended to provide descriptions for words and terms used within this subdivision ordinance. Absent any conflict, words and terms used in this subdivision ordinance shall have the meanings ascribed thereto in this article 107.12. 
(b)  Conflicts. When words and terms are defined herein, and are also defined in other ordinance(s) of the town, they shall be read in harmony unless there exists an irreconcilable conflict, in which case the definition contained in article 107.12 shall control. 
(c)  Present and past tenses. Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular number include the plural number, and words used in the plural number include the singular number. 
(d)  Usage of shall and may. The words shall and must are mandatory and not directory. The word may is directory and not mandatory. 
(e)  Words not defined. For any definition not listed in this article 107.12, the definition found within the latest edition of Webster's Dictionary shall be used. 
(f)  Certain terms and words. Certain terms and words are to be used and interpreted as described and/or defined within the sections of this subdivision ordinance wherein they apply to certain regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 107.12.02 - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply to terms and words used within this subdivision ordinance: 
    Abutting. Also defined as adjacent, adjoining and contiguous to. It may also mean having a lot line in common with a right-of-way or easement, or with a physical improvement such as a street, waterline, park, or open space. 
    Access. A means to enter a property or the ability to traverse a property (such as in the use of a mutual access easement. 
    Acreage, gross. The total acreage included within the boundary line of a particular subdivision, tract, parcel, lot, etc. without any exclusions. 
    Acreage, net. The acreage included within the boundary line of a particular subdivision, tract, parcel, lot, etc., but excluding all public ways. 
    Alley. A minor right-of-way, generally dedicated to public use, which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting a street, and which may be used for utility service purposes. 
    Amending plat. See plat, amending. 
    Amenity. Aesthetic or other physical improvements added to a development that increase its quality, desirability, and/or marketability to the public, and that are described within section 107.08.09(c)(1), elements requiring a HOA, of this ordinance. 
    Appeal. A request for review of and relief from any decision applying a provision of this ordinance. 
    Applicant. The person or entity responsible for the submission of an application. The applicant must be the actual owner of the property for which an application is submitted, or shall be a duly authorized representative of the property owner. Also see developer. 
    Application. The package of materials, including but not limited to an application form, exhibits, completed checklist, tax certificates or other proof of ownership, construction plans, special drawings or studies, and other informational materials, that is required by the town to initiate town review and approval of a development project. 
    Application, complete. See complete application. 
    Application form. The written form (as provided by and as may be amended by the town) that is filled out and executed by the Applicant and submitted to the town along with other required materials as a part of an application. 
    Approval. Approval constitutes a determination by the official, board, commission or town council responsible for such determination that the application is in compliance with the minimum provisions of this ordinance. NOTE: Such approval does not constitute approval of the engineering or surveying contained in the plans, as the design engineer or surveyor that sealed the plans is responsible for the adequacy of such plans. 
    Arterial. A general term for a street or thoroughfare (see street), which has a more specific meaning when used in conjunction with a class distinction, such as major, minor, Type A, Type B, etc. Each class provides a certain degree of continuity, capacity and accessibility to adjacent land uses. 
    Arterial, major. A thoroughfare designed to accommodate cross-town traffic movement, distributing traffic to and from minor thoroughfares and collector streets. Major thoroughfares are divided roadways that typically have an ultimate width of six lanes. Such streets shall also be as described within the engineering design standards, and as shown on the thoroughfare plan map. Also is referred to as "Type A-1." 
    Arterial, minor. A thoroughfare designed to accommodate neighborhood-to-neighborhood (intra-city) traffic movement, distributing traffic to and from collector streets. Major thoroughfares are divided roadways that typically have an ultimate width of four lanes with a median to accommodate turn lanes and landscaping. Such streets shall also be as described within the engineering design standards, and as shown on the thoroughfare plan map. Also is referred to as "Type B." 
    Block. A grouping of buildings that are partially or fully surrounded by one or more streets. Lots separated only by an alley are within the same block. 
    Buffer. An area of permanent vegetation that is adjacent to a thoroughfare, residential subdivision or watercourse. 
    Building. Any structure intended for shelter, occupancy, housing or enclosure for persons, animals or property. When separated by dividing walls without openings, each portion of such structure so separated shall be deemed a separate building. 
    Building line. A line parallel, or approximately parallel, to any front lot line at a specific distance therefrom, marking the minimum distance from the front lot line that a building may be erected. 
    Building permit. An official certificate issued by the town through the chief building official that indicates conformance with or approved conditional variance from town regulations and authorizes construction of buildings or other described construction on the premises for which it is issued. 
    Build-to line. A parallel or approximately parallel line to any front property line at a specific distance determined by zoning district, marking the maximum distance from the front property line that a building may be erected. This distance is generally used in urban areas where wide sidewalks abut the building facades. 
    Building official. The person so designated by the town manager to provide oversight for and have responsibility of the building inspections; such official issues building permits and certificates of occupancy and enforces the zoning ordinance, building code, and any applicable provisions of this subdivision ordinance. This term shall also include any designee of the building official. 
    Centerline, streets or alleys. An imaginary line erected midway between the bounding right-of-way lines of a street or alley. Where the bounding right-of-way lines are irregular, the centerline is to be determined by the town engineer. 
    Certificate of occupancy. An official certificate issued by the town through the chief building official that indicates conformance with or approved conditional variance from town regulations and authorizes legal use of the premises for which it is issued; may be referred to as an occupancy permit. 
    Certified land division. A map, drawing or chart delineating parcels of land offered for rent or lease for other than agricultural uses and which: is not required by state statute to be filed in the map and plat records of the county; does not involve or require the dedication of public streets or alleys; has been certified by the town council as having met the conditions of this chapter. A certified land division shall be treated as a subdivision plat under these regulations, except that it is properly certified for filing with the town secretary rather than the county clerk. In addition, a plat of the property indicating legal boundaries and any public dedications and easements shall be prepared, reviewed by staff, approved by the town council, and filed with the Denton County Clerk. 
    Code. Shall mean the entire Town of Little Elm's Code of Ordinances. 
    Commencement. The date of the official start of the development of the project - usually considered at the initial disturbance of soils. 
    Commission. The planning and zoning commission of the Town of Little Elm. See planning and zoning commission. 
    Complete application. An application that meets the standards of this subdivision ordinance, and has been deemed complete by the town in accordance with section 107.03.03(c), Determination of Completeness, of this ordinance and the V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 245, or successor statute. 
    Comprehensive plan. The town's officially comprehensive plan which includes policies, in written and graphic form, on (but not limited to) thoroughfares, land use, parks, open space, hike and bicycle trails, and other facets of the town's physical form; such policies govern the future development of the town and consist of various components governing specific geographic areas, functions, and services of the town. 
    Construction plans. The drawings and technical specifications that conform to this ordinance and all other applicable ordinances of the town. Construction plans, including bid documents, contract conditions, and escrow agreements, where applicable, provide a graphic and written description of the character and scope of the work to be performed in construction of a development. 
    Construction release. Official authorization by the town, through the town engineer, that indicates conformance with town regulations and authorizes construction of improvements or other described construction, in conformance with approved construction plans, on the premises for which it is given. 
    Crosswalk. A public right-of-way, four feet or more in width between property lines, which provides pedestrian circulations. 
    Day, business. Shall be defined as Monday through Friday, excluding town-recognized holidays. 
    Day, calendar. Each day of a particular calendar year. 
    Dead-end street. A street, other than a cul-de-sac, with only one outlet. 
    Deed restriction. A limitation on the use of land set forth or referred to in the title deed of such land. Such limitations run with the land and are binding upon present and subsequent owners of the land. Deed restrictions are not enforced by the town. 
    Developer. A person or entity, limited to the property owner or duly authorized representative thereof, who proposes to undertake or undertakes the division or improvement of land and/or other activities covered by this subdivision ordinance so as to constitute a subdivision, including the preparation of a plat showing the layout of the land and the public improvements involved therein. The word developer is intended to include the terms subdivider, property owner, and, when submitting platting documents, applicant. 
    Development. Any activities related to the platting or physical subdivision of land including the construction, reconstruction, conversion, or enlargement of buildings or structures; the construction of impervious surfaces (e.g., parking lots); the installation of utilities, roadways, drainage facilities or other infrastructure; or any disturbance of the surface or subsurface of the land in preparation for such construction activities, including grading, drainage, storage, paving, clearing, filling, and/or removal of vegetation or soil, and any mining, dredging, excavation or drilling operations. 
    Development agreement. A legally binding document authorized and in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code [§] 10.0212.172 of the between the town and a property owner whenever public improvements to serve a development are deferred until after final plat approval and recordation. Such document outlines the developer's acknowledged responsibility to complete and warranty improvements and to provide financial security for such improvements. 
    Development application. An application for any type of plat or construction plan/drawing authorized or addressed by this subdivision ordinance. Also may be referred to as a permit within the V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 245. 
    Director of development services. The person so designated by the town manager to provide oversight for and have responsibility of the development services department; as used for responsibility and review purposes within this subdivision ordinance, this term shall also include any designee of the director of development services. 
    Director of parks and recreation. The person so designated by the town manager to provide oversight for and have responsibility of the parks and recreation department; as used for responsibility and review purposes within this subdivision ordinance, this term shall also include any designee of the director of parks and recreation. 
    Driveway. A paved entranceway serving primarily vehicles that allows for access to a lot or facility, and is intended for vehicular movements between the roadway and any portion outside the street right-of-way. 
    Dwelling unit. Any building, structure or mobile home, or part thereof, which is designed, used or intended to be used for human occupancy as the living quarters, of one housekeeping unit or family. 
    Easement. A specific right in a particular area of real property that exists because of an express or implied agreement between the landowner and another party that grants the right to use or access the land area, but not ownership. 
    Engineer. A person who has been duly licensed by the Texas Board of Professional Engineers to engage in the practice of engineering in the State of Texas. (Also known as professional engineer, registered engineer, registered professional engineer, or licensed engineer.) 
    Engineering design standards. A document which is intended to establish standards for the design and construction of public facilities. 
    Entry turnaround. An esplanade opening or other accommodation provided at the entrance to a private street development in order to allow vehicles denied access to reenter the public street with a forward motion without unduly disturbing other vehicles at the entrance. 
    Erosion hazard setback. A defined area adjacent to a stream on which development is prohibited due to significant hazards associated with a flood situation unless major channel stabilization has occurred. 
    ETJ. See extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
    Exemption. A specified reason why a particular development is not subject to the requirements to plat or to a specific provision of this ordinance. 
    Extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ). The unincorporated area, not a part of any other municipality, which is contiguous to the corporate limits of the town, the outer limits of which are measured from the extremities of the corporate limits of the town outward for the distance as stipulated in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 42, according to the population of the town, and in which area the town may regulate subdivisions and enjoin violation of provisions of this subdivision ordinance. 
    Facilities. Infrastructure and other structures that support a development including, but not limited to, water distribution lines, sanitary sewer collection lines, storm sewer lines and other stormwater management devices, thoroughfares, sidewalks, private utilities, etc. 
    File/filed/filing. See official filing date and submission. 
    Fire chief. The person so designated by the town manager to provide oversight for and have responsibility of the fire department; as used for responsibility and review purposes within this subdivision ordinance, this term shall also include any designee of the fire chief. 
    Fire lane. See definition in the town's adopted fire code. 
    Green belt. An open space area consisting primarily of natural features that may be located in a floodplain or along a creek channel or be used as a buffer between land uses or be used as an open space linkage between various land uses. 
    Habitat study. A completed research project that gathers and compiles information pertinent to the natural habitat for threatened or endangered species and habitats used for nesting birds listed in the Migratory Bird Treaty Act. 
    Hike and bike trail. A paved and maintained pathway for pedestrians and bikers that serves as a linkage for access to recreational and educational areas and facilities. 
    Homeowners association (HOA). A community association which is organized within a development in which individual owners share common interests and responsibilities for open space, landscaping, amenities or facilities, and which operates under recorded land agreements. This term also includes property owners associations (POAs) and property management Corporations (PMCs) which are more typically formed for multi-family and nonresidential developments. 
    Improvement. Any man-made fixed item which becomes part of or placed upon real property. 
    Improvement, public. Any improvement, facility or service together with its associated public site, right-of-way or easement necessary to provide transportation, storm drainage, public or private utilities, parks or recreational, energy or similar essential public services and facilities, for which the town ultimately assumes the responsibility, upon a letter of final acceptance being issued, for maintenance, operation and/or ownership. 
    Infrastructure. Facilities and services needed to sustain industrial, residential, commercial and all other land use activities. The term infrastructure includes but is not limited to water, sewer lines, and other utilities, streets and roads, communications, and public facilities, such as fire houses, civic buildings, parks, and schools. 
    iSWM. The acronym for integrated stormwater management, which is a guide for the construction and design of developments. This guide is intended to help mitigate the impact of developments on stormwater runoff by considering such runoff during early site planning and design phases. This guide was created by the North Central Texas Council of Governments (NCTCOG). 
    Land planner. Any person skilled in the art and science of arranging and designing the layout of land so as to create adequate and desirable building sites, a coordinated street system, and space appropriate to the efficient removal of stormwater and the provision of public services and utilities, all consistent with long range goals and the objectives of the comprehensive plan. A land planner may be trained in any of several specialties; and, where appropriate to his experience, the term may include architects, engineers, landscape architects, and surveyors. 
    Lot. An undivided tract or parcel of land that is or may be offered for sale, conveyance, or improvement and is occupied or intended to be occupied by a building or group of buildings. A lot has its principal frontage on a public street or on an officially approved private street, as shown on a plat of record or described by metes and bounds. 
    Lot depth. The horizontal distance measured perpendicularly between two points on the front lot line and two points on the rear lot line which creates an area that meets (or exceeds) the zoning district's minimum width and depth requirements. Lot depth shall not include easements which are located behind the front building line that impair the use of the lot surface as a yard. 
    Lot frontage. That dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting on a street, excluding the side dimension of a corner lot. 
    Lot lines. The lines bounding a lot as defined herein. May also be referred to as a property line. 
    Lot line, front. The narrower side of the lot abutting a street. Where two lot lines abutting streets are of equal length, the owner shall have a choice in designating which shall be designated as the front lot line, and therefore the lot frontage. For a lot which has a boundary line which does not abut the front street line, is not a rear lot line and lies along the same general directional orientation as the front and rear lot lines, said line shall be considered a front lot line in establishing minimum setback lines. (see zoning ordinance, appendix A, illustrations). 
    Lot line, rear. The lot line farthest from and most parallel to the front lot line. For triangular lots, the point opposite the front lot line shall be considered the rear lot line and have a value of zero. (see zoning ordinance, appendix A, illustrations). 
    Lot line, side. Any lot line not the front or rear lot line. 
    Lot of record. A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the county clerk of Denton County or a lot subdivided by metes and bounds description prior to February 1984. 
    Lot width. The horizontal distance measured between side lot lines parallel to the front lot line, and measured from the point on the building line that is closest to the front lot line. 
    Lot, corner. A lot which has at least two adjacent sides abutting for their full lengths on a street, provided that the interior angle at the intersection of such two sides is less than 135 degrees. 
    Lot, double frontage. A lot having a frontage on two non-intersecting streets, as distinguished from a corner lot. 
    Lot, flag. A lot having access to a street by means of a parcel of land having a depth greater than its frontage, and having a width less than the minimum required lot width. May also be referred to as a panhandle lot. 
    Lot, interior. A lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot, key. A corner lot that is designed such that the lots located directly behind it face the side street of the corner lot and are not separated by an alley. 
    Major arterial. See arterial, major. 
    Maximum. For the purposes of this ordinance, "the maximum" is the amount that is the upper limit allowed by this ordinance less than the maximum may be allowed, unless otherwise specified. 
    Metes and bounds. A method of describing the boundaries of land by directions and distances from a known point of reference. 
    Minimum. For the purposes of this ordinance, "the minimum" is the amount that is least amount required of a developer but more than the minimum may be provided, unless otherwise specified. 
    Mobile home park. A tract of land designed, used or intended for the renting or leasing, but not sales, of sites for the location, occupancy, or accommodation of one or more mobile home dwellings. 
    MS4. The acronym for the town's municipal separate storm sewer system. 
    Official filing date. The date an application is deemed complete by the responsible official in the manner prescribed by section 107.03.03(g), official filing date, of this subdivision ordinance. 
    Off-site (also known as "off-premises"). Any premises not located within the area of the property to be subdivided, whether or not in common ownership with the applicant submitting an application. 
    One-hundred-year floodplain. The area defined as having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, based upon a fully developed watershed and the town's criteria to accommodate a 100-year storm. 
    Open space. Any land parcel or natural area that is set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public use and enjoyment, or for private use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of the land adjoining or neighboring such open space area. Open space shall have no dimension less than 50 feet in any direction, and shall not include remnant property unless it is noted for thoroughfare screening or natural areas where the topography is not impacted, in which case it may be less than 50 feet in width. 
    Ordinance (also referred to as "this ordinance"). Refers to this subdivision ordinance of the town, as may be amended in the future. 
    Park. An area developed for active or passive play and recreation that includes open space, sports courts or fields, play equipment, and trails. 
    Park, community. A park of approximately 40 to 100 acres, serving an area two to three miles in diameter, serving a population of approximately 20,000 persons and encompassing the service areas of four or more neighborhood parks. Community parks may typically contain lighted athletic facilities for more active play purposes, such as ball fields for football, softball, baseball and soccer, and a recreation center or swimming pool. These parks may be located adjacent to existing or proposed greenbelt areas and proposed junior and senior high school sites. 
    Park, neighborhood. A park of approximately 10 to 20 acres, serving an area one to two miles in diameter and serving a population of approximately 5,000 persons. Neighborhood parks should be designed to service a specific neighborhood area and may include playground apparatus and other space for active recreational purposes, along with some areas for passive use. Whenever possible, neighborhood parks should be located adjacent to existing or proposed greenbelt areas and proposed elementary school sites. 
    Parks, recreation, and open space master plan. The town's officially adopted plan which includes policies in graphic and text form; such policies govern the future development of the town's park system, open space, and recreation programs, including the hike-and-bike trail system. 
    Pavement width. The portion of a street available for vehicular traffic. Where curbs are paved, it is the portion between the face of the curbs. 
    Pedestrian access. A specifically designated place, path, means, or way by which pedestrians shall be provided safe, adequate, and usable circulation through the interior of a property or development. 
    Permit. A license, certificate, approval, registration, consent, permit, contract or other agreement for the construction or provision of service from a utility owned, operated, or controlled by the town, or other form of authorization required by law, rule, regulation, order, or ordinance, which has been approved by the town, that a person or entity must obtain to perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project for which the permit is sought, and for which the application for the permit or information required to be submitted for consideration provides notice of the project to the town. 
    Person. Any individual, association, firm, corporation, governmental agency or political subdivision. 
    Planning and zoning commission. A decision-making body appointed by the town council which is responsible for subdivision and plat approval, as permitted by state law, and which has any other authority conferred upon it by the town Charter, this ordinance, or other regulations of the town. 
    Plat. A map, drawing or exhibit which shows the exact layout and proposed construction of a proposed development into one or more lots, blocks, streets, parks, school sites, easements, alleys and/or any other elements as required by this ordinance, including any engineering or construction standards for related improvements, and which conforms to all requirements of this ordinance and any other applicable town ordinance, and which is subject to approval by the planning and zoning commission, unless otherwise specified. 
    Plat, amending. A map, drawing or exhibit that modifies a recorded final plat, record plat, or minor plat in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
    Plat, conveyance. A map, drawing or exhibit which conforms to section 107.04.02, conveyance plats, of this subdivision ordinance for the purpose of sale or conveyance. A conveyance plat may be the first step in the development of a project, especially if the project will be developed in phases and off-site easements need to be platted prior to the final platting of the entire tract. 
    Plat, final. A map, drawing or exhibit which conforms to section 107.04.04, final plats, of this subdivision ordinance and is submitted to the town for consideration for final approval by the planning and zoning commission. The plat illustrates that the subdivision of land is consistent with all standards of this subdivision ordinance pertaining to the adequacy of public facilities and the installation of or provision for public improvements. Once approved, such plat is submitted to the county clerk of Denton County for recording. 
    Plat, minor. A map, drawing or exhibit dividing land into no more than four lots that meets the submission and approval requirements of section 107.04.05, minor plats, of this ordinance. Such plat may be approved by the director of development services. Such plat is also considered a final plat. 
    Plat, preliminary. A map, drawing or exhibit which conforms to section 107.04.03, preliminary plats, of this subdivision ordinance and is submitted to the town for consideration for initial approval by the planning and zoning commission. Such plat is not to be recorded, but illustrates the general layout of a proposed subdivision, the adequacy of public facilities needed to serve the proposed subdivision, and the overall compliance of the applicable requirements of this ordinance. Such plat is reviewed and decided prior to approval of a final plat. 
    Plat, replat. The re-subdivision of all or part or all of any block or blocks of a previously platted subdivision, addition, lot or tract, that is beyond the definition of an amending plat and which does not require the vacation of the entire preceding plat. Such plat also conforms to section 107.04.06, replats, of this subdivision ordinance. A replat may function as a final plat for a property. 
    Progress (towards completion). Shall have the same meaning set forth in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 10.0245.005(c) as it exists or may be amended, unless another meaning is specified. 
    Project. An endeavor over which the town exerts its jurisdiction and for which more than one permit is required to initiate, continue, or complete the endeavor. 
    Property owner. The legally recognized proprietor of the land for which an application is being submitted. Also see developer. 
    Property owners association . An organization established for the ownership, care, and maintenance of private streets and other private commercial facilities. 
    Public improvement. See improvement, public. 
    Public way. An officially approved, privately maintained street or roadway, constructed to town street standards, open to unrestricted and irrevocable public access, serving two or more lots that provides the primary means of access and providing fire lane and utility easements. 
    Record drawings. A group of drawings or plans that depicts the final configuration of the installed or constructed improvements of a development, improvements which have been verified by the contractor as their installation or construction occurs during development. The record drawings shall reflect the construction plans (or working drawings) used, corrected, and/or clarified in the field. 
    Residential development. The actual or proposed use of land for one or more buildings or structures that are designed or intended to be used, in whole or in part, as dwelling units. 
    Responsible official. The town staff person who has been designated by the town manager to perform one or more of the following tasks (this term also includes designees): accept an application for filing; review and make recommendations concerning such application; where authorized, to initially decide such applications; initiate enforcement actions; take all other actions necessary for administration of the provisions of this subdivision ordinance with respect to such application. 
    Right-of-way. A use of land dedicated by plat or metes and bounds to and for use by the public, which is separate and distinct from the lots and parcel abutting it, and which is not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. Generally describes an area used for the provision of streets and utilities. Unless otherwise specified, the term right-of-way shall refer to a public right-of-way. 
    Riparian study. An ecologically based study that addresses the three major components of a stream (channel, floodplain and transitional upland fringe). 
    Road, or roadway. See street. 
    Screening. A barrier intended to separate and limit visibility between that which is on either side of the barrier, for example, a thoroughfare and adjacent land uses. 
    Security station (i.e. guard house). A building and gate system to control vehicular access to private street developments, which may be a mechanical device or a manned structure. 
    Sketch plan. An informal drawing of initial development ideas superimposed on a topographic map to indicate generally the plan of development and to serve as a working base for noting and incorporating suggestions of the town manager, engineer or others who are consulted prior to the preparation of the preliminary plat. 
    Stacking area. A vehicle setback measured from a point on a building designed for drive-up service and the area assigned for queuing. 
    Street. A roadway for vehicular traffic and other public uses, whether designated a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place or however otherwise designated. An alley is not considered a street. 
    Street, alley. A minor public right-of-way, not intended to provide the primary means of access to abutting lots, which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or sides of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
    Street, centerline. An imaginary line designated midway between the bounding right-of-way lines of a street or alley. 
    Street, collector (also feeder streets, secondary thoroughfares, etc.). A paved roadway that provides vehicular circulation within neighborhoods and from minor streets to major thoroughfares. Due to similarity of traffic volume and wheel loadings, streets through commercial and industrial areas are frequently constructed to same design as collector streets. 
    Street, cul-de-sac. A roadway having but one outlet to another street, and terminated on the opposite end by a vehicular turn-around. 
    Street, dead-end. A roadway, other than a cul-de-sac, with only one outlet. 
    Street, improved. A roadway that has been constructed or reconstructed to meet the town's minimum standards regarding right-of-way width, pavement width, and/or pavement type, as defined in the engineering design standards. 
    Street, local residential (also minor thoroughfares or streets, etc.). A paved roadway that is primarily used for providing direct vehicular access to abutting residential property. 
    Street, local. A roadway that is intended to provide a high level of access to adjacent developments and, generally, a low level of mobility. Such streets shall also be as described within the comprehensive plan and engineering design standards. 
    Street, major thoroughfare (also arterial streets, primary thoroughfares, etc.). A paved roadway that provides vehicular movement from one neighborhood to another, to distant points within the urban area or to freeways or highways leading to other communities. 
    Street, minor thoroughfare. A paved roadway that is primarily used for providing through access from neighborhood to neighborhood or commercial areas. 
    Street, private. A privately owned roadway within a subdivision for which the private owners assume full responsibility for maintenance and control and which has not been dedicated to the use of the public. This term is inclusive of related alleys. 
    Street, stub. A roadway that has been designed to allow for the future extension of the street through subsequent subdivisions. 
    Street, substandard. An existing street that does not meet the current minimum street standards of the town. 
    Street, unimproved. A roadway that does not meet the town's minimum standards regarding right-of-way width, pavement width, and/or pavement type, as defined in the engineering design standards. Most unimproved streets are former country roads that were built before an area was annexed into the town limits and/or before the town implemented thoroughfare design standards. 
    Subdivider or developer. An individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, or other organization dividing or proposing to divide land, or making improvements to such land, so as to effect a subdivision of land. 
    Subdivision. The division of any lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or more lots or sites for the purpose of sale or of building development, whether immediate or future. The term includes resubdivision or replatting of an existing subdivision, building upon, or other development of land, but does not include the division of land into tracts where each resulting lot is more than five acres in size; does not involve or require any new street, alley or easement of access; and no public improvement is being dedicated. As part of a subdivision, if any lot is proposed to be five acres in area or smaller, the entire parent tract must be platted together with such other lots or tracts. When appropriate to context, the term subdivision shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided. 
    Submission. The date an applicant delivers an application or petition under this ordinance to the director of the applicable town department, or the date on which an applicant deposits an application or petition with the United States Postal Service by certified mail addressed to the director of the applicable town department, along with all required fees and documents. 
    Substandard. A condition of a road or other public improvement that does not meet the town's current right-of-way, design, capacity or construction standards. 
    Surety. A bond, letter of credit, or letter of financial guarantee from a financial institution. 
    Surveyor. A person who practices the profession of surveying and is licensed by the State of Texas as a state land surveyor or a registered public surveyor. 
    TCEQ. The acronym for the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. 
    Thoroughfare plan map. A component of the master thoroughfare plan that generally represents the proposed grid-system of major and minor thoroughfares that will support the future land use plan. The exact locations of future roadways cannot be determined without engineering and environmental analysis, but the map should be used as a guide as development occurs in terms of how connections should be made and by what type of thoroughfare. The thoroughfare plan map also shows existing railroads and proposed transit rail stations. 
    Town. The municipal corporation of the Town of Little Elm, Texas. 
    Town attorney. The person(s) so designated by the town council to provide oversight for and have legal responsibility for the town. This term shall also include any designee of the town attorney. 
    Town council. The duly elected governing body of the Town of Little Elm, Texas. 
    Town engineer. The person so designated by the town manager to provide oversight for and have responsibility of the engineering department; as used for responsibility and review purposes within this subdivision ordinance, this term shall also include any designee of the town engineer. 
    Town manager. The person so designated by the town council, or the town manager's designee. 
    Town official or administrator. Any person, elective or appointive, or any employee, or any board or commission authorized or constituted by town ordinance or state law to act on behalf of the municipality. 
    Tributary. A riparian branch that feeds (i.e., flows into) a major creek, as identified and defined in the town's riparian study, as amended. 
    TxDOT: The acronym for the Texas Department of Transportation. 
    Utility easement. An easement dedicated to the public for access, construction, reconstruction, and maintenance to water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewers, and those franchises granted permission by the town, utility district, or county to occupy the easement. 
    Utility, private. Services, and any related facilities (e.g., distribution lines), not customarily provided by the town or public entities; such services generally include electricity, natural gas, and telecommunications. 
    Utility, public. Services, and any related facilities (e.g., distribution lines), typically provided by the town, county, or publicly owned entity; such services include potable water distribution, wastewater collection, and stormwater management. 
    Variance. An exception to a particular standard or requirement of the subdivision ordinance that would substantially limit the applicant's ability to utilize the land in a manner requested. 
    Variance, major. A significant change to both the standards and intent of this subdivision ordinance, which involves planning and zoning commission approval. A major variance includes any type of variance that is not specifically listed in table 107.13.02. 
    Variance, minor. A minor change to the standards, but not the intent, of this subdivision ordinance, which involves director of development services or town engineer (as applicable) approval unless otherwise noted. An exclusive list of minor variances is shown in table 107.13.02. 
    Vegetative study. A study in which the main purpose is identification and consideration of unique vegetative communities that are important for conserving biotic diversity and are rare due to conversion to other land uses. 
    Violation. Any failure to fully comply with this subdivision ordinance. 
    Wetland delineation study. A study in which the main purposes are to determine jurisdictional wetlands and to ensure compliance with section 404 of the Clean Water Act and other applicable regulations of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
    Wetland. An area that is inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. 
    Zoning ordinance. The Town of Little Elm Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
ARTICLE 107.13 - TABLES AND DIAGRAMS 

Table 107.13.01: - Applications-Responsible officials, initial decision-makers, and appeals. 
Type of 
Application or Petition Responsible 
City Official Appellate 
Decision-Maker Appeal Waiver of right to
30-day action 
(section 107.03.03(d)) Development services director n/a n/a Conveyance plat 
(section 107.04.02) Development services director Planning and zoning 
commission n/a Preliminary plat 
(section 107.04.03) Development services director Planning and zoning 
commission n/a Extension of preliminary plat approval 
(section 107.04.02(j)) Development services director Development services director n/a Final plat 
(section 107.04.04) Development services director Planning and zoning 
commission n/a Minor plat 
(section 107.04.05) Development services director Development services director Planning and zoning 
commission Replat (other than residential) 
(section 107.04.06) Development services director Planning and zoning 
commission n/a Residential replat 
(section 107.04.07) Development services director Planning and zoning 
commission n/a Amending plat 
(section 107.04.08) Development services director Development services director Planning and zoning 
commission Plat vacation 
(section 107.04.09) Development services director Planning and zoning 
commission n/a Construction plans 
(section 107.05.01) Town engineer n/a n/a Extension of construction plans 
(section 107.05.01(h)) Town engineer n/a n/a Construction release 
(section 107.05.01(i)) Town engineer n/a n/a Development agreement 
(section 107.05.04) Town engineer Town council n/a Minor variances to
subdivision ordinance 
(section 107.10.01) Town engineer Town engineer Planning and zoning 
commission Major variances to
subdivision ordinance 
(section 107.10.01) Town engineer Planning and zoning 
commission Town council Vested Rights Petition 
(section 107.10.02) Director 
-or- 
Town engineer Planning and zoning 
commission Town council  
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Table 107.13.02 - Variances-Decision-makers and appeals. 
Type of Variance Initial Decision-Maker Appellate 
Decision-Maker Appeal Water line extension to boundary of development 
(section 107.08.02(d)(2)(iii)) Town engineer Planning and zoning 
commission Town council Connection onto city sanitary sewer system 
(section 107.08.02(e)(1)) Town engineer Planning and zoning 
commission Town council Street lighting 
(section 107.08.03(b)(10)) Town engineer Planning and zoning 
commission Town council Requirement for alleys 
(section 107.08.03(d)) Town engineer 
-and- 
Development services director Planning and zoning 
commission Town council Side lot lines 90°/radial to street 
(section 107.08.07(d)(1)) Development services director Planning and zoning 
commission Town council Lot lines not aligning with county, school district or other jurisdictional
boundary 
(section 107.08.07(d)(2)) Development services director Planning and zoning 
commission Town council Residential lots facing similar lots 
(section 107.08.07(f)(3)) Development services director Planning and zoning 
commission Town council Subdivision naming 
(section 107.08.06(d)) Development services director Planning and zoning 
commission Town council Access to park or open space 
(section 107.09.01(b)(4)) Development services director 
-and- 
Director of Parks Planning and zoning 
commission Town council Relief from development standards 
Zoning ordinance Development services director Board of adjustment Town council  
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Diagram 107.13.01 - Median and cross access. 

(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Diagram 107.13.02 - Flag lots. 

(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Diagram 107.13.03 - Determining lot depth on irregular-shaped lots. 

(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Diagram 107.13.04 - Lot street frontage-Curved streets. 

(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Diagram 107.13.05 - Lot street frontage-Cul-de-sac lots. 

(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Diagram 107.13.06 - Centrally located amenity center. 

(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Diagram 107.13.07 - Access and lot orientation to parks and/or open space. 

(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
[Appendix.] - Engineering Design Standards 

Sec. 1.0 - General requirement. 
Purpose. 
The design criteria and standards section of the subdivision regulations for the Town of Little Elm is intended primarily for use by the developer's engineer. These criteria and standards should enable the engineer to design the required community facilities in a manner acceptable to the town. There may be special circumstances which would call for requirements in excess of those outlined. In most cases, additional requirements will be apparent to the developer's engineer while preparing the plans for the subdivision. 
Compliance Required. 
Prior to the commission's approval of the final plat, the subdivider shall comply or provide for compliance with the policies and procedures set forth in these regulations for construction of street improvements and utilities. No building, sewer, electrical or plumbing permit shall be issued by the town as to any property in the subdivision until: 
1.  The preliminary plan has been approved; and 
2.  The working drawings, specifications and agreements required herein have been reviewed and approved by the affected agencies and, as required, by the town attorney. 
Town Design Criteria and Standards. 
There are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of these regulations design criteria and standards which shall be controlling in design, construction and installation of street paving, curbs and gutters, sidewalks, utilities and other public improvements required herein. All references to town design criteria and standards shall mean and include those standards and specifications, together with all exhibits, charts, drawings and diagrams appertaining thereto, which have been approved by the town's engineer, adopted by the town council, and placed on file in the office of the town secretary. 
Installation and Financing. 
The subdivider shall arrange with the town and with utility companies franchised to serve the area in which the subdivision is located for the construction costs of streets and alleys, utility lines and other public improvements. The subdivider shall also arrange for the sequence of work so that underground utilities shall be installed in those portions of streets intended for vehicular traffic before such streets shall be surfaced. If the several improvements required herein have not been installed or constructed prior to submission of the final plat then the final plat shall bear a restriction that no lot shall be occupied and that no municipal services shall be extended thereto until the specified utilities and improvements have been constructed as required. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 2.0 - Street standards. 
Thoroughfare Design Requirements 
A.  Street Widths 
1.  Street widths for all subdivisions shall be 31 feet from back of curb to back of curb on residential sections. All streets which are not governed by one of the following conditions shall be considered residential for width design: 
2.  Designated as a collector (which shall be 37 feet from back of curb to back of curb) or thoroughfare (which shall be 46 feet from back of curb to back of curb) by the town's comprehensive plan. 
3.  Adjacent to commercial or multifamily land-use where, in the opinion of the town's engineer or the town's planner, additional street width is indicated for proper access and circulation. 
4.  Where, in the opinion of the town administration or in the opinion of the developer with the concurrence of the town administration, the esthetic value achieved from extra width is dictated by special conditions. 
5.  In the case of [subsection] (1) above, the section to be constructed shall be in accordance with the comprehensive plan or a revision thereof based on updated conditions. In the case of [subsections] (2) and (3), each condition will be studied individually and approved by the town prior to approval of the subdivision in question. 
B.  Street Sections. 
1.  Street sections shall be as shown on the following pages for residential, collector and thoroughfare type streets. These sections shall govern except in conditions of [subsections] (2) and (3) above. In those instances, each condition shall be studied by the town's staff individually and designed for the specific situation. Such design must be approved by the town prior to approval of the subdivision in question. 
Sidewalk Policy. 
Statement of policy on sidewalks. 
a.  Sidewalks shall be required in those locations where travel by foot is of such a volume as to warrant special protection for pedestrians using the public right-of-way. 
b.  In general, this requirement shall be considered to have been met when sidewalks are installed along such thoroughfares, arterial streets and other streets that provide major pedestrian access to schools, places of public assembly and commercial centers. Further, sidewalks may be installed by order of the town council upon receipt of a petition signed by more than 60 percent of property owners and 60 percent of properties in any one block face. 
c.  Sidewalks adjacent to arterials and collectors shall be a minimum of six feet. 
d.  Sidewalks adjacent to residential streets shall be a minimum of five feet in width. 
e.  The cost of constructing sidewalks shall be assessed against the abutting property where such property is especially benefited. 
f.  Developed area criteria. 
a.  Town initiated. In cases where the town initiates construction of sidewalks, a public hearing shall be held upon the necessity for such construction and the special benefits, if any, that accrue to the property being assessed. 
b.  Property owner initiated. In cases where sidewalk construction improvements are initiated by a petition of 60 percent or more of the abutting property owners and properties in any one block face, the cost of the improvements shall be assessed against the abutting property owners, following a public hearing upon the necessity for such construction and the special benefits if any, that accrue to the property being assessed. 
Criteria for Property Being Developed. 
At the option of the developer, required sidewalks shall be installed either with the construction of abutting street improvements or at the building site prior to occupancy. The town may require the construction of the sidewalk improvement in advance of the issuance of a building permit where such sidewalk construction is necessary to protect the public safety. 
Street Name Signs. 
The subdivider shall install or shall arrange for the installation of street name signs satisfying the specifications of the town. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 3.0 - Drainage design requirements 
Adoption. 
This ordinance is hereby adopted and shall be known as the "Official Drainage and Flood Control Ordinance" of the Town of Little Elm. 
Purpose and Scope. 
The purpose of policies and design standards set forth herein is to insure adequate stormwater drainage and flood control within the Town of Little Elm. The policies and standards herein are intended to protect public health and safety, to prevent property damage due to flooding, to equitably distribute the cost of necessary drainage improvements, and to minimize the maintenance cost of drainage facilities constructed. Any development or improvement of property affecting storm drainage and flood control in the Town of Little Elm is subject to the provisions of this ordinance. 
A.  The development of land shall consider all drainage elements normally used in the engineering standards of design. 
B.  Stormwater design shall consider the maximum results from a 100-year frequency storm. The release rate of stormwater shall be such that the flows of runoff water after the land development is completed shall not exceed the flows existing before land development is started. In cases where the land considered for development is adjacent to Lake Lewisville and a direct discharge system can be directed into the lake area, then the increased runoff may be allowed to flow without consideration of detention systems. 
C.  Where existing development is in place upstream of the land area under consideration for development, provisions shall be made within the engineering design to provide capacities for the potential full flows which may be created by the upstream properties based on the result of a 100-year rainfall event. 
D.  All standards of the corps of engineers established around Lake Lewisville will be followed. The developer or his designee shall certify that all standards of the corps of engineers around Lake Lewisville have been met. 
Standard Provisions for Storm Drainage. 
A.  All construction for storm drainage in the development or improvement of real property within the Town of Little Elm and its ETJ shall conform to the following standards and requirements: 
B.  Storm sewer inlets shall be provided along paved streets at such intervals as are necessary to limit the depth of flow as follows: SPREAD OF WATER 
Table 1: Allowable Storm Water Spread 
Type of Street Allowable Speed Major thoroughfare One traffic lane in each direction to remain open Collector street One moving traffic lane to remain open Residential street Maximum depth for design storm as shown on  
C.  Section VI herein (figure 2) is curb deep. 
D.  A closed storm sewer system shall be required to accommodate a run-off exceeding the street capacity, as provided above, up to and including the design capacity of a 72-inch concrete pipe. 
E.  An open channel may be permitted to accommodate run-off exceeding the design capacity of a 72-inch pipe, as provided below: 
1.  Channels draining an area with a "CA" factor (coefficient of run-off and drainage area, as used in the hereinafter described "rational formula") of less than 600 shall be concrete lined to the design depth, plus six-inch freeboard except that a closed system as provided above may be used. A 20 foot wide access easement shall be provided along at least one side parallel to channel. 
2.  Channels draining an area with a "CA" factor between 600 and 1,000 shall be improved to a capacity of the 100-year design discharge by excavation, straightening and realignment, as required, and also the construction of a concrete lined channel having a width of not less than the bottom width with concrete lined to a depth of at least two feet. Earthen side slopes shall be no steeper than 4:1, horizontal to vertical, and shall be sodded to prevent erosion. 
3.  The setback for the building line shall be based on a minimum of five to one setback so that as a minimum of 20 foot of width access and maintenance strip is provided parallel and adjacent to each side of the top bank of all drainage channels in this section. 
F.  In lieu of the improvements of a channel draining an area with a "CA" factor in excess of 1,000, the town council may elect to accept the dedication of all land within the natural 100-year floodplain of the existing drainage channel as a permanent right-of-way. 
G.  That the criteria for drainage improvements as hereinabove set forth in paragraphs A. through D. of this section shall be applicable to publicly owned lands solely at the discretion of the Town of Little Elm. 
H.  Excavation, fill and grading operations within the town limits shall be undertaken only after a proper permit has been obtained from the town. 
I.  Responsibility of Owner or Developer for Storm Drainage. 
1.  The owner or developer of property to be developed or used shall be responsible for all storm drainage flowing through or abutting such property. This responsibility includes the drainage directed to that property by prior development as well as the drainage naturally flowing through the property by reason of topography. It is the intent of this ordinance that provision be made for storm drainage in accordance with section III above, at such time as any property effected is proposed for development use. 
2.  Where the improvement or construction of a storm drainage facility is required along a property line common to two or more owners, the owner hereafter proposing development or use of his property, shall be responsible for the required improvements at the time of development, including the dedication of all necessary right-of-way or easements, to accommodate the improvements. 
3.  Where a property owner proposed development or use of only a portion of his property, provision for storm drainage in accordance with section III above shall only be required in that portion of the property proposed for immediate development or use, except as construction or improvements of a drainage facility outside that designated portion of the property is deemed essential to the development or use of that designated portion. 
4.  The owner or owners shall dedicate to the town the required drainage easements. Determination of minimum easement required shall be made by the town engineer. 
5.  In the event that an owner or developer desires to impound stormwater by excavation, filling or construction of a dam within a property, thereby creating a lake, pond, or lagoon as a part of the planned development of that property, the standard provisions for storm drainage as established in section III of this ordinance shall not be applicable, provided: 
6.  That an engineering plan for such construction, accompanied by complete drainage design information, prepared by a registered professional engineer, shall have been approved by the Town of Little Elm; 
7.  That the owner or developer shall have agreed to retain under private ownership the lake, pond, or lagoon constructed, and to assume full responsibility for the protection of the general public from any health or safety hazards related to the lake, pond, or lagoon constructed; 
8.  That the owner or developer shall have agreed to assume full responsibility for the maintenance of the lake, pond, or lagoon constructed; 
9.  That the obligations herein shall run with the land and shall be a continuing obligation of the owner or owners of such land; 
10.  That the requirements of the Texas Water Code pertaining to impoundment of surface water are complied with including the design construction and safety of the impounding structure; 
11.  On any existing structure, the owner will furnish a study proposed by a professional engineer for the town for approval. 
J.  Responsibility and Participation of the Town in Storm Drainage Improvements. 
1.  The town may, in its sound discretion, participate in the cost of such improvements as are required by this ordinance in an amount not to exceed 20 percent. 
2.  The town may, in its sound discretion, participate in any project of improvements by the levy of a special assessment against the lands to be enhanced in value by such improvements. 
3.  The town may acquire drainage easement necessary for such improvements by acceptance of dedication, purchase, or condemnation. 
4.  The town shall, upon acquisition of the drainage easement and the completion of improvements as hereinabove provided, assume full responsibility for the maintenance of such drainage facilities. 
K.  Engineering Design. The design of all storm drainage facilities shall be in accordance with the following criteria: 
A.  Design frequency: 
Table 2: Design Frequency 
Drainage Facility Storm Frequency Closed storm sewer systems 10 r. with emergency 100-year overflow Closed storm sewer system at street low point or sag 25 r. with emergency 100-year overflow Culverts and bridges 100-year Concrete lined channels 50 r. with emergency 100-year overflow Earthen channels 100-year  
L.  Computation of stormwater run-off shall be by the "rational method", which is based on the principle that the maximum rate of run-off from a given drainage area for an assumed rainfall intensity occurs when all parts of the area are contributing to the flow at the point of discharge. The formula for calculation of run-off by the "rational method" is: 
Q = CIA, where 
Q = The maximum rate of discharge, expressed in cubic feet per second. 
C = A run-off coefficient which varies with the topography, land use and moisture content of the soil at the time the run-off producing rainfall occurs. This run-off coefficient shall be based on the ultimate use of the land as recommended by the master plan for the Town of Little Elm and shall be selected from table I herein on the basis of the used shown on land use and zoning map of the comprehensive zoning ordinance for the Town of Little Elm, if an area has had a change of zoning to give the area land use for which the "C" in table II is higher than use shown on land use and zoning maps, the higher "C" factor shall be used. 
M.  For drainage areas where the use of the rational method does not provide reliable data, the use of a unit hydrograph flow determination shall be made. The use of a unit Hydrograph calculation will be based upon standard and accepted engineering principles normally used in the profession subject to the approval of the town engineer. 
I = Rainfall intensity in inches per hour from the applicable curves of figure 1. time of concentration or duration of rainfall for use in figure 1 shall be calculated by data shown in table 2. 
A = The drainage area, expressed in acres, contribution to the runoff at the point in question. Calculation of the drainage area shall be made from a topographic map, a copy of which shall be submitted with the engineering plans for approval. 
N.  Computation of runoff shall be based on a fully developed drainage area, or watershed, in accordance with the land use projected in the then current comprehensive land use plan for the Town of Little Elm. 
Table 3: Design Criteria 
Land Use from Master Plan Value of "C" 
(Run-off Coefficient) Flat 0% to 1% Park areas-No developable land 0.2 Park and school land tract 0.3 Single-family residential 0.4 Duplex 0.45 Multiple family 0.5 Local business 0.6 Central business 0.75 Commercial 0.75 Industrial 0.7 Rolling - 1% to 31/2% Park areas-No developable land 0.3 Park and school land tract 0.4 Single-family residential 0.5 Duplex 0.55 Multiple family 0.6 Local business 0.7 Central business 0.8 Commercial 0.8 Industrial 0.75 Rough - 3.5% and over Park areas-No developable land 0.35 Park and school land tract 0.45 Single-family residential 0.6 Duplex 0.65 Multiple family 0.7 Local business 0.75 Central business 0.85 Commercial 0.85 Industrial 0.8  
Table 4: Average Velocity for Use in Determining Time of Concentration 
Description of 
Water Course 0% to 3% V in f.p.s. 4% to 7% V in f.p.s. 8% to 11% V in f.p.s. Over 12% V in f.p.s. Surface drainage 5 10 15 18 Channels Determine V by Manning's Formula Storm sewers Determine V by Manning's Formula  
f.p.s. = feet per second 
P.  Average velocity of the runoff for calculating time of concentration or duration of rainfall for use in figure 1. These average velocities in this table shall be used unless the designer shows calculation of velocity by streets and/or storm sewers. 
Q.  Using the average velocities from this table the designer shall calculate the time of concentration by the following formula unless more data are shown on the plans for calculating time of concentration. 
T = "Inlet Time" + D/(V*60) 
Where: 
T = Time of concentration in minutes for use in figure 1. 
D = Distance in feet from point of concentration to upper end of drainage area under consideration. 
V = Velocity in feet per second from this table or velocity calculated by designer by streets and/or storm sewers. "Inlet Time" = 5 minutes from property zoned for multiple family, local business, central business, commercial, or industrial. 
"Inlet Time" = 10 minutes for property zoned for parks, schools, single family residential, and duplex. 
R.  The capacity of storm sewers, culverts, bridges, and open channels shall be determined by the use of the Manning's Formula, and the design of the facility derived accordingly. The Manning's Formula is: 
Q = 1.486 R 2/3 S 1/2 * A 
Where: 
Q = Discharge, expressed in cubic feet per second. 
n = Roughness coefficient, based on condition and type of conduit lining. 
S = Slope of hydraulic gradient, expressed in feet of vertical rise per foot of horizontal distance. 
R = Hydraulic radius (area of flow divided by the wetted perimeter). 
A = Cross sectional area of flow in conduit, expressed in square feet. 
S.  The construction of all concrete improvements shall be in accordance with the standards set forth in the Paving and Drainage Specifications handbook of the Town of Little Elm. 
A.  The frequency chart in years (figure 1), the inlet capacity for low point inlets (figure 2), the drainage capacity road sections (figure 3), are hereby adopted as a part of this ordinance. 
T.  Complete engineering plans for storm drainage facilities shall be prepared by a professional engineer, registered in the State of Texas, and experienced in civil engineering work. The total cost for such engineering plans and specifications shall be borne by the owner or the developer and shall be furnished to the town engineer for their review. 
U.  In any development or improvement of property, the owner may be required to provide at their expense a preliminary drainage study for the total area to be ultimately developed. This study shall be submitted to the town engineer prior to approval of the engineering plans for the total development, or any increment thereof. 
Construction in Areas Subject to Flooding. 
A.  No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or relocated within the 100-year floodplains of the major drainageways, unless the finished floor elevation of such a building or structure is a minimum of two feet above the high water elevation calculated for the runoff from a rainfall having a design frequency of 100 years. In all other areas subject to flooding, the finished floor elevation shall be a minimum of the high water elevation calculated for the runoff from a rainfall having a design frequency of 50 years and shall not flood within the 100-year frequency. The owner or developer shall furnish, at their expense, to the town engineer sufficient engineering design information to confirm that the minimum floor elevation proposed is as required by this paragraph. 
B.  No building or structure shall be erected or relocated within a floodplain of drainage channel which will obstruct the natural flow of water within that floodplain or channel. 
C.  No excavation, filling, or construction of embankment, or landscaping shall be permitted within a floodplain or channel which will obstruct the natural flow of the water within that floodplain or channel, unless sufficient engineering design information is furnished to the town engineer in order that they may determine that same will not adversely affect flow characteristics within that floodplain or channel, resulting in damage to that or any other property nearby. 
D.  Building or Structure Setback Requirement. No building or structure shall hereafter be constructed, reconstructed, or relocated within 20 feet of any open drainage channel. It is the intent of this section to insure that an unobstructed width of at least 20 feet is maintained between the top side slope of any such drainage channel and any building or structure. 
E.  Construction over Drainage Facilities. No building or structure shall hereafter be constructed, reconstructed, or relocated over or across any storm drainage facility, unless specifically approved by the town engineer pursuant to that criteria established in paragraphs A and B of this section. 
F.  Construction of buildings or structures may be permitted over or across closed drainage systems, to include concrete box culverts or reinforced concrete pipe. Engineering plans and specifications shall be prepared by a professional engineer registered in the State of Texas and experienced in civil engineering work. The total cost for such engineering plans and specifications shall be borne by the owner or the developer and shall be furnished to the town engineer for their review and approval. 
G.  Construction of pedestrian bridges or small vehicular crossings may be permitted by the town engineer. Engineering plans and specifications shall be prepared by a professional engineer registered in the State of Texas and experienced in civil engineering work. The total cost for such engineering plans and specifications shall be borne by the developer and shall be furnished to the town engineer for their review and approval. 
Storage; General. 
Stormwater management programs aimed at controlling increased stream water runoff generated by development are a top priority in urban watershed planning. More frequent flooding, increased rates and volumes of stormwater runoff, increased stream channel erosion and degradation, increased sedimentation, and increased water pollution are all problems intensified by increased stormwater runoff resulting from development. Storage of excess urban storm runoff is one of the most promising methods available in preventing urban flood damage. 
1.  Storm runoff storage with reduced release rates can hold downstream flood flows to within the safe conveyance capacity of the storm sewer and stream system. In most cases it can be shown that storage is more economical than increasing downstream conveyance capacity. Storage facilities should be planned and designed to assure an effective and efficient operation and maintenance program. 
2.  Retention and detention are two generalized types of storm runoff storage used to control flooding. Retention storage refers to storm runoff collected and stored for a significant period and released or used after storm runoff has ended. Retention storage usually consists of "wet reservoirs" which often have agricultural, recreational, and/or aesthetic value. Detention storage consists of reducing the rate of runoff for a short period of time to reduce peak flows by controlling the discharge through an outlet structure and by extending the period of runoff. 
3.  Skillful use of the procedures outlined in this section will provide reasonable solutions to drainage policy requirements. Individual and community experience in the use of these techniques will evolve into a methodology which will allow urban growth without the attendant drainage problems. 
Storage Classification. Storage can be classified by location as follows: 
a.  Rainfall storage. The storage of water near the point of rainfall occurrence or before storm runoff accumulates significantly. Rainfall storage is usually accomplished by roof top ponding, parking lot ponding, property line swale ponding, and small on-site ponds. 
b.  Runoff storage. Water stored after storm runoff has accumulated significantly and begun to flow in a drainage system. Runoff storage is usually accomplished by off stream storage, channel storage, or on-stream storage. 
Rainfall Storage. 
a.  Rooftops. The building codes require roof load design for rain and snow. The design load may be converted to equivalent water depth in inches which can be safely contained on flat roofs. The maximum storage allowed for design purposes should not exceed this depth unless a building is designed to withstand a greater roof load. The depth of water can be controlled by proper sizing of downspouts and by constructing scuppers through the parapet walls. 
b.  Another method of achieving rooftop ponding involves placing loose gravel windrows or dikes a few inches in heights so that storm runoff is trapped as it moves toward the drainage outlet. Individual wedge-shaped ponds form behind the small dikes and slowly drain as the stormwater filters through the gravel. This solution is of limited value, however, as there is no way to assure its permanence. 
c.  The possibility of overflows exist and will occur quite often during major storms. Overflow drains should be used to protect against roof overloading. Periodic inspection and proper maintenance will reduce the possibility and the hazards of overflows. 
d.  Special attention must be given to the water tightness of the roof to assure that no leakage occurs due to the accumulation of water. 
Parking Lots. 
A.  Considerable area in urban development is occupied by parking lots. If planned correctly, these paved areas can provide adequate detention with minimum inconvenience to the public and without functional interference. 
B.  There are two general methods of stormwater detention that can be utilized on parking areas. One form involves the storage of runoff in depressions constructed near drains or outfall structures. The second method of stormwater detention on parking lots consists of using the paved parking areas to channel stormwater to grassed or gravel filled areas for maximum infiltration and decrease in overland flow. 
Recreation Areas. 
A.  Recreation areas, such as sports fields, generally have a substantial area of grass cover which often has a high infiltration rate. Storm runoff from such fields is minimal. A secondary use of such recreation fields can be made by providing for limited detention storage of runoff from adjacent areas. 
B.  Since these areas are not used during periods of precipitation, detention ponding should not seriously impede their primary use. To minimize after effects, the recreation area should be designed so that it will thoroughly drain. In addition, the vegetation used on the area should be tolerant of periodic inundation and wetness. 
Property Line Swales. 
A.  Subdivision planning and layout requires adequate surface drainage away from buildings. This is obtained by sloping the finished grade in all directions away from the building. The layout often calls for a swale to be located along the back property line, which then drains longitudinally through the block. Where this is used, the design shall include a concrete flume section with baffles to slow the flow of water yet maintain constant point for discharge. 
B.  Temporary ponding facilities along the rear lot line may include small controlled discharges along the back property line or, if the subsoil conditions are favorable, several inches of rainfall could be expected to percolate into the ground during and after a storm. 
C.  Prior to planning for property line swale ponding, the engineer should determine that saturation of the subsoil will not have an adverse effect on building foundations. In cases where significant subsoil problems exist, water should not be ponded or percolated into the ground. 
Combinations. 
In many instances, one on-site detention method cannot conveniently or economically satisfy the required or needed amount of stormwater storage. Limitations in storage capacities, site development conditions, soils limitations and other related constraints may require that more than one method be utilized. For example, roof top, parking lot, and surface pond storage might all be required to compensate for the increase in runoff due to development of a particular site. Whatever combinations are suitable may be incorporated into a site development plan. 
Runoff Storage. 
A.  Off-stream Storage. The storage of water in depressed open areas, in reservoirs, and on low lying recreation fields to which storm peak flows are routed in usually termed off-stream storage. It is usually characterized by a side channel spillway or overflow from the main channel. 
B.  Channel Storage. Although all channels inherently store water, channels can be made to attenuate runoff by altering their hydraulic characteristics in a way that will reduce peak flows. Side channels that run essentially parallel to the main stream channel are also a means of temporarily storing water during excessive rainfall events. 
C.  On-stream Storage. The construction of an embankment across a channel so that a storage pond is formed represents on-stream storage. Spillway considerations are important to pass large floods exceeding the storage capacity. Properly protected roadway embankments are well suited for this purpose. 
D.  Multipurpose Use. 
a.  Rainfall storage and runoff storage systems are most practical when designed for multi-purpose use. For maximum land use efficiency the design engineer must consult early with the planning department and the parks and recreation department of the town. 
b.  Lower cost recreation. Making use of detention storage areas as parks and greenbelts, ballfields and playing fields, satisfies two needs and reduces the cost of each. The mini-park concept, where small recreational areas are provided in neighborhoods within safe walking distances for children, can be a typical joint effort of the drainage design engineer and the planning and recreational staffs of the town. Provisions must be made for maintenance of such areas. 
c.  Multi-use criteria. The multiple use of storage areas is a field of endeavor where the fervent disciplines should develop desirable and acceptable criteria fitting the needs of the local community. It is with storage, including both detention and retention storage, that an important potential exists for the reduction of flooding, drainage costs, and to some degree recreation costs. 
Hydraulic Design Criteria. 
a.  General. Hydraulic and hydrologic design criteria provide the guidelines for design and construction of stormwater storage facilities. These criteria are a necessary part of a stormwater management program needed to protect low-lying areas by preventing unacceptable increases in runoff rates as urban development progresses. The engineer should be familiar with the drainage policy of this ordinance before considering the feasibility of a storm runoff detention facility. Existing land contours of the property should be a consideration in developing the drainage plan. In many instances, storage can be achieved economically by blocking the overland flow of stormwater runoff with various land forms, curbs, walls, terraces, and other means. The amounts to designing a drainage system that will minimize the reduction in the critical time of concentration as the property is developed. A drainage project located in a watershed that has a master plan may involve additional considerations which require review. Consultation with the town is essential to insure compliance with the overall watershed master plan. 
b.  Design factors and procedures. Before proceeding with engineering design of an on-site storage facility, the physical and technical factors should be identified and the basic design procedures established. A discussion of design factors and procedures follow. 
(1)  The drainage plans for a particular storage facility should include all property lines, topography, area, location, and all other items necessary to meet policy requirements outlined in the "Drainage Policy for the Town". 
(2)  Care must be taken to locate, layout, and design the storage facility in a manner to insure safety and ease of maintenance. 
c.  The rate of inflow to the storage facility (inflow hydrographs) and all hydrologic considerations must assume ultimate development of the site's contributing area. Several inflow hydrographs should be prepared to examine their effect on downstream flooding for the various design storm frequencies. The number of inflow hydrographs to be provided may vary but should always adequately describe the range of flows expected for the design storm frequencies. These various design storm inflow hydrographs and an acceptable flood routing procedure will be necessary in sizing the outlet works for the storage facility. An emergency spillway should be provided to pass runoff that exceeds the design capacity of the detention facility. 
d.  The maximum allowable release rate from a storage facility is selected after careful review of runoff rates for all pertinent storms. As a minimum, the pertinent design storm frequencies should include the 10, 25, and 100-year events. However, specific site conditions may require that additional consideration be given a particular area. The town engineering department should be contacted to identify special design conditions. The maximum allowable peak flow released from a particular site is selected to comply with the policy section of this manual. In all cases, the maximum release rate should be calculated using the hydraulic gradient created when the storage area is being utilized at full capacity. 
e.  Key items to consider in determining the maximum allowable release rate are: a) the peak flow rates for the various design storm frequencies prior to development, b) the capacity of the downstream stormwater channel or storm sewer, c) compliance with a master plan for the watershed (if one exists), d) problems, if any, that are created onsite by the storage of stormwater runoff, e) potential problems created downstream when the onsite storage capacity is fully utilized and the excess runoff flows overland into downstream areas. 
f.  The stormwater storage volume required is given by the maximum difference, at any time, between cumulative total inflow volume and cumulative outflow volume measured from the beginning of inflow for a 25-year storm. The maximum allowable release rate is not to be exceeded by the outflow peak discharge. 
g.  The outfall or outlet structures should be designed on the basis of inlet or outlet control, whichever is applicable. The structures should be capable of safely and properly passing the flow range of design storm frequencies including the 100-year storm without causing downstream flooding or exceeding the maximum allowable release rate. Outlet works must also pass all of the runoff from the 100-year design storm within a reasonable length of time or a permit may be required from the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). Wet ponds will in many cases also require a permit from the TCEQ. 
h.  Special attention should be given to the provision of an emergency or overflow spillway which would pass excess flows greater than those of the 25-year design storm and overflows caused by clogging of the principal outlets. Downstream watershed considerations such as the potential loss of life and damage to property due to overtopping or failure of the structure and the storage facilities, area and capacity dictate the emergency spillway design storm. It is advisable to contact the state agencies such as the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB) and the TCEQ when planning a storage facility in order to meet their criteria. 
i.  Surfaces shall be faced with embedded rock or aggregate masonry. Bare concrete shall only be permitted with the express written permission of the town council. Side slopes should be no steeper than 4:1 where feasible for reasons of public safety and maintenance. 
H.  Hydraulic Design Methods. 
a.  General. The two basic methods suggested for predicting the volume of runoff with time and the peak flow rate are the rational method and the standard method. The standard method is best suited for storage analysis of urban runoff but for relatively small drainage areas some form of the rational method if generally acceptable. 
b.  Rational method storage analysis. When designing storage facilities for an area smaller than 400 acres, it is often justifiable to use the rational method to compute the design inflow hydrographs. This method relies heavily upon personal judgment but it is relatively simple and can give acceptable results if proper procedures are followed. There are several different techniques of employing the rational method that may be used. 
(1)  One of the rational method techniques has been utilized by the federal aviation agency in designing airport drainage facilities. The procedure is presented in "Airport Drainage", prepared by the Federal Aviation Agency (FAA, 1966). The FAA technique is basically a graphical procedure which represents the cumulative storm runoff volume and the cumulative volume released from the storage facility through an outlet structure as functions of time. The maximum difference between the two volume curves represents the required storage volume of the storage basin. The procedure will consistently result in under designed storage facilities if a constant release rate is assumed from time zero. This is caused by sizing the outlet pipe using the Manning Equation and not recognizing the stage-discharge relationship. A reservoir routing technique unitizing the stage-discharge relationship of the storage facility should be used. 
(2)  It is recommended that in most instances the contributing drainage area not be more than 25 acres when using this technique. 
(3)  A second technique that employs the rational method is referred to as the modified rational method analysis. This technique manipulates the Rational Method to reflect the fact that storms with durations greater than the normal time of concentration for a basin will result in a larger volume of runoff even though the pear [peak] discharge is reduced. Even though rainfall intensities and resulting peak discharges associated with longer duration storms are less than those for short duration storms, the inflow may still be considerably greater than the outflow thus requiring more storage than in the case of shorter, higher intensity storms. 
(4)  This approach becomes more valid on progressively smaller basins. The technique should, therefore, be limited to relatively small areas such as parking lots, roof tops, or other upstream facilities with contributing areas less than 25 acres. 
I.  Detention Facilities. 
a.  Intent. The Town of Little Elm encourages the use of detention basins based on the multi-faceted benefits of the community outlined below: 
b.  Control of flood discharges. The intent of detention basin (storage) design shall be to reduce flood discharges for the ultimate watershed development conditions without increasing peak discharges above the peak discharges for undeveloped watershed conditions. This storage method serves as a key strategy for the stormwater management plan. 
c.  Environment. As development occurs, there is a loss of wildlife and bird life habitat. It is possible to create a natural micro-environment around ponds that can offset this loss of habitat. These "natural" environmental pockets in conjunction with natural open space areas can help maintain the rural setting of the town. Detention ponds also benefit downstream water quality by allowing the sedimentation of pollutants. 
d.  Recreation. Detention basins offer many recreational opportunities in an urban setting; for example, a normally dry detention basin could be used for athletic fields or picnic areas, while the banks of the pond offer valuable park space. 
e.  Aesthetics. As an integral part of the Town of Little Elm, a detention basin needs to blend into the landscape and into the community. Simple yet inexpensive measures, such as gentle side slopes, planting of trees and shrubs, and other landscaping features can transform the detention facility into an attractive amenity for the neighborhood. 
f.  Requirements. 
(1)  Detailed engineering studies of the entire basin shall be required to evaluate the timing of hydrographs from regional and on-site facilities, as well as backwater calculations to determine the effect of the detention/retention facilities on upstream water surface elevations. 
(2)  All detention facility designs shall be performed by a professional engineer registered in the State of Texas and shall meet the requirements of Permanent Rule 31, Texas Administration Code (TAC) Chapter 299, and other requirements, as applicable. 
(3)  The minimum amount of storage volume of the detention basin shall be that volume required to reduce runoff rate to the undeveloped condition rate. Dedicated detention basins shall also include an additional one foot of freeboard and two feet of sediment storage. The volume of runoff storage for drainage areas greater than 160 acres shall be compared using unit hydrograph procedures. Acceptable unit hydrograph procedures include the Soil Conservation Service Dimension less Unit Hydrograph and Snyder's Unit Hydrograph. Manual methods or use of the computer programs TR20, HEC-1, and NUDALLAS are allowed for runoff hydrograph computation and flood routings. The criteria contained in this section shall serve as the minimum requirements for detention basin design. For drainage areas less than 160 acres, the above methods are recommended; however, an approximate routing method may be used subject to approval of the town engineer. 
(4)  The maximum allowable release rate from any site shall be equal to the 100-year peak runoff rate prior to site development. The maximum design release rate may be less. 
(5)  Where stormwater management improvements are required in the natural floodway or a permanent greenbelt or open space area, they should be incorporated into existing lakes, or they should be designed in as small an area as feasible to create natural contours. Note, however, that detention basins or retention ponds shall be a minimum of one acre in size to allow for proper maintenance, side slopes and outlet work operation. 
(6)  Retention/detention ponds shall resemble natural ponds; in addition: 
1.  The pond should expand gradually from the inlet towards the outlet, insuring that there are no "dead zones". That is, water entering the pond gradually spread out and uniformly displaces the water already present in the pond. 
2.  The length-to-width ratio should be three to one or greater, to provide a long flow path. 
3.  The average permanent pond depth should be greater than five feet, where possible. 
4.  A ten to 20-foot wide shallow bench shall be provided along the shores of the permanent pond for safety and to encourage the development of bottom growth in these areas. This vegetation will enhance the biologic treatment characteristics of the pond and also enhance the "natural" appearance of the pond. 
5.  If several ponds are required, they should vary in size and shape, and be separated by tree groves, vegetated berms, or similar screening of a natural appearance. 
6.  Landscape materials should enhance wildlife habitat where feasible. 
7.  Where slope erosion protection is needed for the side slopes of a pond, rock or geotextiles are required as approved by the town engineer. Exposed concrete [sic] 
g.  Detention facilities of less than ten acre-feet of flood storage shall have outlet structures designed for the 100-year frequency storm. Facilities greater than ten acre-feet of flood storage shall have outlet structures designed for the ten-year and 100-year frequency storms. The release rates shall be such that the flows after land development are no larger than the flows before land development. 
h.  Outlets should be provided with a trash rack to prevent plugging with debris and to provide safety to the public. Due to unique design considerations, the town engineer may approve alternative outlet design. 
i.  All federal, state and county laws pertaining to the impoundment of surface water shall have been compiled with, including the design, construction and safety of the impounding structure. Copies of any federal, state or county permits issued for the proposed impoundments shall be submitted to the town engineer. 
j.  All detention/retention facilities shall include an additional one foot of freeboard and two feet of sediment in determining the design flood elevation. 
k.  Provisions (such as emergency spillways or reinforcing of embankments) shall be made for the occurrence of overtopping or failure of the outlet structure. Under no circumstances should the emergency overflow have a direct path to any buildings or other structures used for human occupancy, commerce, or industry. Details of these provisions shall be supplied to the town engineer for approval. 
l.  The flood storage volume of detention/retention facilities shall be designed to empty in a maximum of 12 hours if said facilities are to be considered an erosion/pollution control facility. 
m.  Consideration should be given to the stocking of retention ponds with fish to control algae growth. 
n.  Inlet structures shall be designed to both dissipate the flow energy and drop the inflow elevation to below that of the pond's water surface or basin's flow line. 
J.  Duties of the Town and Appeal to the Council. The interpretation of the criteria herein above set forth in sections III, IV, V, VI, VII, VIII, and IX, of this ordinance shall be made by the town engineer. Any person adversely effected by the decision of the town engineer may, within ten days from the date of such decision, file an appeal in writing to the town council. Such appeal shall be filed with the town engineer and the town secretary and shall define the specific areas of controversy. It shall be the duty of the town council to hear any such appeal within 30 days from the date it is received by the town engineer and town secretary. 
K.  Building Permits to be Withheld. No building permit shall be issued, nor certificate of occupancy approved for any construction, reconstruction, or development upon any land where such construction, reconstruction or development is not in conformity with the requirements and intent of this ordinance. Anyone who violates any of the terms and provisions of this ordinance shall be denied a building permit, until the violation is corrected. 
L.  Repealing Clause. All provisions of other ordinances conflicting with the provisions hereof are hereby repealed. All other ordinances and provisions of such ordinances expressly in conflict with the provisions hereof shall remain in full force and effect. 
M.  Maintenance Guarantee. The contractor shall guarantee the work which he does against defective workmanship and materials for a period of one year from the date of final acceptance for the work by the owner. 
a.  Where defective workmanship and/or materials are discovered requiring repairs to be made under this guaranty, all such repair work shall be done by the contractor at this own expense within five days after written notice of such defect has been given to him by the owner. Should the contractor fail to repair leaks or correct such defective workmanship and/or materials within five days after being notified the owner may make the necessary repairs and charge the contractor with the actual cost of all labor and materials required. 
b.  The contractor shall arrange to have his faithful performance bond run for a period of one year after the date of completion of the construction work to cover his guaranty as set forth above. 
Severability. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase or provision of this ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity of this ordinance as a whole or any part or provision thereof, other than the part so decided to [be] invalid or unconstitutional; not shall such unconstitutionality or invalidity have any effect on any other ordinances or provisions of ordinances of the Town of Little Elm. 
Penalty. That any person who shall violate the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction therefore shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 4.0 - Water and wastewater design requirements. 
Water System. 
Water lines adequate for domestic supply and for fire protection needs shall be installed to serve each lot, or tract, in every subdivision where connection is to be made immediately to a community or a utility water system in accordance with the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality and town design standards and specifications. In subdivisions outside the town limits, where such connection to a system is not to be made immediately, plans shall be prepared for future installation of a water distribution system to serve each lot or tract. 
A.  Water System Extensions. Water system extensions shall be designed to provide for a domestic supply of at least 100 gallons per capita per day delivered at a minimum pressure of 50 pounds per square inch. The 100-gallon rate of supply shall not be required if, in the opinion of the town's engineer, the proper point of connection to the existing system for the extension is not capable of supplying such a volume. However, the extension shall be designed to convey the 100-gallon rate should the supply point be subsequently improved. If the 50 pounds minimum pressure cannot be provided by existing system pressure or because of the elevation of the tract to be developed, a booster pump system shall be included which will provide that minimum pressure. 
B.  All Supply and Distribution Mains. All supply and distribution mains installed within a subdivision must extend to the borders of the subdivision as required for future extensions of the system, regardless of whether or not such extensions are required for service within the subdivision. 
C.  Fire Hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be provided at locations such that all areas of development are located within a 500-foot radius from a fire hydrant. All such fire hydrants shall be served by a six inch or larger supply or distribution main. 
D.  Extension for Single Customer. 
1.  When it is necessary to extend a water line to serve a new single customer where only one meter will be installed, the town at its own expense will extend the said water line up to 100 feet. 
2.  If a greater distance than 100 feet is required to reach the nearest property line of the new single customer, the said single customer shall pay 100 percent of cost extension in excess of 100 feet. 
3.  If more than one single customer is served by the main extension, 100 feet of main will be allowed for each single customer thus served, and any excess footage will be paid for at 100 percent. 
4.  No more than one single customer credit of 100 feet will be allowed each lot or tract of record so served regardless of the number of buildings, occupied or otherwise, which might be located on said lot or tract. 
5.  Payment will be made in advance of construction. 
E.  Extensions to Serve Developers. 
1.  The developer will pay 100 percent of the construction cost of the size mains required to serve his development, including the approach main, plus ten percent of the developer's share of the construction cost for engineering, supervision and inspection, or six percent if a private engineer approved by the utilities supervisor is employed by the developer and furnishes approved plats and specifications. 
2.  When the developer desires that water mains be extended to serve his property, he will submit a request in writing to the utilities supervisor. The property to be served shall be listed showing the lot, block and subdivision. Two approved plats of the area to be served shall be attached to the request and shall become the property of the town. 
3.  If the area to be served is a part of a larger area that is owned or controlled by the developer and which is reasonably expected to be served by water in the future, then two approved plats or approved preliminary plats of the larger area shall also be submitted. A tentative design of a main layout will be made of the entire area, but the cost estimate will be made on that portion of the subdivision to be served immediately. 
F.  Materials and Workmanship. All materials and workmanship incorporated in water system extensions shall be in accordance with the currently adopted town construction specifications. 
G.  Water Well Design Requirements. Water well must be meet current standard design practice. 
Wastewater System 
Sanitary sewers shall be installed to serve each lot, or tract, in every subdivision where connection is to be made immediately to a community disposal system or to a public sewerage system. 
A.  Sewer Extensions. 
1.  All sewer extensions shall be designed in accordance with the latest applicable rules and regulations as published by the Texas State Department of Health. No sewer lateral shall be smaller than six inch in nominal diameter. All sewers shall be designed with consideration for serving the full drainage area subject to collection by the sewer in question except as modified with the concurrence of the town's engineer because of the projected rate of development or the financial feasibility of the proposed extension. 
2.  All subdivisions developed subsequent to this ordinance must be served by community sanitary sewerage collection, treatment and disposal systems approved by the town with exceptions granted only if all of the following conditions exist: (1) the subdivision in question is less than five parcels of land, (2) the existing community type collection, treatment and disposal system is not and cannot feasibly, in the opinion of the town's engineer, be made available to the area of development, and (3) percolation tests run by an independent testing laboratory are submitted to both the town and county health department with results showing that a septic tank and spreader field can be developed to provide adequate disposal of the sewage. 
B.  Lateral and Sewer Mains. All lateral and sewer mains installed within a subdivision must extend to the borders of the subdivision as required for future extensions of the collecting system regardless of whether or not such extensions are required for service within the subdivision. 
C.  Lift Stations or Separate Treatment Facilities. The provision for lift stations or separate treatment facilities will not be permitted unless the cost of constructing such lift stations or separate facilities is at least 20 percent less than the costs of constructing an adequate outfall or approach sewer from the existing system. 
D.  Septic Tank. A septic tank with a capacity of not less than 500 gallons and with a drain field of not less than 150 feet shall be installed on each lot in accordance with the regulations of the county and state health officers. 
E.  Extensions for Single Customers. 
1.  Where it is necessary to extend a sewer line to serve a new "single customer," the town, at its own expense, will extend said sewer up to 100 feet. 
2.  If a greater distance than 100 feet should be required to extend the line to the nearest property line of the customer, said single customer shall pay the excess over the 100 feet allowable at the rate of 100 [percent] of cost. 
3.  If more than one single customer is served by the main extension, 100 lineal feet of sewer will be allowed for each single customer thus served, and any excess footage will be paid for at 100 percent of cost. 
4.  No more than one single customer credit of 100 feet will be allowed for each lot or tract of record so served regardless of the number of buildings, occupied or otherwise, which might be located on said lot or tract. 
5.  Payment will be made in advance of construction. 
F.  Extensions to Serve Developers. The developer shall pay 100 percent of the construction cost of all sewers including "approach mains," but excepting "service lines," plus ten percent of the developer's share of the construction cost for engineering, supervision and inspection, or six percent if a private engineer approved by the utilities supervisor is employed by the developer and furnishes approved plans and specifications. 
1.  The developer will also pay 100 percent of the cost of "service lines" to all lots to be served by a sewer located in the street. Said "service lines" will be constructed at the same time as a part of the same contract as all other sewers in the developer's addition. If the sewers are being constructed by town forces, the "service lines" will be constructed by town forces at the time all other sewers within the addition are constructed. 
2.  The utilities supervisor shall determine the size of "approach main" required to serve developer's property and the actual size to be constructed. Should the town elect to construct a main larger than the developer's required "approach main," the developer will not be charged for the additional size. 
3.  The amount of developer's payment shall be determined using unit bid prices contained in the award contract. 
G.  Connections. No connection shall be made to any sanitary sewerage system within the town which will permit the entrance of surface water or waste of other than domestic sewage characteristics without the specific authorization by the town council. 
H.  Materials and Workmanship. All materials and workmanship incorporated in the sewage system extensions shall be in accordance with the currently adopted town construction specifications. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 5.0 - Other public improvements. 
Street Lighting. 
1.  The following standards shall apply to all arterial thoroughfares: 
a.  Street lighting shall be placed in the medians, with spacing not to exceed one hundred eighty feet (180') and no closer than one hundred forty-five feet (145') depending on median breaks and intersections. 
b.  Unless a photometric analysis suggests the use of a different type of luminaire, street lighting shall use a city-approved, standard 250-watt equivalent LED luminaire with a color temperature of 3,000 kelvins. 
2.  All traffic signal and street lighting construction, testing, and materials shall be in accordance with the city's current standards, details, and specifications unless otherwise noted. All electrical work shall be in accordance with the most current National Electrical Code, town and TxDOT specifications and standards. 
3.  All lighting luminaries shall use LED lamps. 
4.  All site plans should provide a copies of the proposed layout of street lighting standards serving the subdivision. The type of all proposed and existing street lighting shall be indicated on the layout. 
5.  Contractor shall coordinate electrical services with the town and either ONCOR or COSERV representatives (according to their respective area). 
6.  The contractor shall coordinate with the appropriate utility company and TxDOT/NTTA (if within TxDOT/NTTA ROW) prior to beginning erection of poles, luminaries and structures located near any overhead or underground utilities. 
7.  Proposed concrete foundation and conduit alignment shall be staked by the contractor and approved by the town prior to installation. 
Gas Lines. 
The subdivider shall arrange for and shall file his request at the earliest feasible date for gas service desired for his subdivision. Where a source of gas supply is not within a reasonable distance for present installation, but, wider a gas line extension agreement gas service will be extended within five years following the recording of the final plat, those portions of such lines which will lie within the portions of streets intended for vehicular traffic shall be installed. In lieu of such installation the subdivider may defer the paving of streets and alleys until such lines are installed by making appropriate fiscal arrangements with the town. 
Electric Power and Telephone Service. 
The subdivider shall arrange with the appropriate utility and shall file his request at the earliest feasible date for electric power and telephone service to his subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 6.0 - Environmental requirements section. 
Texas Construction General Permit (CGP) 
Construction activities that discharge stormwater runoff into or adjacent to any surface water of the state are regulated by the State of Texas under the construction general permit (CGP) (TXR150000). The governing agency is the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). Construction activities are regulated according to the area of land disturbed. 
Large construction activities: 
For sites that disturb five or more acres, or are part of a larger common plan of development that will disturb five or more acres, and meet the definition of an operator, the following applies: 
1.  Prepare and implement a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SW3P). 
2.  Post a site notice. 
3.  Submit a copy of the site notice to the MS4 operator. 
For sites that disturb five or more acres, and meet the definition of a primary operator, the following applies: 
1.  Prepare and implement a SW3P. 
2.  Submit a notice of intent (NOI) to TCEQ. 
3.  Post the NOI and site notice. 
4.  Submit a copy of the NOI to MS4 operator 
Small construction activities: 
For sites that disturb at least one but less than five acres, or are part of a larger common plan of development that will disturb at least one, but less than five acres and meet the definition of an operator, the following applies: 
1.  Prepare and implement a SW3P. 
2.  Post a site notice. 
3.  Submit a copy of the site notice to the MS4 operator. 
Sites that disturb less than one acre and that are not part of a larger common plan of development that would disturb one or more acres, are not required to have coverage under the general permit. Refer to the General Permit definitions for Operator and Primary Operator. Additional information on the Texas Construction General Permit can be found at the following link: http://www.tceq.texas.gov/permitting/stormwater/ 
Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SW3P). 
One of the requirements of the construction general permit is to develop an SW3P in accordance with CGP and the SW3P guidance policy for the Town of Little Elm. The purpose of the SW3P is to provide guidelines for minimizing sediment and other pollutants that may originate on the site, from flowing into municipal storm systems, or jurisdictional waters during construction. The plan must also address the principal activities known to disturb significant amounts of ground surface during construction. The stormwater management controls included in the SW3P should focus on providing control of pollutant discharges with practical approaches that use readily available techniques, expertise, materials, and equipment. The SW3P must be implemented prior to the start of construction activity. 
Construction Controls. 
Structural and non-structural controls may be used for controlling pollutants for stormwater discharges from small and large sites. Structural controls shall comply with details and specifications in the latest edition of the NCTCOG iSWM technical manual and these standards. When the NCTCOG Manual and these standards are in conflict, these standards shall govern. The following are acceptable temporary controls for use during construction: 
Non-Structural 
Minimizing the area of disturbance 
Preserving existing vegetation 
Structural 
Silt fence 
Inlet protection 
Rock check dams 
Stabilized construction entrances 
Sediment traps 
Vegetated buffer strips 
Temporary detention structure 
Rock check dams 
Hydromulch 
Suggested construction controls can be found on the NCTCOG iSWM website. It is the responsibility of the design engineer to select and design appropriate construction controls for each site. If the most appropriate control is not shown in the iSWM technical manual, the design engineer shall submit calculations and references for design of the control to the Department of Engineering Services for review and approval. 
Waste and Hazardous Material Controls. 
Covered containers shall be provided for waste construction materials and daily trash. Hazardous materials shall be stored in a manner that prevents contact with rainfall and runoff. Onsite fuel tanks and other containers of motor vehicle fluids shall be placed in a bermed area with a liquidtight liner or be provided with other secondary containment and spill prevention controls. The SW3P shall require federal, state and local reporting of any spills and releases of hazardous materials greater than the regulated reportable quantity (RQ) and reporting to engineering services of all spills and releases to the storm drainage system. 
Temporary Stabilization. 
A.  Portions of a site that have been disturbed, but where no work will occur for more than 21 days shall be temporarily stabilized as soon as practicable, and no later than 14 days, except when precluded by seasonal arid conditions, or prolonged drought. 
B.  Temporary stabilization shall consist of providing a protective cover, designed to reduce erosion on disturbed areas. Temporary stabilization may be achieved using temporary seeding, soil retention blankets, hydro-mulches and other techniques that cover 100 percent of the disturbed areas until either final stabilization can be achieved or until further construction activities take place. 
C.  Perimeter controls such as silt fence, vegetated buffer strips or other similar perimeter controls are intended to act as controls when stabilization has not occurred. Perimeter controls may remain in place during temporary stabilization. 
Final Stabilization. 
Final stabilization consists of soil cover such as vegetation, geo-textiles, mulch, rock, or placement of pavement. For stabilizing vegetated drainageways, sod or seeded soil retention blankets shall be used. Hydromulch will not be allowed in vegetated swales, channels or other drainageways. The plan for final stabilization shall be coordinated with permanent controls in the SWMP and with the landscaping plan, if applicable. 
Notice of Intent (NOI). 
If applicable, copies of the NOI shall be sent to the public works department at least two days prior to construction. The NOI may be emailed to MS4@littleelm.org. 
TCEQ Site Notice. 
A signed copy of the construction site notice shall be posted at the construction site in a location where it is readily viewed by the general public during all construction activity. 
Notice of Termination (NOT). 
All parties that submitted a NOI shall submit a NOT within 30 days after final stabilization is established. When the owner of a residential subdivision transfers ownership of individual lots to builders before final stabilization is achieved, the SW3P shall include controls for each individual lot in lieu of final stabilization. These controls shall consist of stabilization of the right-of-way and placement of structural controls at the low point of each individual lot or equivalent measures to retain soil on each lot during construction. All temporary controls must be removed prior to submitting the NOT. Additionally, the builder must submit a valid NOI before an NOT can be submitted by the owner. 
Inspection and Maintenance during Construction. 
1.  The owner shall construct all controls required by the SW3P. The owner shall have qualified personnel inspect the controls every seven days with no additional inspections after rain events. An alternative method may be used as long as it is in accordance with the CGP. 
2.  Certified inspection reports shall be retained as part of the SW3P. Within seven days of the inspection, controls identified as damaged or deteriorated shall be repaired or replaced, as appropriate. Controls shall also be routinely cleaned to maintain adequate capacity. 
3.  Changes or additions shall be made to the controls within seven days to prevent discharges from the site. The owner shall implement procedures to remove discharged soil from all portions of the storm drainage system including streets, gutters, inlets, storm drain, channels, creeks, ponds, etc. 
4.  Notes requiring the inspection and maintenance shall be placed on SW3P drawings. The SW3P shall identify the responsible party for inspecting and maintaining each control. If no party is identified, each owner and operator that submitted a NOI for the site shall be fully responsible for implementing all requirements of the SW3P. 
Construction and Maintenance. 
The owner shall submit an erosion control plan and site layout for each major phase of the project. These phases, at a minimum, shall include: 
1.  Initial grading and utility construction. 
2.  Street and other pavement construction. 
3.  Post pavement construction. 
4.  Final acceptance to stabilization. 
The owner shall construct all permanent controls and is responsible for maintenance of the controls. When the control falls within a drainage easement, the plat or separate instrument dedicating the easement shall include a statement of the owner's responsibility for maintenance. 
Sec. 7 - GIS/survey requirements. 
Coordinate System. 
AutoCAD 2010 (or higher) with water, sanitary sewer, paving, grading, storm sewer. The CAD file of project should be referenced with the NAD_1983_StatePlane_Texas_North_Central_FIPS_4202_Feet projected Coordinate System. 
Markers. 
1.  Markers consisting of minimum three-eighths-inch diameter steel rods at least twenty-four inches long with caps identifying responsible surveying firm or RPLS number shall be placed at all: 
a.  Lot and block corners (wherever a lot line bearing changes); 
b.  Intersection points of alley and block lines; 
c.  Curve and tangent points along block, lot and right-of-way lines within the subdivision; and 
d.  Right-of-way dedications. 
Monuments. 
1.  Three dimensional coordinates, reported as state plane coordinates, shall be established using the city's monumentation system and using the city's combined scale factor. The coordinates shall be noted on the plat monuments shall be markers and installed at locations shown on the plat. 
2.  Subdivision Monumentation. 
a.  At least two markers shall be placed at property corners in addition to at least two monuments at opposing ends of the property. 
3.  Capital Improvements Project Monuments. 
a.  Found existing right-of-way monuments, survey markers, or property corners, and proposed monuments shall be shown on the construction drawings and located by station and offset, right or left from the control line, base line or center line, or by northing and easting. 
4.  If new construction will damage, destroy, or alter existing survey markers, monuments, or property corners, they must be reset prior to final acceptance. 
5.  Prior to final plat acceptance, all required monuments must be found and reset if damaged during construction. 
6.  The surveyor will provide two monuments acceptable to the town and establish grid coordinates for the monuments in reference to the Town of Little Elm GPS monuments. 
7.  Elevations will be established on the two monuments on the vertical datum in reference to the Town of Little Elm GPS monuments. 
(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
Sec. 8.0 - Standard details. 



(Ord. No. 1444, § 2(Att. A), 3-6-2018) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of the town, used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the codification, and any omitted materials are not reflected in the table. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 5 10-27-1966 A-C 98-2 6 10-27-1966 A-B 98-1 7 11-17-1966 I 50-1 V 50-2 9 12-29-1966 50-1, 50-2 55 12- 6-1973 55-1-55-9 34-1-34-9 56  3- 7-1974 56-1 102-136, 102-137 56-3-56-42 102-138- 
102-177 56-44-56-52 102-178- 
102-186 61  9-12-1974 61-1-61-8 10-21-10-28 61-10 10-29 63  1-16-1975 63-1 98-78 65  8- 7-1975 65-1, 65-2 90-2 67  6- 3-1976 67-1, 67-2 70-54, 70-55 68  7- 1-1976 68-1 106-53 68-6-68-8 106-58-106-60 70 App. A, § 6 79  2-17-1977 1-24 102-213- 
102-236 127 11- 1-1979 1-6 26-53-26-58 129 12- 6-1979 1-7 98-23-98-29 140  8-19-1980 1 50-126 3 50-127 142  2-10-1981 90-26 158  2-23-1982 1-3 58-19-58-21 5 58-22 7, 8 58-23, 58-24 10 58-25 12 58-26 163 10-13-1982 1 App. A, § 6 175  4-12-1983 90-97 1-3 90-56-90-58 177  5-24-1983 2 102-52 3-5 102-78-102-80 6-13 102-104- 
102-111 178  5-24-1983 102-186 1 102-138 4 102-158 186 11- 8-1983 I-IV 18-21 195  6-12-1984 102-158 201  8-28-1984 App. A, § 4 200  9-11-1984 1-3 102-24 213  1-14-1985 1 App. A, § 4 216  2-11-1986 I-IV 98-74-98-77 218  4- 8-1986 1-4 98-100-98-103 5 98-105 220  6-10-1986 I(1)-I(7) 90-90-90-96 2 90-97 221  7-21-1986 I-1 26-90 II-1-II-7 26-109-26-115 III-1-III-19 26-144-26-162 V 26-218 226 10-20-1986 106-37 1 106-1, 106-2 3 106-3 5 106-5 7 106-7 8.1 106-31 8.2, 8.3 106-8, 106-9 8.4 106-16 8.5, 8.6 106-18, 106-19 8.8 106-32 8.9-8.12 106-20-106-23 8.13 106-25 8.14 106-24 8.15-8.17 106-28-106-30 8.18 106-33 8.19 106-27 8.20 106-26 8.21 106-15 8.22-8.25 106-10-106-13 9-11 106-34-106-36 12-26 106-38-106-52 27 106-62 231 11-17-1986 58-19-58-26 237  3- 2-1987 106-41 243  9-21-1987 2 10-30 244 10-19-1987 58-19-58-26 245  3-21-1988 74-21 74-23 250  9-19-1988 2 106-2 4 106-4 
106-6 5 106-7 6 106-31 7, 8 106-8, 106-9 9, 10 106-18, 106-19 259  8-20-1990 1-2 74-2 263 10- 1-1990 1-4 98-47-98-50 266 12- 3-1990 74-21 268  3-18-1991 1-8 30-1-30-8 272  5- 6-1991 74-21 74-23 274  6-18-1991 1-17 2-19-2-35 280  8-19-1991 1 18-1 2 18-22 3 18-48 4, 5 18-70, 18-71 6 18-101 7-10 18-131-18-134 11-13 18-152-18-154 14-16 18-177-18-179 20, 21 18-199, 18-200 23, 24 18-202, 18-203 283 12- 2-1991 1-3 102-1 284  5- 4-1992 1-5 70-21-70-25 285  7- 6-1992 1-12 50-29-50-40 286  7- 6-1992 1 94-1 4 94-1 289  8-17-1992 1, 2 94-21 314  1- 3-1994 App. A, § 4 315  2-21-1994 App. A, § 4 316  2-21-1994 1       Added 106-9.5 323  7-18-1994 1-6 70-84-70-89 327  9-19-1994 1-7 22-99-22-105 9-12 22-107-22-110 330 10-17-1994 1-5 2-59-2-63 331 12- 5-1994 1 106-9.5 342 10- 2-1995 2 106-6 106-14 106-36 369  2- 3-1997 2 102-186 373  3- 3-1997 68-9(b) 106-61 384  3-17-1997 art. I, § A- 54-1-54-4 art. I, § D art. 2 54-5 art. 3, § A- 54-29-54-35 art. 3, § G art. 4, § A- 54-59-54-62 art. 4, § D art. 5, § A- 54-83-54-87 art. 5, § E 405 12-29-1997 1-4 102-2 425 10-19-1998 1-3 90-1 427 11-16-1998 106-10-106-13 2 106-6 106-36 420 12-21-1998 2-43 90-147-90-188 434 12-21-1998 1, 2 26-245, 26-246 444  8- 2-1999 68-3-68-5 106-55-106-57 372-2 106-54 68-9(b) 106-61 467 11-15-1999 Exh. A, § 1- 102-266- 
102-269 Exh. A, § 4 Exh. A, § 6- 102-271- 
102-276 Exh. A, § 11 479  1-17-2000 8 22-106 478  2- 7-2000 1, 2 34-37, 34-38 481  2- 7-2000 1(A.1)-1(A.5) 106-9-106-13 486  3- 6-2000 3 34-39 503  9- 5-2000 2-14 50-70-50-82 509 11- 6-2000 1 50-69 510 12- 5-2000 2 106-13 515  2-20-2001 1 106-36 522  4- 3-2001 1-4 106-36 530  6- 9-2001 1, 2 98-104, 98-105 542  8-21-2001 106-55 544  8-30-2001 1 22-105 554  1-15-2002 1, 2 22-19, 22-20 4, 5 22-23, 22-24 6 22-22 7 22-21 9 22-26 562  5-21-2002 1 106-36 582 12- 3-2002 1 106-36 585 12-17-2002 18-1 18-22 18-48 18-70, 18-71 18-101 18-131-18-134 18-152-18-154 18-177-18-179 18-199, 18-200 18-202, 18-203 575  2- 4-2003 10-1 589  2- 4-2003 II-XI 54-118-54-127 XIII, XIV 54-128, 54-129 600  6-24-2003 1-17 26-271-26-287 599  7- 1-2003 1-6 70-84-70-89 596  7-15-2003 1 106-50 605  9- 2-2003 1-9 26-19-26-27 11-15 26-28-26-32 609 10- 7-2003 1-3 34-67-34-69 620  2-17-2004 1-15 22-56-22-70 632  3- 2-2004 I, II 62-1, 62-2 633  3- 2-2004 1 42-1 628  3-16-2004 1-9 82-1-82-9 644  6- 1-2004 1-10 46-19-46-28 647  7- 6-2004 2 106-36 650  7- 6-2004 1 106-2 2, 3 106-6, 106-7 648  7-20-2004 2-21 86-1-86-20 654  7-20-2004 1 106-43 653  8- 3-2004 1, 2 58-20, 58-21 4 58-22 659  8- 3-2004 1 74-2 74-22 2, 3 74-24 4, 5 74-23, 74-24 668  9- 7-2004 2-4 98-124-98-126 684  1- 4-2005 1 86-9 2, 3 86-12 699  4-19-2005 106-6 700  4-19-2005 106-6 701  4-19-2005 1, 2 106-36, 106-37 705  5- 3-2005 1, 2 94-22 706  5-17-2005 1-16 2-85-2-100 703  6- 7-2005 1 106-38 3 106-38 721  9-13-2005 2, 3 102-313, 102-314 722  9-13-2005 2, 3 102-331, 102-332 727  9-13-2005 2-4 102-112 730 10- 4-2005 1-14 26-19-26-32 732 10-18-2005 1 18-1 2, 3 18-21, 18-22 4 18-48 5, 6 18-70, 18-71 7 18-101 8-11 18-131-18-134 12-14 18-152-18-154 15-18 18-177-18-180 19-23 18-199-18-203 736 11-15-2005 1 2-155 1-3 2-156 4-6 2-157-2-159 752  1- 3-2006 2(A)-2(D) 22-19-22-22 2(F)-2(I) 22-23-22-26 3 102-25 755  1-17-2006 2A 50-108 2B(1)-(61) 50-109 756  2- 9-2006 1 106-1 761  2-21-2006       Dltd 106-53-106-59       Added 106-53-106-58 773  7-11-2006 1-21       Added 86-1-86-21       Dltd 86-1-86-20 778  7-11-2006 1-3       Added 46-60-46-98       Dltd 46-60-46-119 780  7-11-2006 1-7       Added 26-53-26-59       Dltd 26-53-26-58 781  7-11-2006 1-5       Added 22-141-22-145 782  7-11-2006 1-10       Added Adopting Ord, pp. xi 783  7-11-2006 1-7       Added 70-84-70-90       Dltd 70-84-70-89 784  7-18-2006 2-8       Added 70-54-70-60       Dltd 70-54, 70-55 776  8-15-2006       Rpld 26-90-26-218 2-17       Added 26-90-26-127 18, 20       Added 26-141, 26-142 788  9- 5-2006 2A       Added 106-36(o) 2B 106-6 2C 106-7 789  9- 5-2006 1       Added 70-1 796 10- 3-2006 3A       Rpld 102-266-102-276       Added 102-266-102-276 798 10- 3-2006 2A 70-56 2B 74-23(j) 802 11- 7-2006 1-8       Added 70-102-70-109 803  2- 6-2007 2.A-2.C 86-6 2.D 86-10(e)(1)a. 2.E       Rpld 86-12(e) 2.F       Added 86-13(a)(3)       Rnbd 86-13(a)(3)-(12)       as 86-13(a)(4)-(13) 2.G 86-13(a)(4) 2.H 86-13(a)(5) 2.I 86-13(a)(7) 2.J 86-13(b)(2) 2.K 86-13(b)(6)b.1. 2.L 86-13(b)(8)a. 2.M 86-15(e) 2.N 86-19(a) 804  7- 3-2007 1       Added 34-10 815  1- 2-2007 2 106-19 816  1- 2-2007 2 106-31 817  2- 6-2007 2       Added 106-13.5 820  2-20-2007 1-35 ch. 102, art. III, 102-136-102-170 822  2-20-2007 2       Added ch. 2, art. V, div. 3, 2-165-2-169 823  3- 6-2007 2       Added ch. 102, art. VIII, 102-400-102-405, 102-415-102-422, 102-430-102-435 825  5-15-2007 2 ch. 98, art. V, 98-100-98-109 827  3-20-2007 2 106-50 3 106-51 828  4-17-2007 2 106-36(m) 831  3-20-2007 1 50-109(51) 835  6- 5-2007 2       Added 106-32.5 837  6-19-2007 2(Exh. A) 102-313, 102-314 838  6-19-2007 2(Exh. A) 102-331, 102-332 841  8- 8-2007 2 98-104(a)(1) 842  8- 8-2007 1 106-38(3) 848  9- 4-2007 2 74-23(i) 850  8-21-2007 1-6 2-155-2-159 851  8-21-2007 3.A ch. 102, art. V, 102-266-102-276 861 11- 6-2007 2       Added 70-2 865 11-20-2007 2       Rpld App. A, §§ 8, 9 3       Added 106-100-106-113 866 11- 6-2007 2       Added ch. 46, art. IV, 46-110-46-113 868 11- 6-2007 2       Added 94-23 870 11- 6-2007 2       Added 70-3 872 12- 4-2007 2 106-6 106-7 106-8(b), (c) 106-9(b), (c) 106-13.5(e) 106-10(d), (e) 106-11(d), (e) 106-12(d), (e) 106-13(d), (e) 106-14(d), (e) 106-16 3       Rpld 106-15, 106-32 874 12-18-2007 2       Added ch. 94, art. III, 94-41-94-50 880  2- 5-2008 106-6 106-7 1-4       Added 106-33.5 881  2-19-2008 2 106-2 106-6 106-7 2., 67.       Added 106-8(f)       Added 106-9(e) 106-17(b)       Added 106-36(p) 886  4- 1-2008 2 106-51(1)(a) 887  3- 5-2008 2       Added ch. 26, art. VII, 26-300-26-302 889  4- 1-2008 2 106-8-106-14, 106-16-106-18, 106-36 902  6-17-2008 2 106-6 3 106-7 4       Added 106-34(d) 903  6-17-2008 2 106-6 3       Rpld 106-25       Added 106-25 4       Rpld 106-26, 106-27 905 7-1-2008 2A. 22-99 2B. 22-106 906 8-19-2007 1       Dltd 50-108, 50-109       Added 50-108 918 10-8-2008 2       Added 22-146, 22-147 919 10-21-2008 2 106-36(m) 3 106-36(n)(2)d. 920 11-11-2008 2 106-2 3 (Exh. A), 4 106-6, 106-7 929 12-16-2008 2A-E, G, H, J 22-19-22-26 2I       Added 22-27 940  2-17-2009 2       Added 106-1(6), (7) 949  3-17-2009 2       Rpld 26-271-26-287       Added 26-271-26-285 954 5-19-2008 2       Added 5-19-2008 955 5-27-2009 2       Added 98-150-98-160 958 6-16-2009 2       Dltd 106-9.5 3       Added 106-13.5(c)(1)j-l 959 6-16-2009 2 106-2, 106-7 2 (Exh. A) 106-6 960 6-16-2009 2       Rpld 18-1-18-203       Added 18-1-18-230 961 7-21-2009 2 10-1 3       Added 10-2 4       Added 10-3 5       Rpld 10-21-10-31       Added 10-21-10-27 962 7-7-2009 1-7       Rpld 70-84-70-90       Added 70-84-70-90 972 9-1-2009 2       Rpld 86-1-86-21       Added 86-1-86-20 974 8-18-2009 2       Rpld 34-1-34-10       Added 34-1-34-60       Rnbd 34-37-34-69       as 34-87-34-129 978 9-15-2009 2       Added 70-126-70-135 986 10-20-2009 2       Dltd 106-100-106-113       Added 106-100-106-137 987 10-20-2009 2 106-36(n) 993 12-15-2009 2.1 106-25(b) 2.2       Added 106-26 994 12-15-2009 2.1       Rpld 106-14       Rpld 106-22       Rpld 106-29       Rpld 106-34 2.2 106-38(3) 2.3       Dltd 106-36(h)-(j)       Added 106-36(h) 2.4       Added 106-15 2.5 106-6 2.6       Rpld 106-36(f), (g) 2.7       Added 106-36(l)(3)-(5) 2.8       Added 106-36(m)D.3.f) 2.9 106-2 2.10 106-7 995 5-18-2010 2.1 86-11(12) 2.2 86-11(19) 2.3 86-13(2)d.1.ii. 2.4 86-13(2)g.1.viii. 2.5 86-13(2)m.1.i. 2.6 86-20 1001 2-2-2010 1 Ch. 22, Art. V, title       Dltd 22-141-22-145       Added 22-141, 22-142 1002 2-16-2010 2 18-182, 18-183 1005 3-16-2010 2       Dltd 106-1-106-137       Added 106-1-106-114 1008 5-4-2010 2       Rpld 26-271-26-285       Added 26-271-26-285 1009 6-15-2010 2.1       Added 106-39(c)(3) 2.2       Added 106-40(c)(3) 1010 5-18-2010 2 106-90(e)(1)c. 3 86-10(b)(5)b. 86-11(12) 1014 8-3-2010 2       Added 70-150-70-156 1029 12-21-2010 2.1 106-27 2.2 106-35 1030 12-21-2010 2       Added 102-436-102-451 1035 2-15-2011 2.1 54-30 2.2 54-59 1041 3-15-2011 2       Dltd 22-99-22-110       Added 22-99-22-125 1042 3-15-2011 1 50-108 1043 3-15-2011 1       Rpld 22-19-22-27       Added 22-19-22-25 1052 5-17-2011 3 102-313 102-331 4 102-314 102-332 5       Added 102-315       Added 102-333 1057 6-14-2011 1-4       Added 2-101 1058 7-5-2011 2 106-23, 106-24 1067 9-6-2011 2 106-28 1068 9-6-2011 2       Added 46-141-46-143 1076 10-18-2011 2 106-90(e)(3) 1077 10-4-2011 2       Rpld 22-141, 22-142       Added 22-141-22-143 1078 10-18-2011 2       Added 102-476-102-491 1081 10-18-2011 1 102-165(c) 1085 11-1-2011 2       Added 34-150-34-153 1087 11-1-2011 2       Added 102-521-102-529 1088 11-15-2011 2       Added 2-191-2-197 1091 12-13-2011 3 22-141-22-143 1092 1-3-2012 2       Dltd 90-147-90-188       Added 90-147-90-161 1094 1-3-2012 2, 3       Added 2-1, 2-2 1097 4-3-2012 2 26-280(a), (d) 1098  5-15-2012 2(Exh. A)       Added 102-26 1099  4- 3-2012 2       Added 74-61-74-63 1100  5- 1-2012 2       Added 98-200-98-203 1101  5- 1-2012 2       Added 70-4 1106  8- 7-2012 1       Rpld 46-19-46-28       Added 46-19-46-28 1107  8-21-2012 2 98-103, 98-104       Added 98-110 1108  9-18-2012 1 22-20 2 50-108 1114  9-18-2012 2       Rpld 74-61-74-63       Added 74-61-74-63 1115 10-16-2012 2 2-191-2-197 1127 12-18-2012 2       Added 46-171-46-186 1128 12-18-2012 2.a 26-105(a), (b) 26-119 2.b 26-127(14) 1129  3- 5-2013 2       Rpld 102-400-102-435       Added 102-400-102-435.5 1147  5- 7-2013 2       Added 86-14(c) 1151  6- 4-2013 2 106-84 1153  6-18-2013 2 46-60 1159  8-v6-2013 1-7       Dltd 70-84-70-90       Added 70-84-70-90 1162  9-17-2013 2 106-28 1167  9-17-2013 1 50-108, 62. 1180 11- 5-2013 2 106-86 1189 12-17-2013 2 106-28 3 106-35 1209  3- 4-2014 3(Exh. A) 74-62(c) 74-63 1213  4-15-2014 2       Added 46-21(a)(5) 1218  6-17-2014 2       Added 70-206-70-211 1220  6-17-2014 2       Added 70-181 1222  7-15-2014 2 106-88 1227  9-16-2014 2       Added 34-176 1228  9- 2-2014 2 70-54-70-60 1236  9-16-2014 2       Dltd 2-191-2-197       Added 2-191-2-198 1237 11-18-2014 2       Added 42-2 1245 12-16-2014 1       Rpld Ch. 30, §§ 
30-1-30-8 2       Added Ch. 30, §§ 
30-1-30-26 1264  2- 3-2015 22-19-22-25       Added 22-26 50-108 1265  2- 3-2015 2       Dltd 2-165-2-169       Added 2-165-2-168 74-24 74-54 3 74-55(a)(4) 1272  3- 3-2015 2       Added 70-55(b)       Rnbd 70-55(b)       as 70-55(c) 1274  3- 3-2015 2 74-62(d) 1281  6- 2-2015 2 46-60 1282  7- 7-2015       Rpld 86-1-86-20 2(Att.)       Added 86-1-86-20 1285  8- 4-2015 2 106-82 1301 10-20-2015 2 18-1 Art. II, title 18-21 18-23-18-25 18-27, 18-28 18-40(a) 18-45(c) 18-47 18-55 18-56(a)(10) 18-59(a) 18-60 18-71 18-90-18-92       Added 18-93(6), (7) 18-94, 18-95 18-125 18-140-18-142 18-159-18-161 18-170 18-180(4) 18-182 18-183(e) 18-184(a) 18-187 18-189(a) 18-228, 18-229       Added 18-240 1308  1- 5-2016 2       Added 98-210 1317  3- 1-2016 2       Added 74-70-74-90 1322  4- 5-2016 2.A 106-22(a)(1), (2) 2.B 106-23(b) 2.C(Exh. A) 106-28 2.D 106-35 2.E       Rnbd 106-51       as 106-51-A       Added 106-51-B 2.F 106-84(a)(1)a       Added 106-84(a)(2)l 2.G       Added 106-92(c)(5)       Rnbd 106-92(c)(5)       as 106-92(c)(6) 106-92(d)(1)a 2.H       Added 106-101(d)(1)k       Rnbd 106-101(d)(1)k       as 106-101(d)(1)l 106-101(d)(3)b 1334  6- 7-2016 2 34-60 3 34-89 4       Dltd 34-150-34-153       Added 34-150-34-153 1337  7- 5-2016 3       Rpld 74-1, 74-2 4       Rpld 74-21-74-24       Added 74-21-74-45 1339  7- 5-2016 2 42-2(a) 1340  8- 2-2016 2 22-19(a)(8) 3 22-22 1344  8-16-2016 2 18-45(c) 3 18-71 4 18-90(b) 18-91(a)-(c) 5 18-142(a) 6 18-159(e) 18-161 7 18-184(a) 8 18-230(a) 1345  8-16-2016 2 98-104(a) 1360 11-15-2016 2       Rpld 102-400- 
102-405, 
102-415- 
102-422, 
102-430- 
102-435.5 2       Added 102-400- 
102-405, 
102-415- 
102-422, 
102-430- 
102-435.5 1402  7-18-2017 2 106-28 106-35 1403  7-18-2017 2       Added App. A, § 11 1405  8- 1-2017 2       Rpld 102-400-102-405, 102-415- 
102-422, 102-430- 
102-435.5       Added 102-400- 
102-405, 102-415- 
102-422, 102-430- 
102-435.5 1407  8-15-2017 2       Rpld 106-1-106-7, 106-10-106-17, 106-19, 106-21-106-24, 106-27, 106-28, 106-31-106-36, 106-39, 106-40, 106-42-106-46, 106-48, 106-49, 106-51A, 
106-51B, 106-52, 106-53, 106-56, 106-57, 106-59, 106-61, 106-62, 106-64, 106-65, 106-68, 106-70, 106-71, 106-73, 106-76, 106-77, 106-79, 106-80, 106-82, 106-84-106-86, 106-88, 106-90, 106-92, 106-94, 106-97-106-102, 106-106-106-114       Added 106.01.01- 
106.01.15, 106.02.01-106.02.07, 106.02.11-106.02.19, 106.03.01-106.03.03, 106.04.01-106.04.05, 106.05.01, 106.05.02, 106.05.02.1, 106.05.02.2, 106.05.03-106.05.05, 106.06.01-106.06.08, 106.06.11-106.06.22, 106.06.31, 106.06.32, 106.06.41-106.06.48, 106.06.51-106.06.54, 106.06.61-106.06.68 1409  8-15-2017 2 90-147 3, 4       Added 90-162, 90-163 1415  9- 5-2017 1(Exh. A)       Rpld 102-136- 
102-170       Added 102-136- 
102-170 1431 12-19-2017 2.A 22-99 2.B 22-103(b) 2.C 22-112 2.D 22-113(a) 2.E 22-116 2.F 22-117 2.G 22-119 2.H 22-120(a) 2.I 22-123 2.J 22-124 2.K 22-125 1437 12-19-2017       Added 106.04.06 1444  3- 6-2018 2(Att. A)       Rpld App. A       Added 107.01.01, 107.02.01- 
107.02.08, 107.03.01- 
107.03.07, 107.04.01- 
107.04.09, 107.05.01- 
107.05.08, 107.07.01- 
107.07.03, 107.08.01- 
107.08.09, 107.09.01- 
107.09.04, 107.10.01- 
107.10.03, 107.11.01, 107.11.02, 107.12.01, 107.12.02, 107.13.01(tbl), 
107.13.02(tbl), 107.13.01- 
107.13.07(diagrams) Appendix, 
§§ 1.0-8.0 1448  3-20-2018 2 26-279(b) 26-280(a)(3)       Added 26-280(i)       Added 26-286 1449  3- 6-2018 2 86-13(b)(9) 1491  3-19-2019 1       Added 98-212-98-226 1498  4-16-2019 2       Rpld 102-313- 
102-315, 102-331- 
102-333       Added 102-313- 
102-320, 102-331- 
102-341  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to state law. 
Vernon's Ann. Civ. Stat. 
Article  Section 
this Code 1175 Ch. 90 6701d 98-23  
V.A.T.S. Insurance Code 
Article  Section 
this Code 5.43-2 Ch. 26, Art. II  
V.T.C.A. Agriculture Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 143A 18-225 251.002 102-436 102-438  
V.T.C.A. Alcoholic Beverage Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 11.38 Ch. 10 ch. 16 106-27 61.36 Ch. 10 108.55 Ch. 10 109.31 et seq. Ch. 10 109.33 10-21 251.01 et seq. Ch. 10  
V.T.C.A. Business and Commerce Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 36 82-4 ch. 39 26-282  
V.T.C.A. Civil Practice and Remedies Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 101.021 Ch. 2, Art. III Char. § 14.06 101.101 Ch. 2, Art. III Char. § 14.06 102.004 Char. § 14.10  
V.T.C.A. Commission on Environmental Quality 
Section  Section 
this Code 335.401-335.412 102-401  
V.T.C.A. Criminal Procedure Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 14.06(b) 34-4 15.03(b) 34-4 42.12 70-2 44.01 34-40 44.13 34-41 45.03 34-33 45.052 34-60 102.0031 34-4  
V.T.C.A. Education Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 61.003 94-42  
V.T.C.A. Election Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 1.001 et seq. Char. Ch. 11 Ch. 38 4.001 et seq. Ch. 38 11.002 Ch. 38 41.031 Ch. 38 141.003 Char. Ch. 11 Ch. 38 143.005 Ch. 38 145.097 Char. Ch. 11 Ch. 38 276.006 Ch. 38  
V.T.C.A. Family Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 31 70-87 51.08 70-89  
V.T.C.A. Finance Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 302.002 22-107  
V.T.C.A. Government Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 30 34-40 30.00005 34-3 30.000085 34-14 30.00014 34-40 30.00020 34-43 311.004 1-2 311.024 1-3 311.030 1-8 410.032 Ch. 50, Art. II ch. 411 70-126 ch. 415 50-69 ch. 418 30-4 30-8, 30-9 30-15 30-18 ch. 421 30-5 30-18 ch. 433 30-6, 30-9 ch. 551 Char. § 14.09 551.001 et seq. Char. § 14.09 551.072 2-2 ch. 552 Char. § 14.09 26-30 90-152 1201.001 et seq. Char. § 8.08 1331.052 Char. § 8.08 1431.008 Char. § 8.08 ch. 2256 2-85 2-90  
V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code 
Section  Section 
this Code tit. 10 18-55 ch. 341 102-275 341.013(e) Ch. 46 342.004 Ch. 46 342.007 Ch. 46 355.002 102-438 ch. 365 26-280 365.011 46-19 ch. 366 102-25 102-266 102-275 756.011, 756.012 Ch. 70 772.001 et seq. Ch. 42 773.001 et seq. Ch. 42 774.001 et seq. Ch. 42 ch. 821 18-1 18-55 821.022 18-60 ch. 822 18-1 822.001 et seq. 18-155 822.011 et seq. 18-189 822.041(A), (B) 18-180 822.041-822.047 18-28 18-180 822.102E 18-70 ch. 826 18-1 18-140 826.015 18-140 826.017 18-1 826.033 18-140 ch. 828 18-92  
V.T.C.A. Local Government Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 9 Char. § 14.11 9.001 et seq. Char. §§ 1.01-15.01 10.0245.005(c) 107.12.02 26.001 Char. Ch. 2 43.002 106.02.07 107.10.02 51.072 Char. Ch. 2 ch. 54, subch. B 34-3 54.001 1-10 101.022 Char. Ch. 2 102.001-102.111 Char. § 8.06 ch. 105 2-95 132.003(b) 2-101 132.004 2-101 132.006 2-101 ch. 171 2-197 171.001 et seq. Char. § 14.08 201.001 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II 203.025 Ch. 2, Art. II ch. 211 Char. § 9.02 106.01.02 106.02.01 106.02.02 107.02.07 211.001 et seq. Ch. 106 211.005 Ch. 106 211.007 Char. § 9.01 211.011 Ch. 106 106.02.07 211.008-211.013 Char. § 9.02 Ch. 106 211.0075 Char. § 9.01 ch. 212 106.02.01 107.01.01 107.02.01 107.02.07 107.07.02 ch. 212, subch. C 107.05.04 212.0115(b) 107.04.05 107.04.06 107.04.09 212.016 22-113 22-120 213.002 Ch. 106 213.193, 213.194 Ch. 26, Art. II ch. 214 22-63 ch. 214, subch. A 34-3 214.001 Ch. 22, Art. III 214.001 et seq. Ch. 22 214.0011 Ch. 22, Art. III 214.0015 Ch. 22, Art. III 214.003 Ch. 102, Art. II 214.191 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. II 214.212 Ch. 22 Ch. 22, Art. II 214.214 Ch. 22 Ch. 22, Art. II 214.901 Ch. 22 Ch. 22, Art. II 215.074, 215.075 Ch. 26 ch. 216 86-3 86-10 86-15 86-18 216.004 86-6 216.901 Ch. 86 216.903 Ch. 86 ch. 217 18-72 ch. 229 70-126 229.001 Ch. 70 ch. 242 107.01.01 107.04.04 107.07.02 243.001 et seq. Ch. 82 243.010(b) 82-9 ch. 245 106.02.07 107.10.02 245.005(c)(2) 107.10.03 107.12.02 ch. 271 Char. § 8.08 ch. 283 90-147 282.001 Ch. 74 283.001 et seq. Ch. 90 283.057 90-162 ch. 284 90-163 331.001 Ch. 74 331.007 Ch. 74 341.003 Ch. 58 341.012(a), 341.012(b) Ch. 58, Art. II 342.011 Ch. 50, Art. II 370.002 Ch. 70, Art. IV ch. 395 22-100 22-103 395.001 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. IV 402.001 Char. Ch. 12 402.001 et seq. Ch. 102 402.002 Char. Ch. 12 402.017 Ch. 102 Ch. 102, Art. II 431.001 98-107 98-109 Ch. 106 ch. 552, subch. C 102-521 102-526 102-529 552.053 102-529 580.003 102-526 102-529  
V.T.C.A. Natural Resources Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 91.101 102-401  
V.T.C.A. Occupations Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 455.005 Ch. 26 541.001 et seq. 98-100 tit. 12, § 1903.002(c)(1) 102-437 ch. 1201 98-100 ch. 1301 102-437 1302.251 et seq. Ch. 22 1302.301-1302.303 Ch. 22 1702.134 Ch. 26, Art. II 1702.134(2)(c) Ch. 26, Art. II 1702.284 26-30 ch. 1903 102-437 1903-002 102-437 2154.001 et seq. Ch. 50, Art. IV 2154.004 Ch. 50, Art. IV  
V.T.C.A. Parks and Wildlife Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 31 46-60 46-90 ch. 31 74-22 31.092 Ch. 74  
V.T.C.A. Penal Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 1.08 Ch. 70 2.05 98-102 98-104 98-109 ch. 21 82-4 21.01 82-4 ch. 22 82-4 22.011 82-4 22.021 82-4 ch. 25 82-4 42.09 18-1 18-55, 18-56 ch. 43 82-4 46.05(a) 70-130  
V.T.C.A. Tax Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 11.13 Ch. 94 11.13(d), (e) 94-21 11.253 94-23 11.261 94-22 ch. 23, subch. B 94-23 ch. 33, subch. E 46-26 101.008 Ch. 26 ch. 154 70-206 ch. 155 70-206 156.103 94-42 156.151 94-44 302.001(c) Ch. 94 302.101 Ch. 26 302.102(b) Ch. 94 321.001 et seq. Ch. 94 ch. 351 94-47 351.001 et seq. Ch. 94  
V.T.C.A. Transportation Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 311.001 Ch. 90 311.004 Ch. 90 316.001 et seq. Ch. 90 396.001 et seq. Ch. 26 ch. 501 46-60 46-90 98-151 502.001 98-200 541.001 et seq. 98-1 541.304 98-151 542.202 Ch. 98 542.202(a)(1) Ch. 98, Art. II 542.202(a)(2) Ch. 98, Art. V 542.202(a)(3) Ch. 90 542.202(a)(7) Ch. 98 542.202(a)(8) Ch. 98, Art. III 542.202(a)(12) Ch. 98, Art. IV 542.203 Ch. 98 ch. 543 98-160 ch. 543, subch. A 34-4 543.009(b) 98-2 544.007(d) 98-152 98-160 545.424 98-210 545.425 98-210 ch. 546 98-156 551.104 98-213 98-218 551.301(2) 98-124 551.405 98-201 601.051 98-201 621.303 Ch. 98 644.153(a) 46-91 644.153(r) 46-60 682.002 34-4 ch. 683 46-75 46-98 ch. 683, subch.E 34-3 683.014(d) 46-94 683.031 46-90 46-91 46-97 683.032 46-91 683.034(e) 46-97 683.071-683.078 Ch. 46, Art. III 683.072 Ch. 46, Art. III  
V.T.C.A. Water Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 7 102-25 102-266 102-275 13.042(a) Ch. 102 16.315 Ch. 54 16.3145 Ch. 54 54-1 ch. 26 102-275 102-401 26.176 Ch. 102, Art. IV ch. 37 102-25 102-266 102-275  
Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. 
Article  Section 
this Code 14.03 Ch. 58 18.05 46-22 ch. 45 34-150 45.02 34-2 ch. 62 82-4 102.017 Ch. 34, Art. II 102.0174 34-60  
